new aspects in the management of obesity: operation and the

impact of lipase inhibitors
matti uusitupa

obesity is an increasing health problem in most developed
countries and its prevalence is also increasing in developing
countries. there has been no great success with dietary means
and life style modification for permanent weight loss. various
surgical treatment methods for obesity are now available. they
are aimed at limiting oral energy intake with or without causing
dumping or inducing selective maldigestion and malabsorption.
based on current literature, up to 75% of excess weight is lost
by surgical treatment with concomitant disappearance of
hyperlipidaemias, type 2 diabetes, hypertension or sleep
apnoea. the main indication for operative treatment is morbid
obesity (body mass index greater than 40 kg/m?) or severe
obesity (body mass index > 35 kg/m?) with comorbidities of
obesity. orlistat is a new inhibitor of  xxxg1789xxx  enzyme.
at doses of 120 mg three times per day with meals it results in
a 30% reduction in dietary fat absorption, which equals
approximately 200 kcal daily energy deficit. in the long term,
orlistat has been shown to be more effective than placebo in
reducing body weight and serum total and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol fevels. orlistat has a lowering effect on
serum cholesterol independent of weight loss. along with
weight loss, orlistat also favourably affects blood pressure
and glucose and insulin levels in obese individuals and in obese
type 2 diabetic patients. curr opin lipidol 10:3-7. + 1999 lippincott
willams & wilkins

correspondence to professor matt: uusitupa, md. department of clinical nutrition,
kuopio university hospital, p.o, box 1777, 70211 kuopio, finland
e-mail: matti. usitupa@kuh.fi

current opinion in lipidology 1999, 10:3-7

abbreviations

hdl high-density lipoprotein
ldl low-density lipoprotein

*999 lippineett wiliams & wikns
0957-9672

introduction

obesity is a major health problem in many developed
countries and its prevalence is increasing in developing
countries. in the usa the prevalence of obesity (body
mass index equal to or more than 30 kg/m") is
approximately 30%, and in most european countries
the respective prevalence figures range from 10-20%.
even higher figures have been reported in the eastern
european countries of the former soviet union [1,2°].
morbid obesity (body mass index at least 40 kg/m") is
associated with a six- to 12-fold increase in mortality
compared with normal weight, but the major impact of
obesity on health in a population is because of
comorbidities related to moderate or severe obesity.
obesity per se is a significant risk factor of coronary heart
disease. furthermore, obesity increases the risk of type 2
diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidaemias. truncal
obesity is the characteristic feature of insulin resistance
syndrome [2°,3**]. other diseases related to obesity are
degenerative joint diseases, sleep apnoea, various
pulmonary disorders including pulmonary artery hyper-
tension, and both left- and right-sided heart failure [3°*].
moreover, obesity or truncal obesity increases the risk
for cancer of the endometrium, breast [4], colon and
prostate [3°*].

the main causes of obesity are excess energy intake in
the long term and physical inactivity [1,2°]. furthermore,
genetic factors contribute to the development of obesity
[5°°]. recently, great progress has been achieved in the
field of the genetics of obesity. however, with the
exception of very rare single gene defects causing
morbid obesity in humans, no common gene variants
increasing the risk of obesity have been discovered thus
far [5°]. this line of research will increase our knowl-
edge of the genetic basis of obesity and thus provide
new opportunities for the development of more effective
drug therapies for obesity in the future.

until recently, treatment of obesity has been based on
diet, behaviour therapy and physical exercise. for
patients with morbid obesity or those with severe
complicated obesity (e.g. hypertension. diabetes) ditfer-
ent surgical treatment modalities have also been devel-
oped. as for drug treatment, the formerly used anorectic
drugs or appetite suppresssants are no longer available.
thev were withdrawn from the market because of their
adverse effects on pulmonary circulation and cardiac
valves [6]. instead. a new agent for the treatment of

3
4 nutrition

obesity, orlistat, which selectively inhibits intestinal
lipase activity, has recently been introduced. this
review summarizes the recent literature on surgical
treatment of obesity and the role on lipase inhibitors in
long-term weight reduction. special emphasis will be
given to those studies that report the changes in risk
factors for atherosclerosis as well as weight loss.

surgical treatment of obesity

among the different treatment modalities of obesity,
surgical treatment, i.e. bariatric operation, can be
considered the most effective and its long-term results
are the best documented. the first surgical approach to
weight loss was jejunoileal bypass, which causes global
malabsorption. this operation was associated with
severe late complications and, therefore, it should no
longer be performed [7**]. the modem surgical methods
are aimed at (1) limitation of oral intake per meal, e.g.
vertical banded gastroplasty and gastric banding, (2)
limitation of oral intake and induction of dumping, e.g.
roux-en-y gastric bypass or (3) induction of selective
maldigestion and malabsorption, as with biliopancreatic
bypass.

in vertical gastroplasty and gastric banding, a small
pouch is formed into the proximal stomach. this is
connected with the rest of the stomach through a narrow
channel. the principle is to prevent the ingestion of
large amounts of food. the use of this approach needs to
combine behaviour therapy aimed at permanent changes
in eating habits. biliopancreatic bypass operation differs
markedly from vertical banded gastroplasty and gastric
banding because it also results in fat malabsorption,
which obviously has metabolic consequences in the
body beyond that obtained by weight loss per se.
currently, gastric banding can be performed by laparo-
scopy and the band is adjustable. detailed description of
operative techniques and adverse effects related to these
operations are available elsewhere [3°*,7°*,8°*].

all bariatric surgical treatments have peri- and post-
operative complications related to the operation. in
addition, they all have more or less specific late
complications. these are more common after biliopan-
creatic bypass operations than vertical gastroplasty or
gastric banding. most of the late complications of
biliopancreatic bypass are related to malabsorption and
they can mostly be avoided by nutritonal counselling
and nutrient supplementation. in experienced centres,
the operative mortality of bariatric surgery is under 1%
[3°*,79° 89°].

indications for bariatric surgery

bariatric surgical treatment is never the first-line treat-
ment of obesity. it should be restricted to the treatment
of morbid obesity, i.e. the body mass index should be

40 kg/m? or more, or greater than 35 kg/m in combina-
tion with severe comorbidity such as hypertension, type
2 diabetes, sleep apnoea or cardiopulmonary diseases
[3°°.7**]. furthermore, the patient should be well
motivated and informed about the principles and
consequences of a planned operation. the patient
should have failed other supervised attempts to lose
weight. abuse of alcohol or drugs, psychosis, depression
and severe eating disorders are contraindications for the
surgical treatment.

effects of surgical treatment of obesity on weight loss
and cardiovascular risk factors

scopinaro ef a/. [8**] recently reported the main results of
biliopancreatic diversion on the series of 2241 patients
operated on during a 21-year period. the number of
comorbidities among patients and the follow-up period
was variable. at 2 years, the mean percentage loss of
initial excess weight was 74% in 1284 cases; the
respective figures for those 122 cases followed up for
10 years was 77%. because the mean excess weight was
69 kg (range 20-156 kg) this means a decrease of over
50 kg from the initial body weight. in a small group of
patients, resting energy expenditure and body composi-
tion were also measured. interestingly, in women,
resting energy expenditure was not reduced but
increased at 2-3 years after operation. this was
suggested to be because of an increase in size and
functional activity of the whole intestinal tract. in men,
however, resting energy expenditure decreased along
with the decline in fat-free mass. the authors hypothe-
sized that weight loss in men was mainly a result of
decreased intestinal absorption of energy, whereas in
women the significant increase in resting energy
expenditure after biliopancreatic diversion could also
contribute to weight loss.

because biliopancreatic diversion results in fat malab-
sorption, it may also normalize markedly elevated serum
lipids. scopinaro ef a/. [8**] reported the disappearance of
hypercholesterolaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia in all
cases. furthermore, type 2 diabetes, whether requiring
insulin or not, disappeared in all patients and 81% of
hypertensive individuals were normotensive after weight
loss.

disappearance of type 2 diabetes was also reported in
nine out of 10 moderate overweight patients (mean body
mass index 33.2 kg/m’) after only 10-15 kg of weight
loss by biliopancreatic diversion. all ten patients had
hypercholesterolaemia before operation (mean 271.4 mg/
dl) and it was normalized after operation in all; the
average reduction in serum total cholesterol was 39%
[9°]. mingrove er a/. [10°*] suggested that normalization
in insulin resistance and glucose metabolism may not
entirely be a result of the weight loss per se, but the
obesity management: operation and lipase inhibitors uusitupa 5

lowered serum free  xxxd2154xxx  and triglycerides after
biliopancreatic diversion may significantly contribute to
the markedly improved glucose uptake observed 3
months after operation.

gastric bypass operations for obesity have been reported
to have similar results to biliopancreatic diversion in
terms of weight loss. the average loss of excess weight
has been 70%, and in 516 patients followed up for 2
years, only 12 (2.3%) lost less than 50% of the excess
weight. the success rate, defined as 50% loss of excess
weight after 2 years, was 85% [11°]. in another study, 82
morbidly obese patients (61 women, 21 men) were
treated surgically with roux-en-y gastric bypass [12].
after the follow up of 6-12 months, the mean weight
loss was 33% for men and 30% for women. in men, the
mean body mass index was 52.3 kg/m? before the
operation and 35.1 kg/m” at 6-12 months follow-up.
the respective figures in women were 45.6 and 32.6 kg/
m*. in men, fasting glucose decreased by 28% and in
women by 19%. before operation 40% had elevated
blood glucose values and 16% were diabetic; after weight
loss only one patient remained diabetic. hypertension
was diagnosed in 32% of patients before weight loss, but
after the follow-up only two of them were mildly
hypertensive. serum triglycerides decreased 49% in
men and 37% in women: the respective decreases in
serum total cholesterol levels were 28% and 24%.
consequently, marked decreases were also found in
the  xxxg175xxx  of very-low-density lipoprotein and
low-density lipoprotein (ldl).

gastric banding operation also results in almost similar
weight loss to other bariatric surgery methods in obese
individuals. furthermore, marked improvements in
cardiovascular risk factors have been reported in the
swedish obese subjects study (13*]. the final results
from this ongoing study will give valuable new informa-
tion on reduction of morbidity and mortality by marked
weight loss.

lipase inhibitors

as excessive fat intake has a significant contribution to
the development of obesity and dyslipidaemias [1,2°],
compounds that selectively limit the intestinal absorp-
tion of dietary fat could offer a potential tool for the
treatment of obesity and possibly hvperlipidaemias.
 xxxg1789xxx , the key enzyme for fat absorption.
splits fatcy acids from the glycerol backbone of
triglycerides at the 1 and 3 carbon positions. the free
 xxxd2154xxx  and monoglycerides are then incorporated
into bile acid phospholipid micelles which are absorbed
at the level of brush border of the small intestine.
indirectly.  xxxg1789xxx  may also be involved in the
absorption of dietary cholesterol. orlistat is a chemically
synthesized derivative of  xxxd2792xxx , a natural product of

streptomyces toxytricini, which is a potent inhibitor of
intestinal lipases [14-17]. orlistat acts by covalently
binding to the serine residue of the active site of gastric
and pancreatic lipases. in humans, its use at a dose of
400 mg daily results in 35% inhibition of dietary fat. the
effect is dose dependent, and at therapeutic doses of
120 mg three times daily with main meals, approxi-
mately 30% of ingested fat remains unabsorbed [18-21].
in conjunction with a low-fat, mildly hypocaloric diet,
the energy deficit per day is around 200 keal. orlistat has
an extremely poor absorption and, therefore, it does not
have systemic effects on lipid metabolism, for example,
through inhibiting vascular endothelial or other lipases in
the body [20,22*%*]. the effect of orlistat on serum
cholesterol is only moderate; therefore, it will be mostly
used for the treatment of obesity in conjunction with a
low-fat, hypocaloric diet.

recently, orlistat has been brought onto the market and
the first long-term, controlled trials on its efficacy,
tolerability and side effects have also been published.
they will be briefly reviewed giving special emphasis to
the changes in body weight and serum lipids. the
european multicentre orlistat study group [22°*] carried
out a 2-year, randomized double-blind study on 688
patients who were assigned 120 mg orlistat three times a
day or placebo for the first year in conjunction with a
hypocaloric, low-fat diet (calorie deficit 600 kcal per day,
fat intake 30% from total energy intake). during the
second year, the patients were reassigned orlistat or
placebo with a weight maintenance diet. the main study
was preceeded by a 4-week, single-blind placebo lead-in
period with an energy deficit of 600 kcal per day to
identify patients eligible for the main study. from the
start of the lead-in period to the end of year 1, the orlistat
group lost more weight than the placebo group (10.3 kg
versus 6.1 kg, p < 0.001), and the weight loss differ-
ence from the randomization between the groups was
3.9 kg. during the second year, in the former placebo
group, orlistat reduced more body weight compared with
placebo (mean difference 3.6 kg). furthermore, in the
former orlistat group, the weight regain remained 2.4 kg
less in patients with orlistat compared with placebo.

levels of serum lipids, glucose and insulin had already
shown favourable changes in both groups during the
lead-in period of 4 weeks. however, at the t-year and 2-
year examinations the orlistat treated patients had 5—
7.5% lower values for total and ldl cholesterol than the
placebo-treated groups. no significant differences be-
tween the groups were observed in serum high-density
lipoprotein (hdl) cholesterol or triglycerides. but the
ldl-hdl ratio decreased more in patients treated
with orlistat. minor changes in favour of orlistat were also
seen in glucose. insulin and blood pressure values at 1-
and 2-year examinations.
6 nutrition

as expected, adverse gastrointestinal events were more
common with orlistat, but premature withdrawals were
higher in the placebo group than the orlistat group.
initially, a small decrease was seen in fat soluble vitamin
levels, but during the first year only 16 patients in the
orlistat group and four patients in the placebo group
received vitamin supplementation.

because most patients with type 2 diabetes are obese
and obesity worsens both insulin resistance and athero-
sclerotic risk factors, studies on the role of orlistat in the
treatment of obese type 2 diabetic patients are
warranted. this is particularly so because even moderate
weight loss improves both glycaemia and cardiovascular
risk factors in these patients.

in a multicentre, 57-week, randomized double-blind
study, 120 mg orlistat or placebo were administered
three times daily with a mild hypocaloric diet to 391
obese type 2 diabetic patients [23°*]. altogether, 254
patients completed the study. orlistat treatment resulted
in a greater decrease in body weight than placebo: 6.2
versus 4.3%, respectively, from initial body weight.
however, the mean difference between the groups in
weight lost was modest (2.4 kg). in the orlistat group
49% of patients and in the placebo group 23% lost at
least 5% of initial body weight. in the orlistat group the
changes in serum total cholesterol (—9%), ldl
cholesterol (— 12.8%) and triglycerides (— 10.6%) were
significant compared with placebo. as for the glycaemic
control, the changes in hbaic were only modest: — 0.28
per cent unit for the orlistat vs. +0.18 per cent unit for
the placebo group from the randomization to the end of
the study. the improved metabolic control was seen in
the orlistat treated patients despite a significant decrease
in the use of oral sulphonylurea medication.

interestingly, the decrease in serum total and ldl
cholesterol was not dependent on the degree of weight
loss in the orlistat treated patients [23°*]. this strength-
ens the view that orlistat has an independent cholesterol-
lowering effect as shown previously in short-term studies
[24,25] and also in secondary analyses of the data of the
european multicentre orlistat study group [22°*]. not
unexpectedly, orlistat also diminishes postprandial in-
crease in triglycerides by reducing both circulating levels
of chylomicrons and chylomicron remnants [24].

conclusion

surgical treatment of obesity should be limited to
patients with morbid obesity (body mass _ index
> 40 kg/m’) and to those with a body mass index of
at least 35 kg/m? who also have severe comorbidities
related to excess body fat mass. the long-term results in
terms of the loss of excess body weight and the

improvement of comorbidities are encouraging. for
stance, in most cases, type 2 diabetes, hypertension
or sleep apnoea in severely obese patients are curable
along with permanent weight loss. orlistat offers a new
therapeutic approach for the treatment of moderate to
severe obesity. its efficacy has been documented in well
controlled, long-term studies. orlistat also significantly
lowers the levels of major cardiovascular risk factors, i.e.
serum ldl cholesterol and blood pressure without
affecting hdl cholesterol and decreases can also be
obtained in glucose and insulin values. the cholesterol
lowering effect is at least partly independent of weight
loss. more controlled trials on orlistat are needed with
obese individuals at high risk for atherosclerosis.
importantly, the use of orlistat may help promote the
adoption of new dietary habits aimed at reducing dietary
fat intake, because its adverse effects are mostly
gastrointestinal and are related to high fat intake and
induced fat malabsorption in orlistat users.

references and recommended reading

papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have
been highlighted as:

* — of special interest

** of outstanding interest

1 world health organisation. obesity: preventing and managing the global
epidemic. geneva, 3-5 june 1997.

2 grundy sm. multifactorial causation of obesity: implications for prevention. am j
* — clin nutr 1998; 57(suppl):563s-572s.

a recent review of the causes and consequences for health of obesity.
furthermore, prevention measures at population level are discussed.

3 flancbaum l, choban sp. surgical implications of obesity. annu rev med
°° 1998; 49:215-234.

the authors give valuable information about the medical problems related to
obesity and summarize the methods and results of surgical treatment of obesity.

4  mannisté s, pietinen p, pyy m, palmgren j, eskelinen m, uusitupa m. body-
size indicators and risk of breast cancer according to menopause and
estrogen-receptor status. int j cancer 1996; 68:8-13.

5 chagnon yc, perusse l, bouchard c. the human obesity gene map: the 1997
°* updates. obes res 1998; 6:76-92.

a valuable summary of the challenging task. it is shown that no major breakthrough
in the genetics of human obesity has been achieved thus far.

6 — editorial. diet pills redux. n engl j med 1997; 337:629-630.

7 balsiger bm, luque-deleon e, sarr mg. surgical treatment of obesity: who is
an appropriate candidate? mayo clin proc 1997; 72:551-558.
an excellent review of the methods, indications and complications of bariatric

surgery.

8 — scopinaro n, adami gf, marinari gm, gianetta e, traverso e, friedman d etal.
**  biliopancreatic diversion. world j surg 1998; 22:936-946.

the authors summarize their own results on 2241 patients treated with
biliopancreatic diversion. interestingly, basal energy expenditure may not be
reduced in women (as usually happens with weight loss) because of an increase in
size and functional activity of whole intestinal tract.

9  noya g, cossu ml, coppola m, tonolo g, angius mf, fais e, ruggiu m.
biliopancreatic diversion preserving the stomach and pylorus in the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia and diabetes |: results in the first 10 cases. obesity surg
1998; 8:67-72.

the authors report normalization of hypercholesterolaemia and glucose metabo-

lism in type 2 diabetes after biliopancreatic diversion in a small group of moderately

obese patients.
obesity management: operation and lipase inhibitors uusitupa 7

10 mingrove g, gaetano a, greco av, capristo e, benedetti g, castagneto m,

** gasbarrini g. reversibility of insulin resistance in obese diabetic patients: role
of plasma lipids. diabetologia 1997; 40:599-605.

a metabolic study that suggests that improvements in plasma free fatty acid and

triglyceride levels could contribute to an improvement in whole body glucose

uptake in obese individuals treated with biliopancreatic diversion operation.

11 fobi mal, lee h, holness r, degaulle cabinda. gastric bypass operation for
* — obesity. world j surg 1998; 22:925-935.

the authors report the 2-year follow-up results on 516 obese subjects treated by
gastric bypass. the success rate in terms of weight loss was 85%.

12 cowan gsm, buffington ck. significant changes in blood pressure,
glucose, and lipids with gastric bypass surgery. world j surg 1998;
22:987-992.

13 sjdstrém cd, lissner l, sjéstrém l. relationships between changes in body

* composition and changes in cardiovascular risk factors: the sos intervention
study. obesity res 1997; 5:519-530.

this ongoing study with a large number of swedish obese subjects will provide

important new information on the impact of marked weight loss on the future

morbidity and mortality from causes related to severe obesity.

14 weibel ek, hadvary p, hochuli e, kupher e, lengsfeld h.  xxxd2792xxx , an
inhibitor of  xxxg1789xxx , produced by streptomyces toxytricini. j
antibiotics 1987; 40:1081-1085.

15 borgstrém b: mode of action of  xxxd2792xxx :a derivative of naturally
occurring lipase inhibitor  xxxd2792xxx . biochim biophys acta 1988; 962:308-
316.

16 hadvary p, lengsfeld h, wolfer h. inhibition of  xxxg1789xxx  in vitro by
the covalent inhibitor  xxxd2792xxx . biochem j 1988; 256:357-361.

17 chadha nk, batcho ad, tang pc, courtney lf, cook cm, wovkulich pm,
uskokovic mr. synthesis of  xxxd2792xxx . j org chem 1991; 56:47 14—
4718.

18 hauptman jb, jeunet fs, hartman d. initial studies in humans with the novel
gastrointestinal lipase inhibitor ro 18-0647 ( xxxd2792xxx ). am j clin
nutr 1992; 55:309s-313s.

19 drent ml, larsson |, william-olsson t, quaade f, czubayko f, von
bergmann k et al. orlistat (ro 18-0647), a lipase inhibitor, in the treatment of
human obesity: a multiple dose study. int j obes 1995; 19:221-226.

20 guerciolini r. mode of action of orlistat. int j obes 1997; 21(suppl 3):s12—-
$23.

21 mcneely w, benfield p. orlistat. drugs 1998; 56:241-249.

22 sjéstrém l, rissanen a, andersen t, boldrin m, golay a, koppeschaar hpf,

** krempf m, for the european multicentre orlistat study group. randomised
placebo-controlled trial of orlistat for weight loss and prevention of weight regain
in obese patients. lancet 1998, 352:167-173.

this 2-year controlled study with a large number of obese patients shows that

orlistat, a  xxxg1789xxx  inhibitor, results in clinically significant weight reduction

and concomitant favourable changes in cardiovascular risk factors. the authors

also suggested that orlistat may have an independent cholesterol-lowering effect.

23 hollander pa, elbein sc, hirsch ib, kelley d, mcgill j, taylor t et al. role of
** oylistat in the treatment of obese patients with type 2 diabetes. a 1-year
randomized double-blind study. diabetes care 1998; 21:1288-1294.
the authors report the results on an initial number of 391 obese type 2 diabetic
patients of whom 254 completed the 1-year trial. there was a moderate decrease
in body weight with orlistat (net decrease compared with placebo 2.2 kg).
furthermore, serum total cholesterol, ldl cholesterol and metabolic control
improved more in the orlistat group than in the placebo group. orlistat had an
independent cholesterol-lowering effect.

24 reitsma jb, cabezas mc, debruin twa, erkelens dw. relationship
between improved postprandial lipemia and low-density lipoprotein metabo-
lism during treatment with  xxxd2792xxx , a  xxxg1789xxx  inhibitor.
metabolism 1994; 43:293-298.

25 tonstad s, pometta d, erkelens ow, ose l, moccetti t, schouten ja et al.
the effect of gastrointestinal lipase inhibitor, orlistat, on serum lipids and
lipoproteins in patients with primary hyperlipidemia. eur j clin pharmacol
1994; 46:405-410.
