color profile: generic offset separations profile
black 133 lpi at 45 degrees

gut dysfunction in ibs

role of opioid ligands in the
irritable bowel syndrome
enrico corazziari md

e corazziari. role of opioid ligands in the irritable bowel syndrome. can j gastroenterol 1999;13(suppl a):71a-75a. endogenous opioid peptides – enkephalins,  xxxg1801xxx  and
dynorphins – are located in specific sites of the brain, the spinal
cord, the autonomic ganglia and the enteric nervous system. endogenous opioids participate in the regulation of nervous visceral
afference and sensitivity as well as of several visceral motor function induced by the central nervous system and through the
enteroenteric and the myoenteric reflexes. their final effect on
gut physiology is the net and harmonically balanced result of their
binding to mu, delta and  xxxg1633xxx  subtypes. exogenous opioid receptor ligands with different affinities for the opioid
receptor subtypes have been effectively used to modify and normalize altered gut functions. the  xxxg1635xxx  agonists – morphine
and, to a greater extent, the meperidine congeners  xxxd1908xxx 
and loperamide – have been shown to slow gastrointestinal transit
by their effects on the circular and longitudinal muscle of the intestine.  xxxd1908xxx  and, more efficiently, loperamide, for the
lack of any effect on the central nervous system, have been usefully employed in the treatment of diarrhea in irritable bowel syndrome (ibs) patients. unlike the  xxxg1635xxx  agonists morphine
and loperamide, which invariably stimulate colonic motility,
trimebutine, which has almost equal affinity for mu, delta and
kappa receptors, has no effect on normal colonic activity but reduces the abnormal increase in postprandial motor activity in ibs
patients and accelerates slow large bowel transit in constipated patients. opioid ligands can be usefully employed to normalize altered visceral sensitivity in ibs patients. the  xxxg1633xxx 
agonist fedotozine exerts its antinociceptive effect by acting on
peripheral nerve endings of sensory vagal and nonvagal afferent
pathways. fedotozine has been shown to increase the threshold of
perception to colonic distension in experimental conditions and
to affect favourably symptoms of ibs in clinical trials.

le rôle des ligands des récepteurs des opiacés
dans le syndrome du côlon irritable
résumé : les peptides opiacés endogènes, les encéphalines, bêtaendorphines et dynorphines, sont localisés en certains points spécifiques
du cerveau, de la moelle épinière, des ganglions autonomes et du système
nerveux entérique. les opiacés endogènes participent à la régulation de
l’afférence et de la sensibilité viscérale nerveuse, de même qu’à diverses
fonctions motrices viscérales induites par le système nerveux central et par
les réflexes entéro-entériques et myo-entériques. leur effet final sur la
physiologie intestinale est l’équilibre harmonieux de leurs liaisons aux
sous-types de récepteurs des opiacés mu, delta et kappa. des ligands des
récepteurs des opiacés exogènes présentant des affinités diverses à l’endroit
des sous-types de récepteurs des opiacés ont été mis à profit utilement pour
modifier et normaliser les anomalies de la fonction intestinale. les
agonistes du récepteur mu, la morphine et, dans une plus large mesure, les
proches parents de la mépéridine, le diphénoxylate et le lopéramide, se
sont révélés aptes à ralentir le transit gastro-intestinal par des effets sur le
muscle circulaire et longitudinal de l’intestin. le diphénoxylate et, plus
efficacement, le lopéramide, dépourvu d’effets sur le système nerveux central, ont été utilisés avec succès dans le traitement de la diarrhée et du syndrome du côlon irritable. contrairement aux agonistes du récepteur mu,
comme la morphine et le lopéramide qui stimulent invariablement la
motilité colonique, la trimébutine, qui a une affinité quasi égale à l’endroit
des récepteurs mu, delta et kappa, n’exerce aucun effet sur l’activité
colonique normale, mais atténue la stimulation excessive de l’activité
motrice post-prandiale chez les patients qui souffrent de sci et accélèrent
le transit ralenti du côlon chez les patients constipés. les ligands des
récepteurs des opiacés peuvent être utilisés pour normaliser la sensibilité
viscérale anormale chez les patients qui présentent un sci. l’agoniste du
récepteur kappa fédotozine exerce un effet antinociceptif en agissant sur les
terminaisons nerveuses périphériques des voies afférentes, vagales et non
vagales sensorielles. la fédotozine s’est révélée apte à accroître le seuil de
perception de la distension colonique dans des conditions expérimentales
et à affecter favorablement les symptômes du sci lors d’essais cliniques.

key words: constipation, diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome,
ligands, opioids, receptors

100

95

75

cattedra di gastroenterologia i, clinica medica ii, università “la sapienza”, rome, italy
correspondence: dr e corazziari, cattedra di gastroenterologia i, clinica medica ii, policlinico umberto i, v.le del policlinico, 00161, rome,
italy. telephone 396 4469965, fax 396 4469965, e-mail anemgi@mclink.it

25

5

0

can j gastroenterol vol 13 suppl a march 1999

71a
1

g:\gastro\gut dysfunction\corazz\corazziari.vp
thursday, march 11, 1999 10:11:49 am
plate: 1 of 5

color profile: generic offset separations profile
black 133 lpi at 45 degrees

corazziari

release at the level of the cns and by a direct effect on receptors located in the gi tract.
previous investigations have localized opioid receptors in
sensory nerves (10,11), and several studies have reported the
role of opioids in the nervous afference from the gi tract
(12,13). both mu and kappa agonists induce antinociception during colonic distension; however, whereas mu
agonists act at the level of the cns, kappa agonists act at the
periphery. an electrophysiological study showed that kappa
agonists inhibit firing of pelvic afferent fibres before they enter the spinal cord, indicating that kappa ligands act at the
periphery on the primary afferent fibres (14).
afferent fibres of the vagus and splanchnic nerves initiate
enterogastric and enteroenteric inhibitory reflexes induced
by local distension, and convey sensory stimuli from the gi
tract to the cns. enterogastric and enteroenteric inhibitory
reflexes involve mesenteric ganglia and brain structures, and
are modulated by several peripherally and centrally located
neuropeptides (15). distension of the colon and rectum
causes gastric and colonic inhibition; these reflexes can be
enhanced by emotional stress and mucosal inflammation
(16,17). kappa ligands restore normal gastric motility and
emptying that have been inhibited by colonic distension
(18); the peripheral action through kappa, but not mu and
delta, receptors has been demonstrated by the inhibition of
nerve afferent fibre impulses during colonic distension with
fedotozine instead of morphine (19). the enhanced afference
induced by peripheral inflammation appears to be opposed
in physiological conditions by dynorphin and/or enkephalins released from the nervous fibres and the immune cells; in
experimental conditions, pharmacological inhibition of afferent fibres during peripheral inflammation has been reported with kappa ligands (20).
mu and possibly delta opioids enhance intestinal motor
activity by stimulating excitatory nerves, eg, cholinergic
ones, and/or blocking the release of neurotransmitter(s) such
as  xxxg2417xxx , which maintains a tonic inhibition of the smooth muscle (21,22). the sites of action of
these opiates may be in the brain, spinal cord, autonomic
ganglia and the gut itself. intracerebroventricular administration of morphine increases intestinal motor activity and
delays transit (23,24), and spinal opioid receptors affect gi
motility and intestinal transit (25). for example, disconnection between the brain and the sacral centres, as occurs in
paraplegic patients, is followed by the loss of the gastrocolonic reflex and slow colonic transit (26,27). within the
gi tract, opioid receptors are located primarily on enteric
neurons, and opioid ligands may influence motor function by
modulating enteric neural activity. in addition, opioid ligands may release several gut peptides, of which motilin appears to be of great relevance for its ability to induce
propagated motor responses in the interdigestive state, via
neural mechanism or direct stimulation of mucosal endocrine cells (28). it is likely that, in physiological conditions,
endogenous opioids may variably affect gi function on the
basis of their affinities for the main subtype receptors, mu,

endogenous
opioid regulation of
gastrointestinal function
endogenous opioid peptides – enkephalins,  xxxg1801xxx 
and dynorphins – are located in specific sites of the brain, the
spinal cord, the autonomic ganglia and the enteric nervous
system. their effect on gut physiology is the net and harmonically balanced result of their binding to mu, delta and
kappa opioid-receptor subtypes.
opioids activate a descending inhibitory pathway from
the thalamus to the spinal cord and inhibit the ascending
pain pathways in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (1,2).
opioid receptors have been located in the pain pathway,
which is concerned with dull, chronic pain, and do not appear to be present in the neospinothalamic pain pathway,
which is concerned with sharp, stabbing pain (3). along the
descending inhibitory pathway, opioid receptors have been
found in the periaqueductal grey matter, the raphe nuclei
and the locus coeruleus (4,5). along the paleospinothalamic
pain pathway, mu, delta and kappa receptors have been
found at the level of the spinal cord, the periaqueductal grey
matter, the thalamus and the cerebral cortex. in the periphery, opioid receptors have been localized in the myenteric
and submucosal plexuses (6,7).
an interesting experimental model that illustrates the
complex brain-gut relationship as well as the different effects
and sites of actions of the subtypes of opioids is ileus produced by surgical procedure or peritonitis, which elicits pain
and gastrointestinal (gi) motor inhibition; the effect on gi
motor activity is mediated by a peritoneogastrointestinal inhibitory reflex with the involvement of afferent splanchnic
nerves, hypothalamic release of  xxxg517xxx  (crf) and efferent vagal fibres. in patients with this condition, both mu and kappa agonists have analgesic effects;
however, whereas mu agonists fail to reverse motility and
transit alterations, kappa agonists normalize gi motor function. the antinociceptive and the gi motor effects of the
kappa agonists are mediated through activation of receptors
located on distal ends of visceral primary sensory afferents (8).
in stressful conditions, opioids are involved in modifying
behaviour and modulating the hypothalamic neuroendocrine system at the level of the central nervous system
(cns), as well as modifying gi secretomotor activity at the
peripheral level. a model that illustrates the role of opioids
in the brain-gut connections is the stress-induced delay of
the gastric migrating motor complex during prolonged exposure to loud noise in dogs (9). this event is caused by the
cns release of crf, which affects gastric function through
the efferent vagal fibres. after intracerebroventricular administration, kappa, but not mu, agonists abolish the
stress-induced lengthening of the gastric migrating motor
complex cycle and cortisol increase. after oral and intravenous administration, only kappa agonists block the effect of
stress on gastric motility and cortisol increase (9). these
studies indicate that kappa opioids may modify and counterbalance the effect of stress on gi function by inhibiting crf

100

95

75

25

5

0

72

can j gastroenterol vol 13 suppl a january/february 1999
2

g:\gastro\gut dysfunction\corazz\corazziari.vp
thursday, march 11, 1999 10:11:50 am
plate: 2 of 5

color profile: generic offset separations profile
black 133 lpi at 45 degrees

opioids in ibs

tude and frequency of nonpropulsive segmental contractions.
they also increase the tone at all levels of the gi tract (29).
at the level of the gi tract, these mu agonists exert their
antisecretory effects on the submucosal plexus, which reduces basal secretion of enterocytes and inhibits the
stimulatory action of secretory transmitters such as acetylcholine,  xxxd1903xxx  and  xxxg2417xxx .
aside from inhibiting intestinal secretion, the mu agonists
inhibit biliary and pancreatic secretions, thus reducing
endoluminal fluid accumulation (30). the increased resistance to content displacement by segmental contractions
and the reduced aboral propagation by the inhibition of peristaltic activity combined with reduced intraluminal secretion slow gi transit and increase the viscosity of bowel
contents, which induces constipation in healthy subjects
and controls bowel movements in patients with diarrhea. of
the two piperidine derivatives,  xxxd1908xxx  is not totally
devoid of morphine-like physical dependence after chronic
administration, whereas loperamide, which is as effective as
 xxxd1908xxx  in the control of diarrhea, can be used for
chronic treatment with no central side-effects.
in patients with ibs, a double-blind, placebo controlled
crossover study showed that loperamide was effective in relieving diarrhea, urgency and borborygmi; small bowel and
whole gut transit time was delayed, while stool frequency
and the proportion of unformed stools were reduced, with no
reduction in stool weight (31). ibs patients complaining of
diarrhea as their predominant symptom have a normal daily
stool output (ie, less than 200 g), have frequent and loose
motions, and suffer from urgency and incontinence (32). it is
likely that the entry of even small volumes of unformed feces
in the rectum is facilitated by a reduction in segmenting
nonpropagated sigmoid motor activity (33); the associated
lowered threshold of reflex contraction causes the rectum to
contract spasmodically to even small amounts of feces, giving rise to symptoms of urgency, increased frequency of
movements and episodes of incontinence.
in patients with diarrhea and fecal incontinence, loperamide reduced the episodes of incontinence and increased the
compliance of the rectosigmoid tract (34).
functional constipation: functional constipation (35) may
be due to slow colonic transit and/or alteration of the
defecatory mechanism. slow transit constipation may be
caused by two factors – decreased numbers of peristaltic contractions in the colon (36) and/or increased number of segmenting nonpropagating contractions in the sigmoid colon
(33). the latter condition is often associated with abdominal
pain and pellet-like feces, and is regarded as one of the clinical manifestations of ibs.
the nonselective opioid agonist trimebutine, with its almost equal affinity for peripherally located mu, delta and
kappa receptors, has no effect on the motor activity of the
sigmoid colon in healthy subjects, in both the fasted and fed
states (37,38). on the contrary, it has been reported to decrease the meal-induced sigmoid hypermotility (38) and to
increase the number of propagated spike bursts (39) in constipated ibs patients. two double-blind, placebo controlled

delta and kappa, as well as for different sites along the
brain-gut axis and the different levels of the gi tract.
exogenous opioid effect
on gi function
similar to the effects of endogenous opioid peptides, synthetic opiates may have substantially different effects on gi
function as a result of their selectivity for receptor subclasses
and site(s) of action. for example, morphine, a selective mu
agonist, decreases lower esophageal sphincter pressure, delays gastric emptying, increases resting colonic motor activity, has an antinociceptive effect and does not affect
postsurgical ileus motor activity; its action is more effectively
mediated through mu receptors located in the cns.
fedotozine, a selective kappa agonist, does not affect lower
esophageal sphincter pressure, gastric emptying and resting
colonic motility; has an antinociceptive effect; and reverts
postsurgical ileus motor activity; its action is more effectively
mediated through kappa receptors located in the periphery,
outside of the cns. trimebutine, with an almost equal affinity for mu, delta and kappa receptors, increases lower
esophageal sphincter pressure, delays gastric emptying, has
no effect on resting colonic motility, has no antinociceptive
effect and shortens the postsurgical ileus motor activity, and
its action is more effectively mediated through all three main
receptor subtypes located in the periphery, outside of the
cns.
the final effect of an opioid ligand on the gi tract also
depends on the functional state and degree of activity of the
gi sensory-secretory-motor function during which it is administered. likewise, its final effect may be different in the
presence of disease processes that may alter the functional
state of the gi tract and neuromodulation of opioid receptors. it follows that the effects of opioid ligands in patients
are not predictable on the basis of their action in healthy
subjects, and, according to their affinities for subtype receptors, they may be used in a variety of different, and even opposite, pathological conditions.
some of the gi effects of opium derivatives have been so
well known for such a long time that arabian physicians employed opium to treat dysentery more than 1000 years ago.
more recently, the identification of opioid ligands that affect
gi function through peripheral opioid binding sites without
involvement of the cns and with no neurological and psychological side effects has led to the development of synthetic opioid peptides devoted to the control of several conditions of altered gi dysfunctions such as functional
dyspepsia, noncardiac chest pain, irritable bowel syndrome
(ibs), functional chronic diarrhea and chronic constipation.
opioid treatment of functional
bowel disorders
functional chronic diarrhea: among the mu agonists, the
piperidine derivatives  xxxd1908xxx  and loperamide have
been used to treat diarrhea because of their definite constipating effect. they have a potent motor effect consisting of a
decrease in propulsive contractions and an increase in ampli-

100

95

75

25

5

0

can j gastroenterol vol 13 suppl a january/february 1999

73a
3

g:\gastro\gut dysfunction\corazz\corazziari.vp
thursday, march 11, 1999 10:11:51 am
plate: 3 of 5

color profile: generic offset separations profile
black 133 lpi at 45 degrees

corazziari

studies reported that trimebutine oral administration for up
to two months significantly improved clinical symptoms and
shortened colonic transit time in constipated ibs patients
(39,40).
ibs: the key clinical expression of ibs, as indicated in a recent definition by an international consensus panel (35), is
abdominal pain or discomfort variably associated with any of
several different bowel dysfunctions. the pathophysiology of
ibs has so far defied investigators, and no single factor has
been convincingly proven to offer a plausible explanation for
the different and variably presenting symptoms. several motor abnormalities affecting the small and/or the large bowel
have been reported in ibs patients, but none has been consistently associated with symptoms. in addition, treatments capable of reverting motor dysfunctions have a limited effect on
abdominal pain.
a large body of evidence has recently accumulated to indicate that altered visceral perception is present in ibs patients and is considered by some investigators to be the
hallmark of this syndrome.
in a double-blind, placebo controlled trial, the kappa agonist fedotozine, at a dose of 30 mg tid, induced a significant
decrease in the intensity of daily abdominal pain and of the
painless days. bloating was also significantly improved by
fedotozine. the benefit of the kappa agonist therapy was also
evident as a significant improvement of the overall treatment efficacy (41).
another double-blind, placebo controlled clinical trial
confirmed the favourable effect of fedotozine 30 mg tid on
the symptomatic relief of abdominal pain in ibs patients and
significantly improved quality of life (42).
synthesis: different opioid receptors located at several sites
along the brain-gut axis participate in the regulation of the
function of the gi tract.
development of specific subtypes of opioid ligands that
act at the periphery and are devoid of any effect on the cns
can be usefully employed to treat the various manifestations
of functional bowel disorders such as chronic diarrhea, constipation and visceral hypersensitivity of the ibs.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

references
1. koob gf, bloom fe. behavioural effects of opioid peptides. br med
bull 1983;39:89-94.
2. basbaum ai, fields hl. endogenous pain control systems: brainstem
spinal pathways and endorphin circuitry. ann rev neurosci
1984;7:309-38.
3. jessell tm, kelley dd. pain and analgesia. in: kandel er,
schwartz jh, jessell tm, eds. principles of neural science, 3rd edn,
new york: elsevier, 1991:385-99.
4. jones sl, gebhart gf. inhibition of spinal nociceptive transmission
from the midbrain, pons and medulla in the rat. brain res
1988;460:281-96.
5. mansour a, fox ca, akil h, et al. opioid-receptor mrna
expression in the rat cns: anatomical and functional implications.
trends neurosci 1995;18:22-9.
6. larsson li, stenagaard-pederson k. immunocytochemical and
ultrastructural differentiation between  xxxg1801xxx ,
 xxxg1722xxx  and met/leu enkephalin immunoreactive neurons of
feline gut. j neurosci 1982;2:861-78.
7. costa m, furness jb, gibbons il, murphy r. chemical coding and
projections of opioid peptide containing neurons in the guinea pig
intestine. neurosci lett 1985;22:s19-55.
8. rivière pjm, pascaud x, chevalier e, le gallon b, junien jl.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

fedotozine reverses ileus induced by surgery or peritonitis: actions
at peripheral kappa opioid receptors. gastroenterology
1993;104:724-31.
gué m, honde c, pascaud x, et al. cns blockade of acoustic
stress-induced gastric motor inhibition by k-opiate agonists in dogs.
am j physiol 1988;254: xxxg802xxx -15.
hassan ahf, abletiner a, stein c, herz a. inflammation of the paw
enhances axonal transport of opioid receptors in the sciatic nerve and
increases their density in the inflamed tissue. neuroscience
1993;55:185-95.
laduron p. axonal transport of opiate receptors in capsaicin sensitive
neurones. brain res 1984;294:157-60.
diop l, rivière p, pascaud x, dassaud m, junien jl. role of vagal
afferents in the antinociception produced by morphine and u-50,
488h in the colonic pain reflex in rats. eur j pharmacol
1994;257:181-7.
langlois a, diop l, rivière pjm, junien jl. fedotozine inhibits
abdominal constrictions induced by colonic distension during colonic
hypersensitivity in conscious rats. neurogastroenterol motil
1994;6:140.
sengupta jn, gebhart gf. effect of kappa opioid receptors agonists on
mechanosensitive pelvic nerve afferent fibers innervating the colon of
the rat. gastroenterology 1995;108:a686. (abst)
fargeas mj, fioramonti j, bueno l. central action of interleukin-1b
on intestinal motility in rats, mediation by two mechanisms.
gastroenterology 1993;104:377-83.
bueno l. brain-gut mechanisms of visceral motor activity. in:
corazziari e, ed. neurogastroenterology. berlin: de gruyter,
1995:1-16.
julia v, mezzasalma t, bueno l. influence of bradykinin in
gastrointestinal disorders and visceral pain induced by acute or
chronic inflammation in rats. dig dis sci 1995;40:1913-21.
gué m, bueno l. fedotozine modulates colonic distension-induced
inhibition of gastric motility and emptying in dogs. in: galmiche jp,
fraitag b, eds. sensitive gastrointestinal disorders. london:
john libbey, 1995:55-63.
gebhart gf, sengupta jn. effects of fedotozine on mechanosensitive
pelvic nerve afferent fibres in rat. in: galmiche jp, fraitag b, eds.
sensitive gastrointestinal disorders. london: john libbey,
1995:65-71.
haley j, ketchum s, dickenson a. peripheral kappa-opioid
modulation of the formalin response: an electrophysiological study in
the rat. eur j pharmacol 1990;191:437-46.
fox jet, daniel ee. exogenous opiates: their local mechanisms of
action in the canine small intestine and stomach. am j physiol
1987;253: xxxg179xxx -88.
manaka h, manaka y, kostolanska f, fox jet, daniel ee. release of
vip and  xxxg2240xxx  from isolated perfused canine ileum.
am j physiol 1989;257: xxxg182xxx -90.
stewart jj, weisbrodt nw, burks tf. centrally mediated
intestinal stimulation by morphine. j pharmacol exp ther
1977;202:174-81.
stewart jj, weisbrodt nw, burks tf. central and peripheral actions
of morphine on intestinal transit. j pharmacol exp ther
1978;205:547-55.
porreca f, filla a, burks tf. the spinal cord-mediated opiate effects
on gastrointestinal transit in mice. j pharmacol exp ther
1983;227:22-7.
glick me, meshkinpour h, haldeman s, et al. colonic dysfunction in
patients with thoracic spinal cord injury. gastroenterology
1984;86:287-94.
menardo g, bausano g, corazziari e, et al. large bowel transit in
paraplegic patients. dis colon rectum 1987;30:924-8.
champion mc, sullivan sn, bloom sr, adrian te, christofides ns.
the effects of naloxone and morphine on postprandial gastrointestinal
hormone secretion. am j gastroenterol 1982;77:617-20.
manara l, bianchetti a. the central and peripheral influences of
opioids on gastrointestinal propulsion. ann rev pharmacol toxicol
1985;25:249-73.
kromer w. endogenous and exogenous opioids in the control of
gastrointestinal motility and secretion. pharmacol rev
1988;40:121-62.
cann pa, read nw, holdsworth cd, barends d. role of loperamide
and placebo in management of irritable bowel syndrome (ibs).
dig dis sci 1984;29:239-47.
cann pa, read nw, holdsworth cd. irritable bowel syndrome:

100

95

75

25

5

0

74a

can j gastroenterol vol 13 suppl a march 1999
4

g:\gastro\gut dysfunction\corazz\corazziari.vp
thursday, march 11, 1999 10:11:52 am
plate: 4 of 5

color profile: generic offset separations profile
black 133 lpi at 45 degrees

opioids in ibs

33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

38. shannon s, hollingsworth j, cook ij, collins sm. effect of
trimebutine on postprandial colonic motor activity in healthy subjects
and patients with irritable bowel syndrome. j gastroenterol motil
1989;1:9-14.
39. schang jc, devroede g, pilote m. beneficial effects of trimebutine
in patients suffering from irritable bowel disease (ibs) with
normal transit or constipation. gastroenterology 1988;94:a403.
(abst)
40. moshal mg, herron m. a clinical trial of trimebutine (mebutin) in
spastic colon. j int med res 1979;7:2331-4.
41. dapoigny m, abitbol jl, fraitag b. efficacy of peripheral kappa
agonist fedotozine versus placebo in treatment of irritable bowel
syndrome. a multicenter dose-response study. dig dis sci
1995;40:2244-8.
42. dapoigny m, abitbol jl, meric g, geneve g, fraitag b. fedotozine in
irritable bowel syndrome: results of a 6 wk placebo-controlled
multicenter therapeutical trial. gastroenterology 1995;108:a588.
(abst)

relationship of disorders in the transit of a single meal to symptom
patterns. gut 1983;24:405-11.
connell am. motility of the pelvic colon. part ii. paradoxical
motility in diarrhea and constipation. gut 1962;3:342-8.
read mg, read nw, barber dc, duthie hl. effects of loperamide
on anal sphincter function in patients complaining of chronic
diarrhea with fecal incontinence and urgency. dig dis sci
1982;27:807-14.
thompson wg. functional bowel disorders. in: drossman da,
talley ni, thompson wg, corazziari e, whitehead we, eds.
the functional gastrointestinal disorders. boston: little brown,
1994:115-74.
bassotti g, gaburri m, imbimbo bp, et al. colonic mass movements
in idiopathic chronic constipation. gut 1988;29:1173-9.
valori r, shannon s, reddy n, daniel ee, collins sm. the action of
trimebutine maleate on gastrointestinal motility is mediated by opiate
receptors in human subjects. gastroenterol clin biol
1987;11:102b-4b.

100

95

75

25

5

0

can j gastroenterol vol 13 suppl a march 1999

75a
5

g:\gastro\gut dysfunction\corazz\corazziari.vp
thursday, march 11, 1999 10:11:53 am
plate: 5 of 5

mediators
of

inflammation

the scientific
world journal
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

gastroenterology
research and practice
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

journal of

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

diabetes research
volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

international journal of

journal of

endocrinology

immunology research
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

disease markers

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

volume 2014

submit your manuscripts at
http://www.hindawi.com
biomed
research international

ppar research
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

volume 2014

journal of

obesity

journal of

ophthalmology
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

evidence-based
complementary and
alternative medicine

stem cells
international
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

journal of

oncology
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

parkinson’s
disease

computational and
mathematical methods
in medicine
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

aids

behavioural
neurology
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

research and treatment
volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

oxidative medicine and
cellular longevity
hindawi publishing corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

volume 2014

