104

 xxxd218xxx , an attractive anticoagulant, for
left heart bypass with centrifugal pump
for repair of traumatic aortic rupture
systemic heparinization often increases the risk of fatal bleeding from other injured organs in
surgical repair of the aorta using extracorporeal circulation in patients with traumatic aortic
rupture associated with multisystem injuries. we used an antithrombin agent,  xxxd218xxx , as
an alternative anticoagulant in left heart bypass with the bio-medicus centrifugal pump in 7 of
9 recent patients who underwent aortic repair using left heart bypass. all these patients survived without obvious evidence of systemic thromboembolization. surgical treatments for other
organ injuries were carried out in 3 patients concomitantly or immediately after aortic repairs
without undue blood loss.  xxxd218xxx  may have a complementary effect for preventing thrombus formation without aggravating bleeding tendency because of its monotarget specificity to
thrombin. we believe intravenous administration (0.5 to 2 jig/kg/min) of  xxxd218xxx  is a safe
anticoagulant for left heart bypass in repairs of traumatic aortic rupture associated with multiple organ injuries. (jjtcvs 1999; 47: 104-109)
index words:  xxxd218xxx , traumatic aortic rupture, left heart bypass , bio-medicus centrifugal pump
tadanori kawada, md*, yoshiharu okada, md, masayuki hoson md, shinichi endo, md,
motoyasu yokoyama, md, yosuke kitanaka, md, kanako kimura, md, hiroyuki abe, md, and
noboru yamate, md.

c

ontroversy still exists regarding the use of a
shunt or bypass in the repair of traumatic aortic
rupture (tar) to prevent paraplegia and visceral
ischemia, because systemic heparinization is often
hazardous in acutely ill patients with multiple
organ injuries such as brain contusions, visceral
organ ruptures or bone fractures.
left heart bypass (lhb) using a centrifugal
from the *first department of surgery, showa university
school of medicine, tokyo, japan, and division of cardiovascular surgery, third department of surgery, st. marianna
university school of medicine, kanagawa, japan.
received for publication march 20, 1998.
accepted for publication september 18, 1998.
address for reprint requests: tadanori kawada, md, first
department of surgery, showa university school of medicine, 1-5-8 hatanodai, shinagawa-ku, tokyo 142-8666,
japan.

pump without anticoagulant treatment has been advocated in tar repair by several surgeons, 42 however, microemboli have been found to develop sporadically in animal models of left heart bypass
without the use of anticoagulants.' therefore, some
kind of antithrombotic agent is necessary in order
to reduce the risk of systemic embolization. lowdose heparin is most commonly used, however, its
strong anticoagulant effect as well as individual
variation in anticoagulant response increases the
risk of bleeding in other injured organs.
 xxxd218xxx  is a selective and competitive antithrombin agent synthesized in japan.' the antithrombotic effect of  xxxd218xxx  is fairly mild, and
dose response is slower than that of heparin because of its mono-target specificity to thrombin.
 xxxd218xxx  may have complementary effects in
preventing thrombus formation without aggravat-

volume 47 number 3
march 1999

ing bleeding tendency during the repair of tar.
we employed  xxxd218xxx  as an anticoagulant
during lhb with the bio-medicus centrifugal
pump in patients undergoing tar repair and evaluated its beneficial effects.

subjects and methods
between 1980 and 1998, 18 out of 19 patients
with tar underwent surgical treatment. the patient group consisted of 15 males and 4 females,
ranging in age from 16 to 57 years, with a mean
age of 32.9 ± 14.1 years.
simple aortic cross-clamping without adjunct
means was employed for the aortic repair in the
first 4 patients. exploratory thoracotomy and rapid
and blind aortic cross-clamping were attempted in
3 other cases in which intrapleural rupture of the
aorta had developed. wrapping procedure was successful in 1 patient. catheter-embolization was carried out in 2 patients in order to control bleeding
from intraperitoneal and intrapelvic organs before
thoracotomy.
in the 9 most recent tar patients, lhb with
the bio-medicus centrifugal pump was employed
as an adjunct to prevent spinal cord and visceral ischemia (7 men and 2 women, mean age 34.2 ± 17.6
years). although no anticoagulant or low-dose heparin was used in the first 2 of these patients, intravenous  xxxd218xxx  ( xxxd218xxx , mitsubishi chemical corp. and tokyo tanabe corp., japan) was
used as an alternative anticoagulant in the 7 most
recent patients. informed consent regarding the use
of  xxxd218xxx  as an anticoagulant was obtained
from all patients and/or their relatives.
the lhb circuit consisted of standard non-treated vinyl chloride tubing and the bio-medicus centrifugal pump (medtronic, bio-medicus, inc., eden
prairie, minnesota, usa) primed with 500 ml of
lactated ringer solution. polystan vena caval cannula (26-28 fr. polystan a/s varlose, denmark)
and bard arterial cannula (22-24fr. bard inc.
tewksbury, ma, usa) were simultaneously introduced into the left atrium from its appendage and
into the femoral artery, respectively.
lhb was commenced at a flow rate of more than
1 l/min and was quickly increased to as high as 1.5
to 2 l/min (30 to 40 ml/kg/min) following aortic

 xxxd218xxx  in lhb for tar repair

105

cross-clamping. the cell saver system (haemonetics co., braintree, massachusetts, usa) was used
in all patients to recover and return the shed blood.
intravenous administration of  xxxd218xxx  was
started 20 to 30 minutes before left atrial cannulation at a rate of 2 kg/kg/min to reach approximately 180 seconds of activated clotting time (act) determined with a hemochron act analyzer (international technidyne co., edison, new jersey,
usa). doses of  xxxd218xxx  were adjusted during
bypass to 0.5 to 2 ps/kg/min according to the level
of act; administration was discontinued at or 20
minutes before the end of bypass.

results
patients who underwent aortic repair without
bypass or other procedures. among the 4 patients who underwent aortic repair with simple aortic crossclamping (mean aortic cross-clamp time
46 ± 26 minutes), 3 patients survived. but, paraplegia developed in 1 patient following just 30
minutes of aortic cross-clamping. one patient suffered from acute renal failure resulting from prolonged aortic cross-clamping time died of multiple
organ failure.
all of the 3 patients with intrapleural rupture
died of cardiac arrest due to exsanguination, in
spite of rapid thoracotomy and aortic cross-clamping.
two patients underwent catheter-embolization
to control intraperitoneal and intrapelvic bleeding,
however, 1 patient died of cardiac arrest due to uncontrollable bleeding from the ruptured liver during thoracotomy and aortic dissection, and another
patient died of an unknown cause during the embolization procedure (table i).

patients who underwent aortic repair with
bypass. in the first several cases of argatrobantreated patients, intravenous  xxxd218xxx  was administered in doses ranging widely from 0.5 to 5
tg/kg/min to reach an act of approximately 200
seconds. act prolongation was correlated relatively with increased doses of  xxxd218xxx , but prolongation was limited to below 250 seconds even if
the dose was temporarily increased up to 5
tg/kg/min. of late,  xxxd218xxx  is most commonly
started at a dose of 2 pg/kg/min, and the dose is ad-

106

the japanese journal of
thoracic and cardiovascular surgery

kawada et al.

table i.

procedures

postperative results

no. of patients

paraplegia

4
9

1

aortic grafting or repair
with simple aoxcl
with left heart bypass
aortic wrapping
exploratory thoracotomy
embolization & thoracotomy
embolization alone

hospital death

1
1 (11.1%)

3

19

operative death

3
1*
1**

1

6

1

* died of liver rupture during thoracotomy following embolization; ** died of an unknown cause.
aoxcl, aortic cross-clamp.

250
200

if;

0

100

a gatroban 0.5 - 2 u g/kg/min

50

pre

10min
30min
left heart bypass

post

fig. 1. act during left heart bypass with the use of  xxxd218xxx 
at the doses of 0.5 to 2 pg/kg/min.

jested during bypass according to the act level.
at 0.5 to 2 lig/kg/min of intravenous  xxxd218xxx ,
act was prolonged from the control level of 122
± 9 seconds to 162 ± 18 seconds  xxxd1891xxx  minutes and
180 ± 39 at 30 minutes after the start of lhb.
prolonged act recovered spontaneously to 148 ±
26 seconds within 1 hour after the end of bypass
(fig. 1).
five patients who had no serious combined injuries of other organs requiring aggressive surgical
intervention underwent tar repair alone using
lhb, including 2 cases in which no anticoagulant
and low-dose heparin were used, respectively. all
but 1 patient survived. that patient who underwent
aortic repair with lhb using no anticoagulant died
of cerebral contusion 18 days after surgery.
serious life-threatening complications were associated with tar in 4 patients. aortic repairs
were carried out using  xxxd218xxx  as an anticoagulant in all of these patients. one female patient's
condition was complicated by tracheal bleeding

and hypoxia due to massive pulmonary contusion.
therefore, she underwent partial pulmonary resection, and delayed aortic repair was intended.
respirator management for several days together
with airway hygiene was carried out and intensive
drug therapy to reduce the blood pressure continued until her lung function recovered almost completely. resection of the ruptured aortic isthmus
and prosthetic graft replacement were carried out
successfully with minimal blood loss by the use of
lhb with  xxxd218xxx  3 weeks after the first operation. her postoperative recovery was uneventful.
two other cases were associated with pelvic bone
fracture and cerebral contusion. these patients underwent urgent aortic repair using  xxxd218xxx , followed by surgical fixation of the fractured pelvic
bone and craniotomy with drainage on the same
day. suture closure of the ruptured iliac artery concomitant with tar repair using  xxxd218xxx  was required in another patient. all 4 of these patients
survived and returned to normal life.
in the overall patient group undergoing aortic repair with lhb, aortic cross-clamp times ranged
from 24 to 80 minutes with a mean of 47 ± 21 minutes. in one patient who underwent tar repair
using low-dose heparin, paraoperative blood loss
was about 1370 ml and a total of 1100 ml of blood
by transfusion was required. on the other hand,
blood loss during and after surgery and total blood
transfusions were limited in  xxxd218xxx -treated patients to 427 ± 283 ml, 292 ± 139 ml and 719 ± 385
ml, respectively. neither any postoperative complications such as paraplegia and acute renal failure

volume 47 number 3
march 1999

 xxxd218xxx  in lhb for tar repair

min
90

46 ± 26 min

•
60

0
30

0

o
0
simple
aoxcl

47 ± 21 min

a

a

a*
..

a

lhb

fig. 2. aortic cross-clamp time and postoperative complications in groups of patients who underwent aortic repair using
the simple aortic clamp technique and left heart bypass with
the bio-medicus pump.
*no anticoagulant used. **low dose heparin used.•0perafive death due to acute renal failure. ahospital death due to
cerebral contusion. ©survived with paraplegia.

aoxcl, aortic cross-clamp; lhb, left heart bypass.

nor any evidence of multiple organ injuries caused
by systemic thromboembolization, developed in
any of these patients using  xxxd218xxx  (fig. 2).

discussion
some surgeons recommend electively-delayed
aortic repair in patients with other traumatic injuries or such complications as severe respiratory
insufficiency with pulmonary contusion, extensive
body surface burns, contaminated open wounds, or
extensive central nervous system injuries that are
likely to pose risks to thoracotomy and aortic surgeries.' these patients are aggressively treated with
hypotensive therapy and beta-receptor blocking to
decrease the cardiac impulse. several days of delay
in aortic repair allows these injuries to stabilize and
prevents mortality due to other associated lesions.
however, we employed emergency surgery in all
but one patient who suffered from profound hypoxemia due to pulmonary contusion. we reasoned
that it would be impossible to predict when intrapleural rupture of the aorta may develop, in
which case the patient's chance of survival would
be greatly diminished.
it is well known that spinal cord ischemia is

107

more likely to develop in tar patients due to the
minimal development of collateral vessels and that
systemic heparin increases morbidity and mortality
in patients with multisystem injuries, multiple fractures and/or uncontrollable bleeding.' therefore,
simple aortic cross-clamping requiring no anticoagulation was employed in the first several cases.
however, paraplegia developed in one patient after
30 minutes of aortic cross-clamping. thus, since
1986, we have employed a left heart bypass technique using a centrifugal pump for distal perfusion.
when a centrifugal pump is used in left heart bypass, a blood reservoir is not needed within the circuit because the amount of blood expelled by the
pump is dependent on the venous return, and negative pressure is unlikely to suddenly develop in the
inflow line. full systemic anticoagulation is not always required because the bypass circuit is quite
simple, and there is no place within the circuit
where the blood stagnates. dixon demonstrated in
his experimental and clinical studies that long-term
heparinless cardiac support using the bio-medicus
centrifugal pump was possible without the risk of
systemic thromboembolization for more than 24
hours as long as the flow was kept at greater than
l/min. 8
olivier and hess strongly recommended the use
of lhb with the bio-medicus pump without heparin to reduce morbidity and mortality in tar patients associated with serious injuries in other organs.l 2 however, in animal studies of left heart bypass performed at our institution with the biomedicus pump, generation of microaggregates
above 20 x 20 pm in size was shown to be enhanced in the blood stream at the early phase of bypass in a group of dogs untreated with anticoagulant, especially in cases of a flow rate less than 700
ml/min.' in dogs treated with a low dose of heparin,
there was no evidence of an increase in microaggregate production. but, the variability of the patient's response to heparin and the variable rate of
its metabolism have also been well documented.
strong anticoagulant effects of heparin may be
harmful in tar patients with multisystem injuries,
especially with brain trauma,' even if the dose of
heparin is low.  xxxd218xxx , an arginine derivative
synthesized in japan, combines with the single target thrombin and blocks thrombin's active catalyt-

108

the japanese journal of
thoracic and cardiovascular surgery

kawada et al.

table ii. difference of the characteristics between heparin and  xxxd218xxx 

antithrombotic effect
dose response curve
individual variation in anticoagulant response
half-life in blood
platelet activation
bleeding time
neutralizing drugs

heparin

 xxxd218xxx 

 xxxg2056xxx  dependent
steep
(+)
60 min (affected by doses)
(+)
prolonged
protamine

selective thrombin antagonist
gentle

is sites converting fibrinogen to fibrin. its anticoagulant effect is quite mild, and dose response is
slower than that of heparin (table ii).  xxxd218xxx 
produces a dose-dependent prolongation of the coagulation parameters, activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt) and thrombin time (tt), with a
return to baseline levels 1 hour after intravenous
administration.' unlike responses in heparin treatment, platelets are not activated and bleeding time
is not prolonged. because  xxxd218xxx  has a short
half-life in the blood, approximately 15 minutes,
continuous intravenous administration is recommended to obtain a constant anticoagulation effect.
in our experimental study, thrombogenesis was inhibited throughout lhb with the bio-medicus
pump by intravenous  xxxd218xxx  to the same extent
as heparin at the dose at which act was prolonged
to around 200 seconds.'
in humans, act can be prolonged to 150 seconds at a dose of 0.5 to 0.9 µg/kg/min," but it takes
30 minutes for the blood concentration to reach a
plateau." therefore, it is necessary to begin intravenous  xxxd218xxx  20 to 30 minutes prior to the
start of left heart bypass. otherwise, bolus intravenous administration of 200-300 gg of  xxxd218xxx 
or adding it to the priming solution will make it
possible to achieve a rapid anticoagulant effect.
in this study, act did not exceed 250 seconds
even if the dose was transiently increased to above
5 µg/kg/min, probably because the dose response is
quite slow.
other lethal organ injuries that require repairs
before thoracotomy are not uncommon in tar patients. multiple rib fractures are seen in more than
three-fourths of cases, and the liver and head are
involved in more than half.' there is often the risk

(—)

15 min (not affected by doses)
(—)

not prolonged
none

of exsanguination death due to intraabdominal
bleeding or brain death. in 8 of our 9 patients who
underwent tar repair utilizing lhb, other organ
injuries were present, but tar repair was completed first without deterioration of the other organ injuries in 5 of these patients, but one patient died
postoperatively without recovery from a head injury. urgent surgical interventions for other associated injuries were required immediately after tar
repair using lhb with  xxxd218xxx  in 3 patients.
these operative repairs were performed safely and
without difficulty in controlling bleeding and
undue blood loss due to well preserved coagulability with the  xxxd218xxx  treatment. furthermore,
none of the patients in this series showed evidence
of intraabdominal organ insufficiency due to systemic thromboembolization.
in conclusion, we believe that the use of  xxxd218xxx  ensures safety against the risk of systemic
thromboembolization and excessive blood loss
during and after the surgical repair of traumatic
aortic rupture, when left heart bypass with the biomedicus centrifugal pump is used as an adjunct
means.

references
1. olivier hf jr, maher td, liebler ga, park sb,
burkholder ja, magovern gj. use of the
biomedicus centrifugal pump in traumatic tears of
the thoracic aorta. ann thorac surg 1984; 38:
586-90.
2. hess pj, howe hr jr, robicsek f, daugherty hk,
cook jw, selle jg, et al. traumatic tears of the thoracic aorta: improved results using the bio-medicus
pump. ann thorac surg 1987; 48: 6-9.
3. kawada t, mieda t, hoson m, koyama t, abe h,

volume 47 number 3
march 1999

4.

5.

6.

7.

funaki s, et al. left heart bypass with the biomedicus centrifugal pump: the use of  xxxd218xxx  for
preventing platelet loss. artif organs today 1992;
2: 177-84.
okamaoto s, hijikata a, kikumoto r, tonomura s,
hara h, ninomiya k, et al. potent inhibition of
thrombin by the newly synthesized arginine derivative, no 805: the importance of stereostructure of
its hydrophobic carboxamide portion. biochem
biophys res commun 1981; 101: 440-6.
akins cw, buckley mj, daggett w, mcllduff jb,
austen wg. acute traumatic disruption of the thoracic aorta: a ten-year experience. ann thorac surg
1981; 31: 305-9.
soots g, warembourg h jr, prat a, roux jp. acute
traumatic rupture of the thoracic aorta: place of delayed surgical repair. j cardiovasc surg 1989; 30:
173-7.
mattox kl, holzman m, pickard r, beall ac jr,
debakey me. clamp/repair: a safe technique for

 xxxd218xxx  in lhb for tar repair

109

treatment of blunt injury to the descending thoracic
aorta. ann thorac surg 1985; 40: 456-63.
8. dixon cm, magovern j. evaluation of the biopump for long-term cardiac support without heparinization. j extracorp technol 1982; 14: 331-6.
9. lefkovits j, topol ej. diiect thrombin inhibitors in
cardiovascular medicine. circulation 1994; 90:
1522-36.
10. sugawara h, kumon k, tanaka k, esato y, naitou
y, fujita t. evaluation of a synthetic thrombin inhibitor md 805 as anticoagulant after open heart
and vascular surgery. jpn j thorac surg 1983; 36:
533-7.
11. fukutake k, tateyama m, amano k, ueda m,
fujimaki m. clinical pharmacology of  xxxd218xxx ,
selective antithrombin agent: comparative study
with heparin. cardioangiology 1991; 29: 190-6.
12. williams js, graff ja, uke jm, steinig jp. aortic
injury in vehicular trauma. ann thorac surg 1994;
57: 726-30.

