(clinical practice

 

rheumatoid arthritis and primary care:
the case for early diagnosis and
treatment

leonard h. calabrese, do

rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease that can cause severe pain
and disability. disease management historically was based on a “therapeutic pyra-
mid” in which treatment escalated as symptoms worsened. however, the demon-
stration of early joint damage in patients with rheumatoid arthritis has emphasized
the importance of early identification and treatment. key features in establishing
a diagnosis include joint examinations, assessments of extra-articular manifestations,
laboratory tests, and radiologic examinations. care must be taken to rule out
other disorders with symptoms that overlap those of rheumatoid arthritis. treat-
ment of rheumatoid arthritis typically involves disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and low-dose corticosteroids—often used
in combination. a new class of therapeutic agents designed to neutralize  xxxd2315xxx -
matory cytokines has added a new dimension to the therapeutic armamentarium
against rheumatoid arthritis. etanercept, a bioengineered soluble receptor fusion
protein that blocks  xxxg2296xxx  activity, is the first compound in this class
to be approved for treatment of patients with refractory rheumatoid arthritis.
therapeutic trials indicate that etanercept can reduce disease activity with relatively
few drug-related adverse effects, thus helping persons with rheumatoid arthritis return
to more normal, healthy lives.

(key words: rheumatoid arthritis, diagnosis, disease-modifying antirheumat-
ic drugs, biologic response modifier, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, etan-
ercept,  xxxg2296xxx )

 

heumatoid arthritis (ra) is a chron-

ic, systemic, inflammatory disease
that affects multiple joints and sometimes
involves more than one body system.
rheumatoid arthritis affects people of all
ethnic groups and ages—from children
to the elderly. rheumatoid arthritis affects
up to 1% of the adult population and
accounts for more than 9 million physi-
cian visits and more than 250,000 hos-

pitalizations each year.! from 1983 to
1995, the cost of providing medical care
for a patient with ra averaged close to
$4800 per year.2

rheumatoid arthritis is often accom-
panied by disability and pain. in a
prospective, 18-year study of 823 patients
with ra, work disability (that is, joint
deformities so severe that the patients
were unable to work) was estimated to

 

dr calabrese is vice chairman and head,
section of clinical immunology, department
of rheumatic and immunologic disease and
the r.j. fasenmeyer chair of clinical
immunology at the cleveland clinic foun-
dation, cleveland, ohio.

dr calabrese serves as a consultant to

calabrese ¢ clinical practice

merck & co, immunex, wyeth—ayerst, g.d.
searle & co, and celgene.
correspondence to leonard calabrese,
do, department of rheumatic and immuno-
logic disease, the cleveland clinic founda-
tion, 9500 euclid ave, cleveland, oh 44195.
e-mail address calabrl@cesmtp.ccf.org

occur in 25% of patients after 6.4 years
of disease and in 50% of patients after
20.9 years of disease. self-reported pain
scores (visual analog scale) were strong-
ly associated with work disability.3 even
within the first year of diagnosis, both
physical disabilities (decreased mobility,
decreased dexterity, and difficulties with
activities of daily living and household
activities) and psychologic disabilities
(anxiety and depression) are common.‘
functional disabilities often progress more
quickly during the first few years than
later in the course of the disease.5 an esti-
mated $6.5 billion in patient earnings are
lost each year as a result of ra-related dis-
ability.¢

in addition, ra has been shown to
decrease life expectancy by 4 to 10 years.”
as one might expect, patients with more
severe ra are at the greatest risk for
increased mortality.’ this increase in
death rate is probably attributable to
infections, complications of ra treatment
(such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage and
perforation induced by nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs [nsaids]), and com-
plications of ra itself (vasculitis, rheuma-
toid lung disease, amyloidosis, and
atloido-occipital subluxation).7.9

historical approach to
treatment

the traditional approach to the treat-
ment of ra was the nsaid-based “ther-
apeutic pyramid.” underlying this
approach was the concept that ra was a
benign disease that did not merit aggres-
sive treatment until it became very severe.
treatment began with nsaids and
became more aggressive if these drugs
failed. the second-line drugs were the
 xxxd2301xxx  derivatives, gold ther-
apy,  xxxd2870xxx , and  xxxd3255xxx . if
these medications also failed to provide
relief, then immunosuppressive or cyto-
toxic agents (corticosteroids, azathioprine,
and methotrexate) were considered.10
often, 5 to 8 years passed while a patient
progressed in the pyramid to more aggres-
sive therapy.

in the past decade, studies have indi-
cated that joint destruction begins with-
in the first 2 years of ra.11.12 this evi-
dence has led to the therapeutic pyramid

 

jaoa °¢ vol 99 © no 6 ¢ june 1999 © 313
scheme being largely replaced by an
approach in which early, aggressive treat-
ment with disease-modifying anti-
rheumatic drugs (dmards) is used in
an attempt to prevent or delay joint
destruction. because of the importance
of early treatment with active agents,
early identification of patients with ra is
a critical first step in the control of the
pathogenesis of ra.13 primary care physi-
cians have an increasing role and respon-
sibility in this process.

early diagnosis of rheumatoid
arthritis

two major factors influence how prompt-
ly ra is diagnosed after the onset of
symptoms: the time that it takes a symp-
tomatic person to see a physician and the
time it takes the physician to make the
diagnosis after the patient’s initial visit. in
a retrospective study of patients in whom
ra was diagnosed between 1987 and
1990, chan and colleagues!4 found that
the greatest delay from symptom onset
until the diagnosis of ra was the time it
took the physician to make the diagnosis
after the patient presented with possible
ra symptoms. the median time from
the symptomatic patient’s first medical
visit to the establishment of a diagnosis
was 18 weeks, whereas the median time
from the onset of symptoms to the first
medical encounter was 4 weeks.14 even
when patients had symptoms that were
classically associated with ra (symmet-
ric arthritis and positive rheumatoid fac-
tor), 40% did not have ra diagnosed
until more than 6 months after their ini-
tial medical visit.14

guidelines to diagnosis

because delaying the treatment of ra
can be detrimental to patients, osteopathic
primary care physicians, who see a dis-
proportionate number of patients with
musculoskeletal symptoms, are faced with
the urgent need to distinguish patients
with ra from those with arthralgias stem-
ming from other sources. performing this
task can be a challenge to even the most
skilled diagnosticians. the american col-
lege of rheumatology has created guide-
lines to aid the physician in the diagnos-
tic process (figure 1).15 in general, ra

314 ¢ jaoa ¢ vol 99 ¢ no 6 ® june 1999

should be suspected in any patient with
the signs and symptoms of inflammato-
ry arthritis. these signs and symptoms
include the presence of prominent morn-
ing stiffness lasting for more than 30 to 60
minutes in the involved joints, the presence
of redness or tenderness over any involved
joints, and the detection of palpable syn-
ovitis (see “joint examination” later in the
discussion). the diagnostic likelihood of
ra is particularly enhanced when the
arthritis involves more than five joints,
occurs in a symmetric pattern, and
appears in an at-risk individual.

at-risk populations

rheumatoid arthritis affects people of all
ages, although onset is most common in
the fourth and fifth decades of life. the
disease is approximately two to three
times more prevalent in women than in
men.16 genetics seems to play a role, as
most people who have ra have the class
ii alleles hla-dr4, hla- xxxg1057xxx , or
both.17 in addition, the concordance rate
in monozygotic twins is 34%, compared
with 3% in dizygotic twins.5.18

joint examination
a thorough examination of the muscu-
loskeletal system is critical to diagnosis.
whereas advanced ra may result in gross
deformities, swellings, effusion, redness,
warmth, and tenderness, the early findings
can be subtle. swelling of an individual
joint is generally due to one of three con-
ditions: bony enlargement, effusion, or
synovitis. synovitis can be distinguished
from bony enlargement because it is soft
and has a spongy or resilient texture, as
opposed to the hard swelling seen in
osteoarthritis. synovitis can at times be dif-
ficult to differentiate from simple effu-
sion in small joints, but in larger joints,
effusions are ballotable, whereas synovi-
tis is not. the detection of mild synovitis
can be an important clinical clue to
inflammatory arthritis, particularly ra.
in early ra, swelling in the hands is
often noted in the wrists, the second and

third metacarpophalangeal (mcp) joints,

and the second and third proximal inter-
phalangeal (pip) joints. the distal inter-
phalangeal (dip) joints are typically
spared. later, joint erosions and joint

space narrowing occur; these changes can
be detected by radiographic examina-
tions.!9 joint and tendon destruction can
produce hand deformities, including ulnar
deviation of the fingers at the mcp joints,
swan neck deformity of the fingers (hyper-
extension of the pip joints and flexion of
the dip joints), boutonniére deformity of
the fingers (flexion of the pip joints and
hyperextension of the dip joints), and
z-deformity of the thumb (flexion of the
pip joints and hyperextension of the dip
joints).5.19

about one third of patients with ra
have involvement of the elbow.19 the
earliest sign of elbow involvement is usu-
ally a loss of extension. effusions and
swelling of the elbow can be profound
and easily observable. effusions of the
shoulder may be palpated from the ante-
rior, but more often the only notable sign
or symptom is a loss in the shoulder’s
range of motion.5 limitations in shoulder
motion are observed in approximately
45% of persons with ra.20

the temporomandibular joint (tmj)
is commonly affected. persons with arthri-
tis of the tmj have difficulty opening
the mouth and experience pain while
speaking or masticating.21

cervical symptoms affect almost 75%
of patients with ra.19 subluxation of the
spine of patients with ra can occur at any
level, but atlantoaxial subluxation is the
most common (25% of patients).!9 symp-
toms of cervical involvement include neck
pain, stiffness, paresthesias, sensory loss,
abnormal gait, and urinary retention or
incontinence.s although conventional
radiography can detect some cervical
spine abnormalities, magnetic resonance
imaging is usually superior to other
modalities in evaluating patients who
may have serious cervical cord involve-
ment.22

signs and symptoms of hip  xxxd2315xxx -
mation are often difficult to distinguish in
early ra. a clue that the hip may be
involved is pain in the groin or thigh,
particularly when the person tries to put

_on shoes. pain may also be felt in the but-

tock or referred to the knees

effusions of the knee are common and
can be easily palpated and identified. the
way a patient walks into the office can

 

calabrese ¢ clinical practice
nrarin endnass morning stiffness in and around the joints, lasting at
9 least 1 hour before maximal improvement
the presence of at least three joint areas with simulta-

neous soft tissue swelling or fluid (not bony overgrowth

cj arthritis of three or more joint alone) observed by a physician. the 14 possible areas
areas are right or left proximal interphalangeal (pip) joints,

metacarpophalangeal (mcp) joints, wrist, elbow, knee,

ankle, and metatarsophalangeal (mtp) joints.

ie ae : at least one area swollen (as defined above) in a wrist,
oo arthritis of hand joints mcp, or pip joint

 

 

 

 

 

 

simultaneous involvement of the same joint areas (as

: i: defined in second criterion) on both sides of the body
rthrit
elevate alin (bilateral involvement of pip, mcp, or mtp joints is

acceptable without absolute symmetry)

subcutaneous nodules over bony prominences or
rheumatoid nodules extensor surfaces, or in juxta-articular regions,
observed by a physician

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

demonstration of abnormal amounts of serum rf by
serum rheumatoid factor (rf) any method for which the result has been positive in
less than 5% of healthy control subjects

radiographic changes typical of rheumatoid arthritis on

posteroanterior hand and wrist radiographs, which must
[_] radiographic changes include erosions or unequivocal bony decalcification
localized in, or most marked adjacent to, the involved

joints (osteoarthritic changes alone do not qualify)

 

 

figure 1. american college of rheumatology criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthritis. for classification pur-
poses, patients shall be said to have rheumatoid arthritis if they have satisfied at least four of these seven criteria. first four
listed must have been present for at least 6 weeks. patients with two clinical diagnoses are not excluded. designation as clas-
sic, definite, or probable rheumatoid arthritis is not to be made. (adapted from arnett fc, edworthy sm, bloch da, et al.
the american rheumatism association 1987 revised criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis rheum.
1988;31:315-324.)

 

calabrese ® clinical practice jaoa ¢ vol 99 ® no 6 ¢ june 1999 # 315
suggest involvement of this joint. effu-
sion of the knee can lead to posterior her-
niation of the capsule (baker’s cyst). more
serious manifestations, such as rupture
into the calf (often misdiagnosed as deep
vein thrombosis), may also occur.s

inflammation of the ankles and feet
is very common in early ra. in the feet,
the metatarsophalangeal (mtp) joints
are most often affected. inflammation of
these joints can cause the “daylight” sign
(the toes spread apart). arthritis of the
mtp joints can cause dorsolateral sub-
luxation, hammertoe deformities, and
hallux valgus.5.19 these changes, howev-
er, are late. early on, tenderness may be
noted only with lateral compression of
the forefoot.

the archetypal patient with ra pre-
sents with an absolutely symmetric dis-
tribution of affected joints. this type of
patient, however, is more the exception
than the rule. a number of factors can
affect symmetry. large joints and less fre-
quently used joints tend to show less dete-
rioration, resulting in asymmetry. for
unknown reasons, men tend to exhibit
less symmetry of affected joints than do
women. 19,23

morning stiffness

the importance of the presence of morn-
ing stiffness cannot be overstated. like
other forms of inflammatory joint dis-
ease, ra characteristically displays a gen-
eralized decrease in mobility after pro-
longed immobility such as a night’s sleep.
morning stiffness invariably lasts at least
30 minutes and frequently 1 hour or
longer. this prolonged “gel phenom-
enon” is in contrast to osteoarthritis, in
which the relative joint stiffness lasts only
a few minutes. patients will not always
relate such morning stiffness to disease
and therefore must be asked specifically
about symptoms.

extra-articular manifestations
extra-articular manifestations can be
either very specific to ra or frustrating-

ly vague. generalized malaise, fatigue, —

and weight loss are common presenting
complaints of patients with ra. patients
often attribute malaise and/or diffuse sym-
metric joint pain to aging rather than to

316 ¢ jaoa ¢ vol 99 ® no 6 # june 1999

checklist

@ skin

rheumatoid nodules
cutaneous vasculitis (nailfold
infarcts)

 

 

 

 

 

 

eyes

keratoconjunctivitis sicca
episcleritis

scleritis

scleromalacia

scleromalacia perforans

“corneal melt” (corneal thinning)
brown’s syndrome (diplopia
caused by stenosing tenosynovitis
of the superior oblique tendon)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cardiac

pericarditis

pericardial effusions

constrictive pericarditis

nodules (epicardium, myocardium,
valves)

aortitis

conduction defects

coronary arteritis

myocarditis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

respiratory

cricoarytenoid joint inflammation
interstitial lung disease

single or multiple nodules
pleural effusions

bronchiolitis obliterans
pulmonary arteritis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

neurologic

entrapment neuropathies
myelopathies (c1 to c2, subaxial)
peripheral neuropathy

ischemic neuropathy secondary to
vasculitis

muscle atrophy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

hematologic

anemia of chronic disease
thrombocytosis
splenomegaly/lymphadenopathy
felty syndrome (rheumatoid
arthritis, splenomegaly,
leukopenia)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

figure 2. extra-articular features of
rheumatoid arthritis. (source: ahern
mj], smith md: rheumatoid arthritis.
med j aust. 1997;166:156-161.)

a disease process. another characteristic
manifestation is the appearance of one
or more rheumatoid nodules. these nod-
ules can vary in size from a few millime-
ters to 2 cm or more in diameter. they are
usually found at pressure sites (elbows,
sacrum, head, and heels), in subcutaneous
areas (extensor surfaces, fingers, and but-
tocks), or on tendon sheaths (achilles
tendon and hand flexors). these nodules
are usually painless.24

a variety of less common extra-artic-
ular manifestations may be seen on the
patient’s initial presentation (figure 2).
because the patient may not volunteer
information about the presence of
rheumatoid nodules, morning stiffness,
generalized malaise, and the other extra-
articular manifestations of ra, a metic-
ulous interview with a thorough review of
systems is necessary.

verifying the diagnosis

a number of initial diagnostic tests should
be ordered for a person who presents
with putative ra. these tests include gen-
eral chemistry analyses, liver function
tests, complete blood cell counts, deter-
mination of acute-phase reactant levels,
and tests to determine the presence of
other disease processes. if signs and symp-
toms persist for more than a few weeks,
additional tests should be ordered: tests of
rheumatoid factor (rf) and antinuclear
antibodies (anas), radiography of affect-
ed joints, and tests specific for other dis-
eases. abnormalities that may be noted in
ra include elevations in erythrocyte sed-
imentation rate (esr),  xxxg520xxx 
(crp), and other acute-phase reactants;
positivity for rf and other autoantibod-
ies, including anas; normocytic anemia,
either normochromic or hypochromic;
widely varying levels of leukopenia or
leukocytosis; and mild thrombocytosis.25
no single test, however, secures the diag-
nosis. the tables,18,26-29 shows normal
laboratory values for several of these tests
and the alterations expected in ra.

i rheumatoid factor—although rf is
present in about three quarters of patients
with ra, its presence is neither necessary
nor sufficient to make the diagnosis of
ra. in fact, the patient with the earliest
presentation is likely to be rf negative.

 

calabrese ¢ clinical practice
laboratory tests and typical

 

laboratory test

rheumatoid factor

 

 

 

erythrocyte
sedimentation
rate, mm/h
— males

— females

 

(j antinuclear antibody
(titer)§ :

 

 xxxg520xxx ,
pg/l (119/l)

(| hematocrit
- males
females

 

 

 

white blood cell count,
no./mms

 

 

 

[| platelet count, no./mm3

normal value

negative*

negative (<1:20)26
6.8 to 820 (68 to 8200)26

0.39 to 0.49

(89% to 49%)
0.33 to 0.43
(33% to 43%)26

3200 to 980026

130,000 to 400,00026

table

alterations in rheumatoid arthritis

 

 

alteration in

elevated

0 mm/h to 15 mm/h
0 mm/h to 20 mm/h#26

rheumatoid arthritis

positive (titers 1:20 or
1:40; titers of =1:320 more

sensitivity, %

positive (>1:20 titer)26 15

60 to 80t

— 30 to 40

clinically meaningful)27

disease
disease28

disease28

“rheumatoid factor may be elevated in healthy persons.18

t level varies with disease activity.

#normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate may increase with a patient’s age.29
§ antinuclear antibody is nonspecific and present in a small percentage of healthy individuals, as well as frequently in the presence of

other connective tissue diseases.

because rf becomes progressively more
reactive over time, the same patient may
be rf positive 3 to 6 months later.

alternatively, rf positivity does not
secure the diagnosis of ra. rheumatoid
factor is seen in a wide variety of other
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases,
including systemic lupus, scleroderma,
vasculitis, myositis, sarcoidosis, and other
conditions, as well as in a wide variety of
infections, including subacute bacterial
endocarditis and hepatitis c infection.
thus, in considering rf positivity in the
diagnosis of ra, it is important to note
that it is a test of only moderately high
sensitivity and relatively poor specificity.
it is most valuable when interpreted in
light of a clinical picture suggestive of
ra.

once patients become rf positive,

calabrese ¢ clinical practice

they tend to remain rf positive. accord-
ingly, repeated testing for rf positivity is
not necessary once ra has been defini-
tively diagnosed.

i erythrocyte sedimentation rate and
 xxxg520xxx —both the esr and
crp are acute-phase reactants and non-
specific indicators of inflammation. ele-
vations of the acute-phase reactant levels
are typical of the rheumatoid process,
but not diagnostic of it. the sensitivity
of elevated acute-phase reactant levels
varies in the presence of ra: early and
mild disease may be associated with nor-
mal or only minimally elevated acute-
phase reactants. the specificity of these
tests is also extremely low, because their
results may be abnormal in virtually any
inflammatory disease, including autoim-
mune disorders, infections, and malig-

elevated (>820 y.g/dl)

60 to 80

may be decreased

because of drug-induced

gastrointestinal bleeding —
_ or because of chronic

often elevated in early

often elevated in early

nancies. from a practical perspective, the
presence of elevated acute-phase reac-
tants is most useful when a patient
demonstrates polyarticular joint pains
with only equivocal evidence that an
inflammatory process is the cause.
marked elevations of the acute-phase
reactants would encourage the physician
to more actively pursue a diagnosis of an
underlying inflammatory condition. nor-
mal levels of acute-phase reactants should
reassure the clinician that the muscu-
loskeletal pains are probably of nonin-
flammatory etiology. common condi-
tions such as osteoarthritis and
fibromyalgia syndrome are by definition
associated with normal acute-phase reac-
tants.

hm radiologic tests—the presence of
bony erosions can add a high degree of

 

jaoa ¢ vol 99 * no 6 # june 1999 ® 317
diagnostic specificity for ra, but they are
not typically present early in the disease.
radiographic signs of ra often take 1
to 2 years to emerge. bony erosions can
often be seen in the feet before the hands;
thus, in patients with long-standing joint
symptoms, a screening posteroanterior
radiograph of both hands and feet not
only serves as a baseline but also may
provide useful diagnostic information.

differential diagnosis
most patients with ra present with vague
stiffness, swelling in a few joints, and per-
haps pain or warmth in varying degrees—
all symptoms that could be associated
with other diseases. therefore, a thor-
ough history and physical examination
are crucial for differential diagnosis. sev-
eral conditions that mirror ra are
described in the following sections.
chronic polyarthritis—chronic pol-
yarthritis can be caused by a number of
diseases with immunologic bases. a
detailed discussion of these diseases is
beyond the scope of this article. the most
common diseases that can resemble ra
are systemic lupus erythematosus, vas-
culitis, polymyositis, scleroderma, and
the spondyloarthropathies (ankylosing
spondylitis, reiter syndrome, and entero-
pathic arthritis). symptoms of these dis-
eases often overlap and can be diagnos-
tically challenging.30 the presence of an
erythematous facial rash or a history of
photosensitivity or serositis may suggest
lupus, particularly in a young woman.
the presence of marked fever, constitu-
tional symptoms, peripheral neuropathies,
or a suggestive rash may suggest the pres-
ence of some form of systemic necrotizing
vasculitis. the skin should be scrutinized
for the changes of scleroderma. the
spondyloarthropathies may occasionally
present as polyarthritis, although usually
the joint manifestations are limited to one
joint or fewer than five joints. prominent
involvement of the spine, as well as sug-
gestive genitourinary or gastrointestinal
_ symptoms, should warrant further inves-
tigation for one of these disorders.
chronic polyarthritis can also be
caused by diseases such as amyloidosis,
hemochromatosis, and sarcoidosis. even
polyarticular gout can be confused with

318 ¢ jaoa ¢ vol 99 & no 6 ® june 1999

advanced ra, and noninflammatory
osteoarthritis occasionally resembles early-
onset ra. this confusion can be com-
plicated by the coexistence of osteoarthri-
tis and ra in some older patients.
bf viral infections—patients with viral ill-
nesses (for example, those caused by hep-
atitis b virus, parvovirus b19, epstein-
barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and rubella
infections) can present with acute rheuma-
toid-like features such as malaise, weak-
ness, weight loss, and polyarthritic
swelling and pain. a careful interview
may elicit a history of recent sick con-
tacts, fevers, or more specific symptoms
of viral infection. if a viral infection
appears likely, appropriate management
should be instituted. however, most viral-
ly associated articular syndromes will
clear in 4 to 8 weeks or less.
considerable patience should be exer-
cised in making a diagnosis of ra. rarely
is it necessary to make a diagnosis of ra
at the first or second office visit. symp-
tomatic therapy for arthritis can com-
mence before a secure diagnosis is made.
the diagnosis of ra carries a variety of
stigmata that affect the psychosocial fab-
ric of the patient and the patient’s fami-
ly. symptoms should persist for at least 6
months before a definite diagnosis of ra
is made, although treatment can and
should commence on a systematic basis
much earlier. because so many disease
processes can resemble ra, a rheuma-
tologist should be consulted when a
patient has symptoms suggestive of ra.

treatment
the most important aspect of the treat-
ment of ra is counseling the patient and
the patient’s family. the impact of arthri-
tis on family interactions and on the
patient’s ability to participate in work-
place activities needs to be taken into
account. support from the local chapter
of the arthritis foundation can be of
great help, particularly in providing edu-
cational materials.

the role of physical therapy and exer-

cise cannot be overemphasized. patients

need to be instructed in the principles of
joint protection and joint motion, that
is, putting each major joint through a full
range of motions several times each day.

moderate aerobic exercise can also be of
benefit in the treatment of ra, as long as
excessive impact loading is avoided and
the exercise does not cause a significant
flare-up of the underlying condition.
counseling on diet and nutrition is also
important. the role of the osteopathic
primary care physician in instituting these
measures is of vital importance.

drug therapy
treatment of ra often involves combi-
nation modes of therapy, which have
proved more effective than single-drug
modalities in many studies.31,32 often,
more than one dmard is combined
with an nsaid and low-dose corticoste-
roids to provide both aggressive treat-
ment of the disease process and alleviation
of patient discomfort.
hi nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs—nsaids, formerly the standard
treatment for early ra, are now thought
to be only palliative. nsaids do not
appear to change the pathophysiology or
progression of ra.33 these medications
affect inflammation at the last steps in
the inflammatory cascade. although they
are still a mainstay of treatment, they are
used only to improve patient comfort.
the new specific  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-
2) inhibitors likewise will not halt dis-
ease progression, although they reduce
gastrointestinal erosions and may prove
to be safer than traditional nonselective
inhibitors.
ml disease-modifying antirheumatic
drugs, immunosuppressive drugs—by
definition, dmards induce a decrease
in general inflammatory activity.34
because of their anti-inflammatory effects,
dmards can “modify” disease activity
and positively influence the course of
ra.10 as will be discussed later, the most
favorable results are achieved when
dmard therapy is instituted early in
the course of ra (within at least 2 years
of diagnosis).31.35 even a mean delay of
8 months in initiating treatment has been
shown to result in significantly greater
progression of joint destruction visible
on radiographs compared with initiation
of dmard treatment immediately after
diagnosis.

the different dmards have diverse

 

calabrese ¢ clinical practice
disease-modifying
antirheumatic drug

methotrexate

 xxxd2301xxx 

 xxxd3255xxx 

gold compounds
(aurothiomalate,  xxxd248xxx )

cyclosporine

 

azathioprine

 xxxd2870xxx 

corticosteroids

 xxxd2450xxx 

calabrese ¢ clinical practice

cells affected

thymocytes
monocytes
_] lymphocytes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

monocytes
lysosomes
macrophages
t cells

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

monocytes
t cells
l] endothelial cells

 

 

 

 

 

 

macrophages
monocytes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

lymphocytes, espe-
cially t cells and b
cells

(j natural killer cells
monocytes
macrophages

 

 

 

 

 

 

t cells

!
|
!
|

 

 

 

 

 

b lymphocytes
t cells
endothelial cells

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

monocytes
lymphocytes

t cells

synovial tissue cells

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

proliferating
mononuclear cells

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

gastrointestinal symptoms
mucosal ulcers
myelosuppression

pulmonary infiltrates or fibrosis
liver dysfunction

macular damage

|
|
|
'
|
!
1
1
1

myelosuppression
i
1
i
i
1

myelosuppression
proteinuria

renal insufficiency
anemia
hypertension

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

myelosuppression
lymphoproliferative disorders
hepatotoxicity

myelosuppression
proteinuria

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

hyperglycemia
hypertension
osteoporosis

gastrointestinal symptoms
teratogenic effects
liver dysfunction

 

figure 3. characteristics of commonly used disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. (sources: references 36 and 37.)

 

jaoa °¢ vol 99 no 6 # june 1999 # 319
effects early in the inflammatory cascade
that appear to slow disease progression
(figure 336,37), unfortunately, many of
the dmards have toxic adverse effects
that make them difficult to manage. fur-
thermore, the vast majority of patients
receiving dmard therapy have contin-
uing disease symptoms.

although a small percentage of

patients with ra can be managed with
nsaids alone, most patients cannot con-
 xxxd3105xxx  their symptoms and inflammation
sufficiently to avoid disease progression.
at this point, the primary care physician
should establish a working relationship
with a rheumatologist skilled in the use of
dmard therapy. this consultation helps
to develop an aggressive program of
dmard therapy that will provide the
optimal ratio of benefits to risks. the pri-
mary care physician needs to remain an
active part of the treatment care team
and to be poised to deal with the gener-
al health maintenance of patients with
ra throughout the rest of their lives.
i biologic response modifiers—recent
research has sought to target particular
cytokines that have a role in the patho-
genesis of ra. one major approach
recently approved by the food and drug
administration (fda) is the use of a sol-
uble receptor to  xxxg2296xxx 
(tnf).38  xxxg2296xxx  is a
cytokine that regulates cell activity and
modulates the production of inflamma-
tory cytokines in the joints. elevated tnf
levels in the rheumatic joint appear to
induce the proliferation of synoviocytes
and to trigger the production of pros-
taglandins, metalloproteinases, collage-
nase, and other cytokines. data from ani-
mal models suggest that tnf plays a key
role in tissue destruction and remodeling
in ra.39-41

a bioengineered soluble tnf-receptor
protein (etanercept) has recently received
approval from the fda for treating
patients with ra who do not respond to
dmard therapy. in clinical trials, most
patients receiving etanercept improved in
all measures of disease activity (number of
swollen and tender joints, esr, crp level,
patient and physician assessments, pain,
functional disability as assessed by the
health assessment questionnaire, and

320 ¢ jaoa ® vol 99 # no 6 ® june 1999

morning stiffness).42 etanercept blocks
tne activity and may have fewer adverse
effects than dmards. another strate-
gy under investigation to inhibit tnf
activity is the use of human chimeric mon-
oclonal antibodies; this approach also
appears promising, although it has not
yet received fda approval.43

benefit of early aggressive therapy
currently, the consensus is that the earli-
er aggressive treatment is begun, the bet-
ter. irreversible cartilage damage may
occur within months, and damage visible
on radiographs occurs in most patients
within the first 2 years of disease. 11

there is thus ample evidence that the
early initiation of therapy is likely to ben-
efit most patients with ra. unfortunate-
ly, months of clinical observation often
preclude a confirmed early diagnosis of
ra.14 once the diagnosis has been con-
firmed, most nonrheumatologists are
reluctant to begin antirheumatic thera-
py.44 when the diagnosis of ra is sus-
pected, a rheumatologist should be con-
sulted to confirm the diagnosis and plan
a treatment strategy. a recent study of
233 patients found that in 70% of cases,
a diagnosis of ra can be made by a
rheumatologist within 2 weeks of the first
visit.45

comments
although early identification of ra is of
utmost importance, treatment with
nsaids may be initiated before a con-
firmed diagnosis. this treatment does not
slow the progression of the disease but
does alleviate some pain and swelling.
when diagnosis becomes certain, aggres-
sive treatment should be initiated. first,
the patient should be given a thorough
explanation of what is expected if ra
progresses and what can be accomplished
by therapy. such education by the
rheumatologist can alleviate patient anx-
iety and significantly increase patient com-
pliance. any patient who has had ra
diagnosed must be carefully and respon-
sibly monitored, and this cannot be
accomplished without the patient’s under-
standing and compliance.

once treatment has begun, improve-
ment should be apparent within weeks

to months, depending on the dmard
used. if traditional dmard therapy fails
to significantly decrease pain and stiff-
ness or to improve quality of life to the
satisfaction of the patient and the physi-
cian, then biologic therapy with etanercept
should be considered. such therapeutic
decisions are critical in the treatment of a
patient with ra and are best made in
consultation with a rheumatologist. the
ultimate goal of treatment is disease remis-
sion (defined as the absence of symptoms
of active inflammatory joint pain, morn-
ing stiffness, fatigue, and synovitis on
joint examination; no progression of dam-
age visible on sequential radiographs; and
normalization of esr or crp levels).13.46
people with ra rarely reach complete
remission, but optimal treatment can
allow them to feel better (often better
enough to return to the lifestyles they
enjoyed before they had ra). in the fu-
ture, the tolerability of new cytokine in-
hibitors such as etanercept may change the
risk-benefit equation, allowing patients
to start earlier on second-line therapy and
reap the benefits of reduced disease activ-
ity without cumulative toxicity.

references

1. allaire sh. the costs of ra. pharmacoeco-
nomics. 1994;6:513-522.

2. singh g, ramey d, terry r. direct costs of
medical care in rheumatoid arthritis: patterns
and role of rheumatology care [abstract]. arthri-
tis rheum. 1997;40(suppl): xxxd1770xxx .

3. wolfe f, hawley dj. the longterm outcomes
of rheumatoid arthritis: work disability: a prospec-
tive 18 year study of 823 patients. j rheumatol.
1998;25:2108-2117.

4. meenan pf, kazis le, anthony jm, wallin ba.
the clinical and health status of patients with
recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis rheum.
1991;34:761-765.

5. ahern mj, smith md. rheumatoid arthritis.
med j aust. 1997;166:156-161.

6. mitchell jm, burkhauser rv, pincus t. the
importance of age, education, and comorbidity in
the substantial earnings losses of individuals
with symmetric polyarthritis. arthritis rheum.
1988;31:348-357.

7. mitchell dm, spitz pw, young dy, bloch da,
mcshane dj, fries jf. survival, prognosis, and
causes of death in rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis
rheum. 1986;29:706-7 14.

8. pincus t, callahan lf, vaughn wk. ques-
tionnaire, walking time and button test measures

 

calabrese ¢ clinical practice
of functional capacity as predictive markers for
mortality in rheumatoid arthritis. j rheumatol.
1987;14:240-251.

9. mcguire jl, ridgway wm. aggressive drug
therapy for rheumatoid arthritis. hosp pract
(office dition). 1993;28:45-52.

10. fries jf, williams ca, morfeld d, singh g,
sibley j. reduction in long-term disability in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis by disease-
modifying antirheumatic drug-based treatment
strategies. arthritis rheum. 1996;39:616-622.

11. fuchs ha, kaye jj, callahan lf, nance
ep, pincus t. evidence of significant radio-
graphic damage in rheumatoid arthritis within
the first 2 years of disease. j rheumatol.
1989;16:585-591.

12. plant mj, jones pw, saklatvala j, ollier
wer, dawes pt. patterns of radiological pro-
gression in early rheumatoid arthritis: results of
an 8 year prospective study. j rheumatol.
1998;25:417-426.

13. american college of rheumatology ad hoc
committee on clinical guidelines. guidelines
for the management of rheumatoid arthritis.
arthritis rheum. 1996;39:713-722.

14. chan k-wa, felson dt, yood ra, walker
am. the lag time between onset of symptoms
and diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis
rheum. 1994;37:814-820.

15. amett fc, edworthy sm, bloch da, et al. the
american rheumatism association 1987 revised
criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthri-
tis. arthritis rheum. 1988;31:315-324.

16. abdel-nasser am, rasker jj, valkenburg
ha. epidemiological and clinical aspects relating
to the variability of rheumatoid arthritis. semin
arthritis rheum. 1997;27:123-140.

17. goronzy jj, weyand cm. rheumatoid arthri-
tis, a: epidemiology, pathology, and pathogen-
esis. in: klippel jh, weyand cm, wortmann rl,
editors. primer on the rheumatic diseases, 11th
edition. atlanta, ga: arthritis foundation; 1997;
pp 155-161.

18. starz tw, miller eb. diagnosis and treat-
ment of rheumatoid arthritis. prim care.
1993;20:827-837.

19. britton ca, wasko mc. rheumatoid arthri-
tis. semin roentgenol. 1996;31:198-207.

20. fuchs ha, anderson jj. joint assessment.
in: wolfe f, pincus t, eds. rheumatoid arthritis:
pathogenesis, assessment, outcome, and treat-
ment. new york, ny: marcel dekker inc; 1994;
pp 151-165.

21. gordon da, hastings de. clinical features of
rheumatoid arthritis: early, progressive and late
disease. in: klippel jh, dieppe pa, editors. prac-
tical rheumatology. london, england: mosby-
wolfe medical communications; 1995; pp 169-
182.

22. fuchs ha, sergent js. rheumatoid arthritis:
the clinical picture. in: koopman wj, editor.
arthritis and allied conditions: a textbook of

calabrese ® clinical practice

rheumatology. 13th edition. baltimore, md:
williams & wilkins; 1997; pp 1041-1070.

23. resnick d, niwayama g. rheumatoid arthri-
tis. in: resnick d, niwayama g, editors. diag-
nosis of bone and joint disorders. 2nd edition.
philadelphia, pa: wb saunders co; 1988; pp
955-1067.

24. bacon pa, moots ru. extra-articular rheuma-
toid arthritis. in: koopman w4j, editor. arthritis
and allied conditions: a textbook of rheuma-
tology. 13th edition. baltimore, md: williams &
wilkins; 1997; pp 1071-1088.

25. blackburn wd jr, chatham ww. laborato-
ry findings in rheumatoid arthritis. in: koopman
wj, editor. arthritis and allied conditions: a
textbook of rheumatology. 13th edition. balti-
more, md: williams & wilkins; 1997; pp 1089-
1107.

26. ferri ff. laboratory values and interpretation
of results. in: practical guide to the care of the
medical patient. 2nd edition. st louis, mo:
mosby—year book; 1991; pp 581-614.

27. ward mm. laboratory testing for systemic
rheumatic diseases. posigrad med. 1998;103:93-
100.

28. harris ed jr. treatment of rheumatoid arthri-
tis. in: kelley wn, ruddy s, harris ed jr, sledge
cb, editors. textbook of rheumatology. 5th edi-
tion. philadelphia, pa: wb saunders co; 1997;
pp 933-950.

29. shmerling rh, liang mh. evaluation of the
patient, b: laboratory assessment. in: klippel
jh, weyand cm, wortmann rl, editors. primer
on the rheumatic diseases. 11th edition. atlanta,
ga: arthritis foundation; 1997; pp 94-97.

30. kelley wn, ruddy s, harris ed jr, sledge
cb, editors. textbook of rheumatology. 5th edi-
tion. philadelphia, pa: wb saunders co; 1997.

31. wilke ws, sweeney tj, calabrese lh. early,
aggressive therapy for rheumatoid arthritis: con-
cerns, descriptions, and estimate of outcome.
semin arthritis rheum. 1993;23:26-41.

32. o'dell jr, haire ce, erikson n, et al. treat-
ment of rheumatoid arthritis with methotrexate
alone,  xxxd3255xxx  and  xxxd2301xxx , or
a combination of all three medications. n engl j
med. 1996;334:1287-1291.

33. gremillion rb, van vollenhoven rf.
rheumatoid arthritis. postgrad med. 1998;103:
103-123.

34. bondeson j. the mechanisms of action of
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: a review
with emphasis on macrophage signal transduc-
tion and the induction of proinflammatory
cytokines. gen pharmacol. 1997;29:127-150.

35. egsmose c, lund b, borg g, et al. patients
with rheumatoid arthritis benefit from early 2nd
line therapy: 5 year followup of a prospective
double blind placebo controlled study. j rheuma-
tol. 1995;22:2208-2213.

36. barrera p, boerbooms amth, van de putte
lba, van der meer jwm. effects of antirheumat-

ic agents on cytokines. semin arthritis rheum.
1996;25:234-253.

37. american college of rheumatology ad hoc
committee on clinical guidelines. guidelines
for monitoring drug therapy in rheumatoid arthri-
tis. arthritis rheum. 1996;39:723-731.

38. arend wp, dayer j-m. inhibition of the pro-
duction and effects of interleukin-1 and tumor
necrosis factor a in rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis
rheum. 1995;38:151-160.

39. firestein gs, zvaifler nj. anticytokine ther-
apy in rheumatoid arthritis [editorial; comment].
n engl j med. 1997;337:195-197.

40. dayer j-m, beutler b, cerami a.
 xxxg2296xxx / xxxg2296xxx  stimulates col-
lagenase and  xxxd1903xxx  production by
human synovial cells and dermal fibroblasts. j
exp med. 1985;162:2163-2168.

41. alvaro-gracia jm, zvaifler nj, firestein gs.
cytokines in chronic inflammatory arthritis, v:
mutual antagonism between interferon-gamma
and  xxxg2296xxx  on hla-dr
expression, proliferation, collagenase produc-
tion, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stim-
ulating factor production by rheumatoid arthritis
synoviocytes. j clin invest. 1990;86:1790-1798.

42. moreland lw, baumgartner sw, schiff mh,
et al. treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with a
recombinant human  xxxg2296xxx  recep-
tor (p75)-fe fusion protein. n engl j med. 1997;
337:141-147.

43. lipsky p, st clair w, kavanaugh a, et al.
long-term control of signs and symptoms of
rheumatoid arthritis with chimeric monoclonal
anti-  xxxg2296xxx  antibody (infliximab) in patients with
active disease on methotrexate. american col-
lege of rheumatology 62nd national scientific
meeting and association of rheumatology health
professionals 33rd national scientific meeting,
november 8-12, 1998; san diego, ca. abstract
a1988.

44. criswell la, such cl, yelin eh. differences
in the use of second-line agents and prednisone
for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis by rheuma-
tologists and non-rheumatologists. j rheumatol.
1997;24:2283-2290.

45. van der horst-bruinsma ie, speyer |, viss-
er h, breedveld fc, hazes jmw. diagnosis
and course of early-onset arthritis: results of a
special early arthritis clinic compared to routine
patient care. br j rheumatol. 1998;37:1084-
1088.

46. pinals rs, masi at, larsen ra, and the
subcommittee for criteria of remission in
rheumatoid arthritis of the american rheuma-
tism association diagnostic and therapeutic
criteria committee. preliminary criteria for clin-
ical remission in rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis
rheum. 1981;24:1308-1315.

 

jaoa ¢ vol 99 * no 6 @ june 1999 ¢ 321
