 xxxg36xxx  inhibition and  xxxg100xxx  blockade modify the pressure-natriuresis relationship by additive mechanisms in rats with...  the intrarenal factors responsible for hypertension in double-transgenic rats (dtgr) harboring human renin and human  xxxg99xxx  genes are unclear. the pressure-natriuresis and -diuresis relationships in response to chronic  xxxg36xxx  (ace) inhibition and  xxxg100xxx  blockade were evaluated. renal renin-angiotensin and  xxxd2738xxx  (no) system gene expression was also investigated. six-week-old dtgr were treated for 3 wk with submaximal doses of  xxxd1694xxx  (10 mg/kg, orally) or losartan (10 mg/kg, orally) or with the drug combination. in untreated dtgr, pressure-natriuresis relationships were maximally shifted rightward by approximately 70 to 80 mmhg, and both renal blood flow (rbf) and gfr were markedly decreased. submaximal  xxxd1694xxx  and losartan dosages both decreased systolic bp by 30 mmhg and shifted the pressure-natriuresis curves leftward by 25 to 30 mmhg.  xxxd1694xxx  increased rbf and gfr to values observed in normotensive control animals but did not significantly affect fractional sodium excretion (fena) or fractional water excretion (feh2o) curves. in contrast, losartan had no significant effect on rbf or gfr but shifted the fena and feh2o curves leftward. the  xxxd1694xxx  and losartan combination completely normalized bp and shifted the pressure-natriuresis curves leftward more than did either drug alone. when  xxxd1694xxx  and losartan were administered at higher doses (30 mg/kg, orally), the two drugs equally shifted the pressure-natriuresis curves leftward, by 50 mmhg. both drugs increased rbf and gfr; however, only losartan shifted fena and feh2o curves leftward. human and rat renin and  xxxg99xxx  genes were downregulated in dtgr and were increased by losartan and  xxxd1694xxx  treatments, whereas no changes in the expression of rat ace and at1a receptor genes were observed. endothelial no synthase expression was increased by  xxxd1694xxx  but not by losartan. neither  xxxg1578xxx  nor neural no synthase gene expression was affected by drug treatments. therefore, submaximal ace inhibition enhanced sodium excretion mainly by increasing rbf and gfr, whereas submaximal  xxxg100xxx  blockade decreased tubular sodium and water reabsorption. the combination of the two drugs produced an additive effect. the ace inhibitor effects may involve increased endothelial no synthase expression, perhaps related to the inhibition of bradykinin degradation.