 a novel mutation of delta‐aminolaevulinate dehydratase in a healthy child with 12% erythrocyte enzyme activity - akagi - 1999 - british journal of haematology - wiley online library 
 
 abstract 
 
 cloning, expression and phenotype studies of the defective gene for delta‐aminolaevulinate dehydratase ( xxxg121xxx ) in a family with an asymptomatic girl who had  xxxg121xxx  deficiency were carried out. the proband was identified by neonatal  xxxg121xxx  screening, and had erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity at 12% of the normal control. she was heterozygous for  xxxg121xxx  deficiency, which was inherited from her father. nucleotide sequence analysis of the cloned  xxxg121xxx  cdna revealed c 36  to g and t 168  to c mutations on the same allele. the former mutation resulted in f12l substitution, whereas the latter was a silent mutation. all family members who had decreased  xxxg121xxx  activity had the same mutation. expression of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna in chinese hamster ovary cells produced an  xxxg121xxx  protein without significant enzyme activity. additionally, the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna which encodes f12l substitution produced an aberrant migration pattern in polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing conditions. this finding probably reflects an abnormal folding of the f12l protein, since the mutation occurred in the alpha1 helix of the n‐terminal arm of the enzyme, which is involved in the extensive quaternary interactions among the subunits. this is also the first report of  xxxg121xxx  gene mutation in an asymptomatic subject. 
 
 delta‐aminolaevulinate dehydratase (e.c.4.2.1.24,  xxxg121xxx ) is a cytosolic enzyme in the haem biosynthetic pathway that catalyses the condensation of two molecules of delta‐aminolaevulinic acid (ala) to form a monopyrrole, porphobilinogen (pbg) (  21 ). the enzyme activity is present in great excess in normal cells, thus a partial inhibition of this enzyme activity is not usually accompanied by clinical consequences (
				 14 ). however, a markedly decreased enzyme activity may occur in the case of inherited  xxxg121xxx  deficiency porphyria (adp), or in acquired  xxxg121xxx  deficiency produced by lead exposure, or by hereditary tyrosinaemia which accompany grave clinical symptoms (
				 14 ). four well‐documented cases of adp have been reported to date, i.e. two german male patients who developed the disease at adolescence, one swedish boy who suffered from severe adp from birth, and one belgian male patient who developed the disease at age 63 (
				 4 ; 
				 9 ). molecular analysis of the gene defects has been reported for two of the four patients, i.e. the first german patient (
				 12 ) and the swedish boy (
				 20 ), but others have yet to be reported. except for parents and siblings of the proband for adp, no  xxxg121xxx  mutation has been reported in isolated cases of asymptomatic subjects with  xxxg121xxx  deficiency. in the present study we describe a novel mutation of the  xxxg121xxx  gene in an asymptomatic swedish infant with erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity at ~12% of normal controls who was identified by  xxxg121xxx  assay for neonatal screening of hereditary tyrosinaemia.  xxxg121xxx  phenotype studies in this family by genomic dna analysis confirmed that the proband was heterozygous for the mutation of the  xxxg121xxx  gene, which was inherited from her father. in addition,  xxxg121xxx  activity expressed by the mutant cdna in chinese hamster ovary (cho) cell unequivocally established that the mutation encoded a protein with little enzyme activity, and is responsible for the marked  xxxg121xxx  deficiency in the proband.
          
 
 
  materials and methods 
 
  proband and family members studied 
 the child was born at full term and healthy after an uneventful pregnancy. neonatal screening for hereditary tyrosinaemia showed reduced erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity. hereditary tyrosinaemia type i and lead poisoning were excluded by specific tests. the child had and still has slightly elevated urinary ala and coproporphyrin excretions, and increased erythrocyte protoporphyrin concentration. no abnormality in porphyrin metabolism was found in other members of the family. urinary pbg, faecal porphyrin excretion and erythrocyte pbg deaminase activity were within the normal range. the child is now 3 years old, is in good health and has a normal growth, and normal neuromuscular and intellectual development. her elder brother, both parents, grandparents and a paternal uncle and an aunt were studied for erythroid  xxxg121xxx  activity and/or genomic analysis. 
 
 
  synthesis of  xxxg121xxx  cdna 
 total rna was prepared from buffy coat isolated from ~45 ml heparinized peripheral blood, according to the method of  3 ). the first‐strand dna was synthesized using superscript rnaseh −  reverse transcriptase (gibco‐brl, gaithersburg, md.), primed with oligo(dt) 12–18 . the first pcr amplification of  xxxg121xxx  cdna was performed by using two oligomers, alad21, 5′gggagaccggagcgggagaca and alad31, 5′‐ggttgtcacttgtctgaggc. alad21 corresponded to the beginning portion of exon 1a of  xxxg121xxx  cdna (
							 15 ), and alad31 to the 3′‐untranslated region of  xxxg121xxx  cdna (
							 26 ). the pcr product was purified using a geneclean kit (bio 101 inc., lajolla, calif.), then used as a template for the second pcr amplification, which was carried out using alad23, 5′‐caatgccccagga gccctaggt and alad2,5′‐gttctagagggcctggcactg tcctcca, as primers. these oligomers corresponded to the 5′‐untranslated (downstream of  xxxg121xxx  21) and the 3′‐untranslated (upstream of  xxxg121xxx  31) region of  xxxg121xxx  cdna, respectively (
							 26 ). amplifications were performed three times in separate experiments, and further steps were processed separately as well. pcr was carried out using a dna thermal cycler (perkin elmer‐cetus corp. norwalk, ct.), employing a thermal cycle programme, as described previously (
							 13 ).
             
 
 
  cloning and sequencing of cdnas 
 pcr products were purified using a geneclean kit, followed by cloning into pgem‐t easy vector (promega, madison, wis.). dna sequencing was carried out by the dideoxy chain‐termination method, using a genetically engineered t7 dna polymerase (sequitherm tm  long‐read tm  cycle sequencing kits lc., epicentre technologies, madison, wis.).
             
 
 
  nucleotide sequence analysis of genomic dna 
 genomic dna was prepared from buffy coat samples isolated from ~10 ml heparinized peripheral blood. regions containing the deletion detected in cdna were amplified by pcr. the pcr was carried out using a primer set, i.e.  xxxg121xxx  23 and  xxxg121xxx  36, 5′‐gcgtgagcgcaacctcccttc‐3′ (  26 ), which encompasses the point mutations found in the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna. the pcr product was purified, and cloning and sequence analysis were carried out as described above.
             
 
 
  expression of mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna 
 the expression vector pdkcr‐neo (  18 ), which contains the sv40 early gene promoter, donor and acceptor sites, and polyadenylation sites derived from the rabbit beta‐globin gene and the sv 40 early gene, was used for expression of  xxxg121xxx  proteins. cloned  xxxg121xxx  cdna was restricted with  eco r  i followed by purification with geneclean kit, and inserted into the  eco r  i site of the pdkcr‐neo vector (
							 19 ). the recombinant plasmids were introduced into chinese hamster ovary (cho) cells by coprecipitation with calcium phosphate (cellphect transfection kit, pharmacia fine chemicals. uppsala, sweden), followed by selection with  xxxg418xxx  ( xxxd2191xxx , gibco‐brl, gaithersburg, md.) (800 mug/ml) starting 24 h after transfection.
             
 
 
  immunoblot analysis and  xxxg121xxx  assay 
 human  xxxg121xxx  in erythrocytes and those which were expressed in cho cells were specifically detected by using rabbit igg versus human  xxxg121xxx  in immunoblot analysis as described previously (  2 ). briefly, 10 6  cho cells transfected with the normal or the mutant  xxxg121xxx  were used for electrophoresis in a 10% polyacrylamide gel–0.01%  xxxd3215xxx  (sds‐page), unless otherwise noted in the case of page under a non‐denaturing condition.  xxxg121xxx  in erythrocytes was partially purified before electrophoresis using a 1 × 3‐cm column in diethylaminoethyl cellulose chromatography, and concentrated approximately a 100‐fold by centrifree tm  micropartition system (amicon inc., bevery, mass.) at 4°c. 50 mug of protein were loaded onto each lane in a 10% gel in sds‐page that was blotted onto a sheet of nitrocellulose membrane. detection of the specific immune complex was carried out using the ecl western blotting detection system (amersham life science ltd, buckinghamshire, u.k.). protein concentration was determined by the method of 
							 17 ).  xxxg121xxx  activity was determined using 10 6  cells/assay, according to the method described previously (
							 21 ).
             
 in order to assess the effect of minor differences either in the electrical charge, or the size of the  xxxg121xxx  protein, cellular extracts were prepared from 10 6  cho cells expressing normal human  xxxg121xxx , f 12  → l mutant, v 153  → m mutant, and k 59  → n mutant, by suspending them in 5 m
							 m  potassium phosphate buffer (ph 6.88), and frozen‐thawed once using liquid nitrogen. after centrifugation  xxxd1891xxx  000 rpm for 10 min, supernatants were isolated and protein concentration was determined by the method of 
							 17 ). f 12  → l mutant is the one reported in this study, whereas v 153  → m mutant was from a german patient with adp (
							 1 ) and k 59  → n mutant was from a belgian patient with adp (
							 11 ). untreated protein (10 mug) was loaded onto each lane of the gel and electrophoresed in the absence of sds. human  xxxg121xxx ‐specific protein was detected using rabbit anti‐human  xxxg121xxx  igg, as described previously.
             
 
 
 
  results 
 
  abnormal porphyrin metabolism in the proband 
 the proband had erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity at only 12% of the normal control level at the time of screening (fig  1 a). her enzyme activity slightly increased in the following 2 years, but remained <15% of the normal control level. the proband's erythrocyte porphyrin concentrations were always elevated (fig 
						 1 a), though she had no signs of iron deficiency anaemia, or lead poisoning. her urinary ala and coproporphyrin concentrations were also elevated, but pbg concentration was within the normal range (fig 
						 1 b).
             
 
 
 figure 1 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
   fig 1.  porphyrin metabolism of the proband. (a) erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity and porphyrin concentration. (b) urinary ala, pbg and coproporphyrin concentrations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   xxxg121xxx  activity and  xxxg121xxx  protein in erythroid cells in the proband's family members 
 the father, the brother, a paternal uncle and a paternal aunt, and the paternal grandmother of the proband had <50% of the normal control level of  xxxg121xxx  activity in erythrocytes, whereas another paternal aunt, the paternal grandfather, and all the maternal pedigree members examined, i.e. the mother and both maternal grandparents, had normal  xxxg121xxx  activity (fig  2 a).  xxxg121xxx  protein content in their erythrocytes was all normal irrespective of their activities (fig 
						 2 b). these results suggest that abnormally decreased  xxxg121xxx  activity in the proband and in certain subjects in this family is due to a protein with a positive cross‐reactive immunological material. since the mother of the proband had the normal  xxxg121xxx  activity while the father had a decreased enzyme activity (~30%), the results also indicate that the proband is heterozygous for  xxxg121xxx  deficiency, which is inherited from her father. because of the difficulty in obtaining a sufficient amount of peripheral blood from the proband, we used the peripheral blood from her father for molecular studies as described below.
             
 
 
 figure 2 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  cloning of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna 
 in order to examine the mutation of the  xxxg121xxx  gene, cdna was synthesized from total rna isolated from the peripheral blood of the father.  xxxg121xxx  cdna sequences were amplified by pcr, and cloned into a pgem‐t easy vector. to confirm the results, pcr amplification and the cloning were performed three times independently. first, by nucleotide sequence analysis, one allele (allele 1) was identified which encoded two point mutations, i.e. c 36  to g, t 168  to c (fig 
						 3 ). whereas the latter was a silent mutation, the former accompanied an amino acid substitution of f12l. the other allele encoding  xxxg121xxx  (allele 2) was shown to be completely normal. the proportion of these two alleles was essentially similar (


  table i), indicating that the abundance of each  xxxg121xxx  mrna copies was equivalent.
             
 
 
 figure 3 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
   
                6  → g base transition resulted in an amino acid substitution of phe 12  → leu, while t 168  → c transition was silent. (b) both base transitions were found in the single allele, and none were found in the other allele. 
 
 
 
 
 
 table 1.
             table i.  proportion of two allelic products detected in cdnas from the proband's father. the number of two allelic products detected in the father's cdnas is shown for each separate library obtained by three separate experiments. allele 1 had both c 36  → g and t 168  → c mutations, whereas allele 2 was normal.
                
 
 
 
 
 
  pedigree studies 
 these two point mutations were identified in the partial sequence of pcr‐amplified genomic dna not only of the father, but also the proband, the brother, the paternal aunt, and the paternal grandmother, all of whom showed low  xxxg121xxx  activities (  

table ii). on the other hand, these point mutations were absent in the mother (


  table ii). these findings clearly indicated that the two point mutations were transmitted to the proband from her father.
             
 
 table 2.
             table ii.  detection of c 36  → g and t 168  → c mutations in genomic dna from family members. the number of clones of which sequence analysis confirmed the normal or the mutated sequence is shown. see details in materials and methods.
                
 
 
 
 
 
   xxxg121xxx  activity expressed by the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna 
 to confirm that the c 36  to g mutation was responsible for the low activity of  xxxg121xxx , mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna was expressed by transfection in cho cells and expressed  xxxg121xxx  activity was compared with that obtained by transfection of the normal  xxxg121xxx  cdna. human  xxxg121xxx  protein expressed in cho cells was specifically detected and quantified by western blot analysis using a polyclonal rabbit igg versus human  xxxg121xxx  which reacts with the human, but not the hamster  xxxg121xxx . human‐specific  xxxg121xxx  activity was calculated as the difference between the total enzyme activity of cho cells transfected with  xxxg121xxx  cdna and the activity of cho cells transfected with a plasmid in which  xxxg121xxx  cdna was inserted in the reverse orientation (mock transfection).  xxxg121xxx  activity was then normalized on the basis of the amount of human  xxxg121xxx  expressed in cho cells, and expressed as an activity/mass ratio, as described previously (
						 12 ). cho cells transfected with normal human  xxxg121xxx  cdna were found to express significant  xxxg121xxx  protein and activity compared to those that were mock‐transfected. although transfection of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna expressed an equivalent amount of  xxxg121xxx  protein as normal  xxxg121xxx  cdna, the  xxxg121xxx  activity/mass ratio was nearly null (fig 
						 4 ).
             
 
 
 figure 2 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
   fig 4.  expression of  xxxg121xxx  cdna in cho cells. normal human  xxxg121xxx  cdna, anti‐sense  xxxg121xxx  cdna, and c 36  → g mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna were introduced into a pdkcr‐neo expression vector. the recombinant constructs were transfected into cho cells. and neomycin‐resistant clones were selected by incubation in the presence of  xxxd2193xxx  800 mug/ml. quantification of the human  xxxg121xxx  protein and  xxxg121xxx  activity were made as described in materials and methods. the basal level of  xxxg121xxx  activity in mock transfected cho cells was negligible, and no  xxxg121xxx  protein was detectable using anti‐human  xxxg121xxx  antibody in western blot analysis. data are the mean of three separate experiments. the activity/mass ratio of 1.0 for the normal enzyme corresponds to 5.2 nmol pbg formed/mug protein/h, 37°c. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  protein under a non‐denaturating condition 
 the mutation identified in this proband accompanied the loss of  xxxg121xxx  activity, despite that this mutation was located far from the substrate‐binding site or the zinc‐binding domain of the enzyme. we therefore carried out polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of  xxxg121xxx  under a non‐denaturing condition, i.e. using an untreated protein in the electrophoresis in the absence of sds, to examine potential structural difference of the mutant enzyme. recombinant alads from normal cdna and the mutant cdna encoding v153m showed two bands with the same mobility. another mutant cdna encoding k59n also showed two bands, but their mobilities were different from those described above for the normal enzyme and the v153m mutant. this is probably because k59n protein has one less positive charge per unit by substitution. the mutant  xxxg121xxx  encoding f12l showed only one band which had a significantly larger mobility compared with the normal  xxxg121xxx  (fig  5 ).
             
 
 
 figure 5 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
   
                9  → n mutant, were used. 10 mug of untreated protein were loaded onto each lane of the gel and electrophoresed in the absence of sds. human  xxxg121xxx ‐specific protein was detected using rabbit anti‐human  xxxg121xxx  igg, as described previously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  discussion 
 this study represents the first complete molecular analysis of a novel mutation of the  xxxg121xxx  gene in an asymptomatic subject with marked  xxxg121xxx  deficiency who was identified by neonatal  xxxg121xxx  screening.  xxxg121xxx  activity in the proband's erythrocytes was 12% of the normal control (fig  1 a), which accounted for the elevation of urinary ala excretion (fig 
					 1 b). the proband's erythrocytes contained the normal amount of immunologically quantifiable  xxxg121xxx  protein (fig 
					 2 ), suggesting the existence of a structurally abnormal non‐catalytic enzyme. the proband was considered to be heterozygous for  xxxg121xxx  deficiency, since her mother had normal  xxxg121xxx  activity, while her father had ~30% enzyme activity compared with normal (fig 
					 2 a). all the family members having <50% of normal  xxxg121xxx  activities carried the same set of mutations, namely, c 36  to g, and t 168  to c point mutations on the same allele (fig 
					 3 ). the former mutation resulted in a phe to leu substitution at amino acid residue 12, whereas the latter was a silent mutation (fig 
					 3 ). it was unclear why only the proband had an extremely low activity of  xxxg121xxx , despite the fact that she was heterozygous for the low  xxxg121xxx  gene, similar to her father and her other family members with one‐half the level of normal  xxxg121xxx  activity. it is unclear whether her young age contributed to the observed low enzymatic activity.
          
 expression studies of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  cdna in cho cells showed that the mutant  xxxg121xxx  had little enzymatic activity, whereas its protein expression  per se  was not impaired (fig 
					 4 ). this finding suggests that this mutation produced at least a stable but non‐catalytic enzyme protein. the amino acid substitution caused by the mutation is, however, located far from the active centre (
					 24 ), thus the loss of enzyme activity is probably not directly due to a change in the affinity of the enzyme to the substrate, or a change in its metal binding status.
          
 recently, the structure of the subunit of yeast (  5 ) and  e. coli   xxxg121xxx  (
					 6 ) has been elucidated by x‐ray crystallography. both of them have a characteristic beta‐barrel structure with the substrate binding sites at the centre, and an n‐terminal arm of approximately 50–60 amino acids. the n‐terminal arm is thought to interact with the beta‐barrel region when the single subunit is arranged into a homodimer, which would then be followed by the arrangement into a homotetramer, ultimately to a homooctamer which is the active form of  xxxg121xxx  (
					 24 ). since the amino acid substitution of phe to leu at amino acid residue 12 is located exactly within the n‐terminal arm, this mutation may elicit a stereotactic hindrance in homodimer formation. page analysis of the mutant  xxxg121xxx  under a non‐denaturating condition also detected a single band, rather than the two bands found in the normal  xxxg121xxx . in addition to charge differences, these two bands may represent differences in the size of smaller molecular weight complexes of the enzyme, since an  xxxg121xxx  mutant, v153m mutant, showed an identical pattern to the normal  xxxg121xxx , and another mutant, k59n with the loss of one positive charge per subunit, also showed the same pattern but with a different mobility in page under a non‐denaturing condition, reflecting the charge difference in this case (fig 
					 5 ). thus the upper band of the two bands observed with normal  xxxg121xxx , v153m and k59n mutants may represent a higher molecular complex, whereas the lower band observed with all alads examined, including the f12l mutant, may represent a lower molecular weight complex.
          
 the unique feature of this study is the identification and characterization of a novel mutation of the  xxxg121xxx  gene in an asymptomatic subject but with a marked  xxxg121xxx  deficiency. this subject was detected by erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  assays for tyrosinaemia screening which had been initiated in 1995 including all newborns in sweden, and so would not have been otherwise detected. this screening assay detects subjects only with an extremely low  xxxg121xxx  activity, e.g. <20% (  10 ), and so far the levels comparable to that of the proband in this study was detected at 2 per 100 000 (
					 25 ). on the other hand, the prevalence of low erythrocyte  xxxg121xxx  activity <50% of normal has been estimated to be about 2% in the swedish population (
					 25 ), and it is highly likely that more mutations of the  xxxg121xxx  gene may be found in asymptomatic low  xxxg121xxx  carriers by screening. the implication of low  xxxg121xxx  carriers and its identification by molecular analysis is obvious, since these subjects may be more vulnerable to toxic effects of compounds which may inhibit enzyme activity, such as lead (
					 22 ), succinylacetone (
					 16 ; 
					 23 ), styrene oxide (
					 7 ) or trichloroethylene (
					 8 ).
          
 
 
  acknowledgements 
 we are grateful for skilled technical assistance from ms luba garbaczewski. this work was supported in part by us phs grant dk‐32890 (s.s.), yamanouchi molecular medicine research fund (s.s.), chugai fund for molecular haematology (s.s.) and karolinska institute research grant (p.h.). 