journal of pharmacokinetics and biopharmaceutics, vol. 27, no. 2, 1999

constructing a prediction interval for time to reach
a threshold concentration based on a population
pharmacokinetic analysis: an application to
 xxxd286xxx  in renal transplantation
france mentre,1,3 john kovarik,2 and christophe gerbeau2
received april 27, 1998—final may 20, 1999
 xxxd286xxx  is an immunosuppressant chimeric monoclonal antibody directed to the human
interleukin-2 receptor a-chain used for prevention of acute rejection episodes in organ transplantation. the minimally effective serum concentration necessary to saturate receptor epitopes in
kidney transplant patients is 0.2 fig/ml. to guide dose selection for phase 3 efficacy trials, a
population pharmacostatistical model was fitted to intensively sampled phase 2 pharmacokinetic
data. this served as a basis from which to examine candidate dose regimens with respect to the
duration over which receptor-saturating concentrations would be achieved posttransplant. three
prediction methods were assessed: one based on simulations, and two others based on first-order
approximation using either inverse regression or inversion of confidence intervals. an 80% prediction interval was generated by each method to evaluate its predictive performance against prospectively collected phase 3 data in 39 renal transplant patients who received two injections of 20 mg
 xxxd286xxx , one prior to surgery and one on day 4 posttransplant. all methods provided correct
prediction of the duration of receptor-saturating concentration. as anticipated, the best performance was obtained from the simulation method which predicted 30 values in the 80% prediction
interval, 19.7-52.7 days. the actually observed 80% interval from the phase 3 data was 23.758.3 days.
key words: prediction interval; pharmacokinetics; population analysis; nonmem; inverse
regression; immunosuppressives.

introduction
 xxxd286xxx  is a chimeric human/mouse monoclonal antibody directed
against the  xxxd2286xxx  receptor a-chain (il-2ra or  xxxg1174xxx ) on activated t-lymphocytes. it is composed of a murine hypervariable
1inserm

u436, 75013 paris, france.
pharma, ag, 4002 basel, switzerland, and 92506 rueil-malmaison, france.
3to whom correspondence should be addressed: inserm u436, chu pitie-salpetriere,
91 bd de l'hopital, 75013 paris, france.
2 novartis

213
0090-466x/99/0400-0213$16.00/0 © 1999 plenum publishing corporation

214

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

region which confers binding specificity and a human igg1k constant
region.  xxxd286xxx  is used for immunoprophylaxis against acute rejection
episodes following solid organ transplantation in addition to cyclosporine
and corticosteroids as the baseline immunosuppressive regimen. the pharmacokinetics and immunodynamics of  xxxd286xxx  have been characterized
extensively in phase 2 development studies in de novo renal transplant
patients (1,2). as has been reported for other chimeric monoclonal antibodies,  xxxd286xxx  has a relatively restricted central distribution volume of
4.9 l, a clearance of 46 ml/hr and an elimination half-life of 6.5 days (2).
flow cytometry has been used to quantify il-2ra blocking on peripheral
blood t-cells and results indicate that a threshold concentration–effect
relationship exists whereby serum  xxxd286xxx  levels in excess of 0.2 mg/ml
are sufficient to saturate (> 97% coating) receptor sites (2).
although it is currently unknown what the optimal period of il-2ra
blockade is, a critical period in need of improved immunoprophylaxis is the
first month following renal transplantation during which the majority of
acute rejection episodes occurs (3). on the other hand, prolonged augmentation of the baseline immunosuppressive regimen with additional
agents raises the concern of potential overimmunosuppression. to balance
these factors, a target window for the duration of il-2ra blockade of 4–6
weeks posttransplant was defined to guide dose selection for phase 3 efficacy
studies of  xxxd286xxx . in the context of phase 2, however, only limited
numbers of patients could be assessed for any given candidate dose regimen.
it was therefore desirable to generate more robust predictions of what could
be expected in a large phase 3 population based on the full phase 2 pharmacokinetic (pk) database collected from several small-scale exploratory regimens. accordingly, all phase 2 pk data were combined in a population
pharmacostatistical model to serve as a basis for forecasting the duration
of receptor-saturating concentrations for a limited set of phase 3 dosing
options. in this context, methods to construct prediction intervals for the
duration of drug effect were explored.
since the parameter of interest in this evaluation was time (duration of
concentrations exceeding a threshold value) on the x-axis, inverse regression
appeared to be an appropriate paradigm. however, to our knowledge,
methods for applying inverse regression in nonlinear mixed-effects models
have not been reported previously. a related approach may be found in
nonlinear calibration (4), where a confidence interval for the value of the
measured concentration on the x-axis is sought for an assay response on the
y-axis, given a model previously fitted on calibration curves. several
methods have been proposed in linear or nonlinear calibration (4,5). these
include methods based on the inversion of the prediction interval for the

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

215

response, methods based on the inversion of the structural model, and also
bootstrap methods (6,7).
herein we adapt the approaches developed in nonlinear calibration to
the inverse regression problem in population analysis, replacing the estimate
by the mean parameter values and the estimation variance by the interindividual variability. we do not take into account the estimation error of the
population characteristics. we propose three approaches to evaluate the
prediction intervals of the time to reach a threshold concentration. the first
approach makes fewer assumptions and is based on simulation. we also
developed two methods based on first-order approximation using inverse
regression or inversion of confidence intervals. although more approximated than the first method, these methods were developed because linear
approximation is commonly used in the context of nonlinear mixed-effects
modeling. these methods were applied to the results of a population pk
analysis of the phase 2 data of  xxxd286xxx  performed with nonmem
(8). we evaluated the predictive performance of the derived 80% prediction
intervals with prospectively collected pk data from a phase 3 trial.
prediction intervals
relationships with nonlinear calibration
in nonlinear calibration, a confidence interval for a value x0 on the xaxis based on a previous fit of calibration curves is derived for an observed
response y0 (4). a structural model relating x and y is defined which incorporates individual parameters q. experiments with several xi, yi pairs are
performed. the simplest approach is to estimate the individual parameters
from these experiments and then to use this estimate and its estimation
variance to derive a confidence interval for x0. this has been well addressed
in the case of linear structural models (5); however, for nonlinear models,
the problem is more complex since most of the statistical properties of the
estimators are only asymptotic. several different methods have been proposed to compute a confidence interval for x0 based on the assumption that
the asymptotic distributional properties of the estimator are verified. one
approach is to use the estimated parameters and their estimation variance
to compute a confidence interval around y0 and to invert this interval. this
approach is called inversion of prediction intervals. another approach is to
use an inverse function of the structural model and to compute directly a
symmetric interval around its value for y = y0. in calibration, this approach
is called the inverse regression approach which leads to a wald confidence
interval.
in calibration, the value y0 is most often observed, that is, the measurement error should be taken into account. however we may be interested in

216

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

the interval for a nominal value; y0 is then assumed to be a fixed value given
by the experimenter (9).
when several experiments are performed before the calibration problem, the idea of using nonlinear mixed-effects models to analyze the set of
experiments has also been addressed (10,11). the population characteristics
are first derived using an appropriate method. the empirical bayes estimation of q on the last experiment is done using the estimated population
characteristics. this is called bayesian calibration and has, to our knowledge, not been applied yet with the exception that giltinan and davidian
(11) showed with simulations the potency of this approach using a global
two-stage approach (12).
statistical model
the observed concentration y of a given individual at a given time t is
assumed to be modeled by

where & is the p x 1 vector of individual pharmacokinetic parameters, f is a
known nonlinear function of q, e is a random error, and h is a known error
function with error parameters b. the random error e is assumed to be
normal, zero-mean, homoscedastic with variance s2. in case of an homoscedastic error, the function h is equal to 1. for a constant coefficient
of variation error model, h is equal to 1. in those two cases there is
no additional error parameter b. another error model, often applied in
population pharmacokinetics, is

that is, the addition of a constant and a relative error.
the individual parameters are assumed to be random in the population.
the model involves a p x 1 vector of fixed effects m and a p x 1 vector of
random effects h. for the derivation of the intervals, first the random effects
are assumed to be additive q = m + h, with h distributed according to a zero
mean normal distribution with variance q. the expressions for an
exponential random effects model 9 = meh, where h~n(0, w) are then given.
the population characteristics m, w, s2, and b are assumed to be
known. they can, for instance, be estimated from data in a set of individuals
using an appropriate parametric estimation method (4,13) but the standard
errors would be neglected. we want to compute the prediction interval for
the time at which the drug concentration falls below a given threshold value
y0 for a given dose regimen. it is assumed that y0 is a value for which the
function f(t; q) can be considered as strictly decreasing with respect to t in

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

217

the considered area of time. let g be the inverse function of f with respect
to time in this area: if y0 = f ( t 0 ; q), then t0 = g(y 0 ; q).
methods

three methods to derive a prediction interval for t0 taking into account
the interindividual variability are proposed. the first approach is not based
on analytical calculation but on simulation of individual parameters from
the assumed distribution. this is close to what is termed an empirical bayes
confidence interval in nonlinear calibration. the other two approaches are
both based on the distributional assumption of the prediction using a firstorder expansion of the model about m. in the second approach, the inverse
function g is used to compute directly a symmetric interval around g(y 0 ; m).
the third approach consists of the inversion of the prediction interval
around y0. we studied the case of the prediction interval for a nominal
threshold and not for an observed threshold, which is often done in nonlinear calibration, because it is usually not appropriate in population pharmacokinetics. therefore, the value y0 corresponds to a fixed nominal value.
the first approach is based on simulation and is therefore computer
intensive. however it is not based on any approximation. for both types of
random effects models, n vectors hi, are simulated from n(0, w), then qi,
and g(y0; qi) are computed using the appropriate expressions. we then take
the upper and lower a/2 points of the n values g(y0; qi), respectively, as
the limits of the 100(1 – a)% prediction interval—that is, the observed a/2
and 1– a/2 percentiles of g(y 0 ; qi) (14).
the second method, the inverse regression interval, is based on a firstorder taylor series expansion of g(y 0 ; q) about m. it yields the
approximation

where qj, and mj, are the jth component of 0 and m respectively. because
q~n(m,w) it follows that t0 is distributed according to a normal distribution
with mean g(y 0 ; m) and variance g t (y 0 ;m)wg(y 0 ;m), where g(y 0 ;m) is
the  xxxg1664xxx  vector of derivatives with jth component: (dg(y 0 ; q)/dqj)q=m.
therefore a 100(1 – a)% prediction interval for t0 is given by

where za/2 is the 1 – a/2 percentile of the standard normal distribution.
this interval is symmetric around g(y 0 ; m). in case of an exponential

218

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

random effects model, it can be shown that eq. (3) holds, with g(y 0 ;m)
being the p x 1 vector with jth component

in the third method, the prediction interval is derived from the prediction interval of the observation for a given t. expanding y = f(t; q) in a
first-order taylor's series about m gives the following approximation

with this approximation and assuming that q~n(m,w), y is distributed
according to a normal distribution with mean f(t; m) and variance
ft(t; m)wf(t; m), where f(t; m) is the p x 1 vector of derivatives with jth
component: (df(t; q)/dq j ) q=m . therefore a 100(1– a)% prediction interval
for y is given by

in case of an exponential random effects model, eq. (4) holds with f(t; m)
being the p x 1 vector with jth component: qj(df(t; q)/dqj)q=m. let ia(t) be
the prediction interval defined in eq. (4). the 100(1– a)% prediction interval for t0 is given by the set of values t for which y0 belongs to ia(t), that
is, the set of times t leading to a 100(1– a)% prediction interval which
contains the value y0. it is also the set of points t that satisfies

this interval is symmetric on the observation scale but not on the time
scale. the interval of times can be obtained by computer search,
incrementing the value of t from both sides of g(y 0 ; m).
application to  xxxd286xxx 
phase 2 data
data from 46 de novo renal transplant recipients who underwent intensive blood sampling in pk studies were evaluated. there were 30 men and
16 women with mean (± standard deviation) age of 47.3 (± 10.6) years and
weight 70.0 (± 13.3) kg. they received total doses of 20 to 60 mg  xxxd286xxx 
( xxxd286xxx , novartis pharma, basel, switzerland) by intravenous infusion
either as a single dose or as two or three 20-mg dose installments in the first
10 days posttransplant. a total of 1049 serum samples were obtained over
12 weeks posttransplant averaging 22.5 (± 6.2) samples per patient.

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

219

serum  xxxd286xxx  concentrations were determined by an idiotypespecific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method as previously
described (2). assay performance for the phase 2 samples was assessed at
six quality control concentrations with an assay precision ranging from 7.4
to 19.6% and accuracy from –11.9 to 1.8%. the limit of quantification was
0.05 mg/ml.
phase 3 data
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial compared the incidence of acute rejection episodes in renal transplant patients
receiving  xxxd286xxx  (20 mg on days 0 and 4) versus placebo in addition
to cyclosporine and corticosteroids (16). a nested, blinded pk study was
performed at five study centers enrolling a total of 79 patients: 40 allocated
to  xxxd286xxx  and 39 to placebo. the  xxxd286xxx -treated patients undergoing pk sampling were 30 men and 10 women ages 48.3 ± 11.6 years and
weighing 72.4 ± 12.9kg. demographic characteristics in this subgroup were
similar to those of the full intent-to-treat study population (16) and to the
patients in the phase 2 evaluation.
venous blood samples were obtained pretransplant and once each in
weeks 2, 3, and 4 posttransplant. the sampling times coincided with protocol-scheduled clinic visits and were chosen so as to characterize the terminal
elimination phase following the last administration of  xxxd286xxx . assay
performance for the phase 3 samples was assessed at four quality control
concentrations with an assay precision ranging from 3.3 to 3.8% and accuracy from -3.8 to 0.4%. the limit of quantification was 0.06 mg/ml.
for each patient, the terminal elimination rate constant was derived by
log linear regression and used to calculate the day on which concentrations
reached the threshold of 0.2 mg/ml, defined as the duration of il-2ra
blockade (2). a total of 116 of the anticipated 120 blood samples were
received. for one patient, a single posttransplant sample was obtained,
precluding regression analysis. hence, 39 patients were evaluable.
population pharmacokinetic analysis
the population pharmacokinetics of  xxxd286xxx  were estimated from the
phase 2 data using nonmem version iv (double precision, level 2.0) with
the first-order conditional method (8). previous pk analyses established that
a standard two-compartment model with intravenous input was the optimal
pk structural model (2). this was parameterized in nonmem using
advan3 and trans1 as: rate constant of elimination, k; transfer rate
constant from the central to the peripheral compartment, k12; transfer rate

220

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

constant from the peripheral to the central compartment, k 21 ; and the central distribution volume, v. an exponential model was used to quantify the
interindividual pk variability. the heteroscedastic model given in eq. (2)
was used to describe the residual variability in serum concentrations. the
parameter b was estimated as an additional fixed effect, theta(5), and s2
as the variance of eps(l). this was a purely pk analysis with no covariates
entered into the model.
performance of prediction interval methods
the three methods for computation of the prediction interval for the
time to reach a nominal threshold of 0.2 jug/ml were applied. this universal
threshold concentration (0.2 mg/ml) was applied to all patients although it
is known from phase 2 studies that there is interpatient variability in the
threshold receptor saturation concentration (2). however, patient-specific
values can only be derived if flow cytometry measurements are performed
in concert with pk blood sampling which is clearly not practical in blinded
phase 3 studies.
the statistical model and the population characteristics were those estimated from the phase 2 data. for the phase 3 data on which these intervals
were evaluated, the dosing regimen was assumed to be 20 mg of  xxxd286xxx 
on day 0 and 4 as is applied clinically (16). therefore the model f is given
by

where d is the dose, l1 and lz are derived from k, k12, and k21 using the
usual expressions for a two-compartment model

the l1-phase was very rapid compared to the lz-phase, and the threshold corresponds to a relatively low concentration. therefore the first phase
was neglected for the computation of the inverse function used in method
2. it is expressed as

for the first approach based on simulation, 10,000 samples of the individual parameter vectors were generated using s-plus (17), and the 10 and
90% percentiles of g(y 0 ; qi) were evaluated. the computation of the 80%

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

221

fig. 1. diagnostic plots to examine the pharmacostatistical model applied to phase 2 data. (a)
pooled concentration-time data of 24 patients receiving 40 mg  xxxd286xxx  with the superimposed population mean curve; (b) similar to panel a for 6 patients receiving 60 mg  xxxd286xxx ;
(c) predicted vs. measured concentration data of all 46 phase 2 patients; (d) weighted residual
vs. predicted concentration of all 46 phase 2 patients.

prediction interval with the two last methods was performed using s-plus,
with z a/2 = 1.28 and from analytical derivatives of g (method 2) and /
(method 3). for method 3, increments for t from g(y0; m) of 0.1 and –0.1
days were tested. for dosage regimens with a single administration, f and g
are very close to the expressions reported above but with 0 instead of the
terms e4l1 and e4lz .
the performance of each prediction interval method was evaluated by
determining the number of observed threshold times from the 39 phase 3
profiles that fell within the constructed 80% prediction interval. because we
did not derive exact prediction intervals and because the individual thresholds are not known exactly but estimated, this indication of the reliability
of the prediction intervals is empirical. it was supplemented with graphical
comparisons of predicted intervals and the actual data distribution from
phase 3.
results
population analysis of phase 2 data
figure 1 shows various diagnostic plots demonstrating the adequacy of
the pharmacostatistical model. inclusion of the additive error b in the model

222

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

table i. estimated population pharmacokinetic characteristics of  xxxd286xxx  from phase 2
data (with standard errors)
model parameter
k (day–1)

 xxxd3215xxx  (day –1 )
k21 (day–1)
v(l)
b(mg/ml)a

s2a
aparameters

population estimate

interpatient variance

cv%

0.237 (0.044)
1.12 (0.159)
1.02 (0.318)
3.72 (0.045)
0.371(0.190)
0.089(0.031)

0.125(0.032)

35.4

0b

0b

0.263(0.077)
0.169(0.030)

51.3
41.1

—
—

—
—

of the error model.

bfixed.

significantly improved the fit. estimation of the interindividual variability
for the rate constant k12 appeared to give numerical instability with a variance converging to very low values. when this variance was fixed to zero,
the objective function did not increase significantly so that a fixed value for
k12 was used in the final run.
the estimated population pk parameters are shown in table i with
the estimation standard errors. the standard errors were satisfactory, corresponding to coefficients of variation smaller than 30% in the estimates of
the components of m and w. because of the exponential nature of the model,
the population parameter estimates correspond to the median values. therefore, the median for other parameters of interest can easily be derived using
standard equations. the initial disposition half-life was comparatively short
with a median of 7.3 hr; whereas the terminal disposition phase dominated
with a median half-life of 6.5 days. the median clearance was 36.7ml/hr.
the population parameters were in agreement with previously published
data based on the conventional two-stage approach applied to one of the
phase 2 studies (2). interpatient pk variability was noteworthy and confirmed similar observations from phase 2 populations (2).
forecasting candidate phase 3 dose regimens
limited experience in phase 2 indicated that total  xxxd286xxx  doses in
the range of 20 to 60 mg could yield receptor-saturating concentrations
ranging from 2-8 weeks posttransplant (2). accordingly, prediction intervals of the duration of effective drug concentrations from doses in this range
were constructed with method 1 based on simulations, as outlined in table
ii. it was desired to select a cumulative dose which yielded receptor suppression for a population average of 30-45 days while avoiding a pronounced
potential for prolonged suppression beyond this period. while the 80% prediction intervals for 40 mg and 60 mg both straddled the target window,
there was little incremental benefit when progressing from the lower to the

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

223

table ii. predicted durations over which
serum  xxxd286xxx  concentration exceeds the
threshold for candidate single-dose regimens
with method 1
dose (mg)

20
40
60

x

80% ci

24.8
32.3
36.7

13.0-38.8
17.3-50.4
19.6-57.2

higher dose in terms of the percentage of durations falling exactly within
the window: 32.8% at 40 mg vs. 36.2% at 60 mg. furthermore, the higher
dose yielded more durations exceeding the upper limit chosen to guide dose
selection (>45 days): 15.5% at 40 mg vs. 24.1% at 60 mg. on this basis, a
total dose of 40 mg appeared to achieve the best balance between the dose
selection goals. although single doses of 40 mg are well tolerated (2), it was
decided for clinical reasons to deliver the total dose in two 20-mg
installments, the first prior to surgery and the second postoperatively. this
regimen would allow more flexibility inasmuch as the second installment
could be withheld in the event the transplant operation did not proceed, or
graft loss (hyperacute rejection), or a serious infection occurred in the early
postoperative period. under such conditions, the patient would not be
exposed to prolonged periods of immunosuppression unnecessarily. day 4
posttransplant was chosen since it was noted in phase 2 studies using dose
intervals in excess of 4 days that serum  xxxd286xxx  concentrations could
decline below the receptor saturation threshold in some patients if the
second dose was postponed beyond day 4.
predictive performance of the interval methods
applying the three methods for computing the 80% prediction intervals
to the selected phase 3 regimen of 20 mg on days 0 and 4 (16) gave the
following results. in method 1, the full distribution of the time to reach the
threshold is simulated, as displayed in fig. 2. therefore any statistics on
these data can be derived. using the two 10% percentiles, the 80% confidence interval was found to be 19.7-52.7 days with a median time of 31.7
days. for method 2, based on the inverse function, t0 was found to be 31.5
days with standard deviation 12.2, so that the 80% confidence interval was
16.0–47.1 days. for method 3, fig. 3 displays the predicted curve f(t; m)
with the limits of the 80% confidence intervals at each time t. keeping the
times t for which this interval contains the threshold, leads to a 80% interval
for the time to reach the threshold of 15.1–42.7 days. for this method, as
the model is mostly exponential for the later times, the same approach can
be applied but using the logarithm of the model which is then linear with

224

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

fig. 2. simulated distribution of time to reach the threshold and estimated 80% prediction
interval with method 1.

respect to time. applying method 3 to a new function log(f(t; q)) instead
of f, leads to an 80% prediction interval of 21.2–66.1 days. it is interesting
to note that the four intervals differ somewhat.
pooled concentration-time data from phase 3 are displayed in fig. 4.
the majority of terminal elimination half-life values (37/39) were between
3.2 and 13.8 days with two outliers at 31.2 and 40.2 days. although the
2-week blood sampling interval (study weeks 2 to 4) was appropriate for
characterizing half-lives of around 1–2 weeks, it was likely suboptimal for
estimating the two outlier values. hence, these two values are likely biased.
nonetheless, all data were retained in this analysis and the median half-life
was 8.0 days. the mean estimated duration above the threshold in the 39
patients was 41 + 23 days. given the potential bias introduced by the outlier

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

225

fig. 3. predicted concentration profile f(t, m) and associated 80% prediction interval. the predicted interval of time to reach the threshold of 0.2 mg/ml with method 3 is also shown; it is
composed of the times for which the 80% band includes the threshold.

fig. 4. pooled concentration-time data of the terminal phase decline from phase 3
patients after the two-dose  xxxd286xxx  regimen (20 mg on days 0 and 4). the dotted
line represents the threshold concentration minimally necessary to saturate il-2ra
epitopes (0.2 mg/ml).

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

226

fig. 5. the 80% prediction intervals estimated with the three methods overlayed on
the observed times to reach the threshold in 39 phase 3 patients. the dotted vertical
lines enclose the actual 80% confidence interval from the observed data. the horizontal lines delineate the 80% prediction intervals from methods 1-3 and from
method 3 using the logarithm of f (designated method 3').

values, a more robust descriptor in terms of median (10, 90 percentiles) was
35 (23.7-58.3) days. the corresponding range was 15 to 59 days with the
outlier values at 77 and 152 days, respectively.
as can be seen in fig. 5, which shows the observed durations and the
prediction intervals, all three methods had a tendency to underpredict the
durations. for method 3 applied to the logarithm of the function, it is the
reverse. methods 1 and 2 showed good predictive performance with 30 and
28 values in the predicted interval which corresponds to coverage of 76.9
and 71.8%, respectively. method 3 performed less well with only 23 values
in the interval, and 35 values for its application to the logarithm of the
prediction. these values for method 3 corresponds to coverage of 59.0 and
89.7%, respectively, which seems too low or too high for a 80% prediction
interval.

discussion
we have proposed and evaluated three methods to estimate the prediction interval around the time to reach a threshold concentration following
drug administration. the impetus behind this work came in the context of
the pharmaceutical development of  xxxd286xxx  in renal transplantation.
the approaches we assessed enabled us to combine limited phase 2 pharmacokinetic data collected from several small exploratory dosing cohorts to
yield a more robust database from which to forecast the performance of

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

227

candidate dose regimens for phase 3. these forecasts, together with safetytolerability information from phase 2, provided a more confident entry into
multicenter efficacy studies with the chosen  xxxd286xxx  regimen (20 mg on
days 0 and 4). indeed, prospective evaluation of this regimen in phase 3
demonstrated that the addition of  xxxd286xxx  to a baseline immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine and corticosteroids significantly reduces
the incidence of acute rejection episodes compared to placebo (16).
the performance of the three methods in predicting the duration of
receptor-saturating concentrations were evaluated based on prospectively
gathered pk data from 39 phase 3 patients treated with the selected dose
regimen. it is of note that the three methods gave different results. method
1 based on extensive simulations gave the most reliable prediction. methods
2 and 3, based on first-order expansion of the model about m, produced
intervals shifted toward the left compared to method 1 and showed lower
recovery (especially method 3). the specific recoveries were 77, 72, and 59%
for methods 1, 2, and 3, respectively. method 3 can also be applied on the
logarithm of the prediction, in which case the interval was shifted toward
the right and had a recovery of 90%, which was too high. the evaluation
criteria we applied (number of observed values in the 80% confidence interval) has, of course, some shortcomings. first, individualized estimates of
the duration were used and not exact values and the corresponding estimation error was not taken into account. second, the connection between
the empirical percentage coverage and the coverage probability of the prediction interval is not straightforward. nonetheless, this empirical approach
was used here mostly to compare methods.
method 1 is computer intensive since it is based on simulations; however, these simulations are very easy to implement when the inverse function
is derived. method 2 is based on the inversion of the model and provides a
wald interval. when this inverse function can easily be derived, the prediction interval is then straightforward to compute. method 3 needs the iterative evaluation of confidence intervals of y for several values of t. in the
present example, only this third approach relied on the full model without
neglecting the l1-phase. when we did neglect it, as for the two other
methods where the inverse function was used, the results we obtained were
strictly identical. we were certain that the threshold time is always reached
during the lz-phase for the dosage regimens studied, but this gave further
confidence in the fact that this l1-phase could be neglected in methods 1
and 2.
we assumed that the model function was monotonic around the studied times for all patients. then the inverse function exists and the equation
t = g(y 0 ; q) has a unique solution for any 6. problems can occur first when
the inverse function has no solution for some or all patients. this could

228

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

happen for instance if the dose is too low so that the threshold concentration
is never exceeded in some of the patients. in that case the first-order
approximation used in methods 2 and 3 is questionable. method 1 can still
be used but then the results should be both the proportion of patients who
do not exceed the threshold and the prediction interval for the others. the
second problem occurs when the pk model is not monotonic so that there
are several solutions to the equation t = g(y0; q). method 3 does not need
the inverse function and can be used directly. method 1 can also be
extended: all solutions or the last solution of the equation could be used,
depending on the problem to be addressed. method 2 is more difficult to
implement because of the limitation of the first-order approximation in that
case.
we were disappointed with the results of method 3 whose predictability
was low. indeed, in nonlinear calibration this approach based on inversion
of intervals is usually preferred to the approach of the wald interval as in
method 2. however, extensive simulation studies in nonlinear calibration
have shown a poor recovery of both wald and inversion intervals in the case
of nonlinear heteroscedastic variance (18,7). this has led some to propose
bootstrap-adjusted intervals (7). the transposition we have made here to
nonlinear mixed-effects models is close to this type of regression model.
furthermore, in this population analysis, the interindividual variability was
noteworthy and larger than the range of estimation errors found in nonlinear calibration. for wide variability, the first-order expansion is a poor
approximation and this may further explain the discrepancies of the results
compared to the extensive simulation method.
these findings further confirm that first-order approximation in nonlinear mixed-effects models, also common, should be avoided when possible
and that simulation should be preferred. perhaps using higher-order expansion in the taylor series would have improved methods 2 and 3, but the
increase in complexity compared with the implementation of method 1 is a
considerable disadvantage in this context. method 2 can, however, be used
to give an approximate prediction interval. because of the time-to-event
nature of the problem, one could have also chosen to evaluate nonequal
tailed intervals. this is easy to implement especially for the simulation
method because the whole distribution of the threshold times is simulated.
however, here, we were interested in both aspects of when the threshold was
reached; hence, for the sake of simplicity, we used equally tailed prediction
intervals. while we developed methods of computing prediction intervals
for a nominal threshold, these methods can be extended to compute the
prediction interval for an observed or patient-specific threshold. in that
case, an additional term in the variances should be added to take into

constructing a prediction interval for threshold concentration

229

account intraindividual variability. this is often done in nonlinear calibration where the prediction interval of a concentration corresponding to
an observed assay measurement is computed.
surely the main limitation of the proposed methods is that we have not
taken into account the estimation error of the population analysis and,
indeed, predictive distributions should take into account all sources of
uncertainty. this can be an important limitation because when parameter
uncertainty is ignored, predictive ranges are generally too narrow. monte
carlo markov chain methods are a good alternative because they account
for the uncertainty in estimation in a very natural way and they can readily
be used to solve this problem of inverse regression (19). applying more
common parametric estimation methods, we could have used the estimation
standard errors but this would have needed further developments. in the
method based on simulation, bootstrap-like methods could be developed.
in the two analytical methods based on variance evaluation, another term
to take into account the standard errors, as proposed by vonesh and chinchilli (20), should be added. we thought that these developments were
beyond the scope of the present application and that the empirical coverage
(77%) obtained with the simulation method was satisfactory. also, the standard errors provided by nonmem, or by any method based on laplace
approximation, although useful are approximated; they are based on the
fisher information matrix and are therefore only a lower bound (21). furthermore, distributional assumptions on the estimates are needed in the derivation of the predictive distributions, and the normality assumption is valid
only asymptotically (21).
despite these methodological limitations, we think this study provides
useful tools to solve the problem of inverse prediction in nonlinear mixedeffects models. it could also easily be applied to dose-response models
where the dose yielding a given response is to be defined after a population
analysis.
acknowledgment
we thank tom beveridge for his involvement in the development of
 xxxd286xxx  and for initially posing the question which led to this evaluation:
what can we expect for phase 3?
references
1. p. l. amlot, e. rawlings, o. n. fernand, p. j. griffin, g. heinrich, m. h. schreier, j. p.
castaigne, r. moore, and p. sweny. prolonged action of a chimeric interleukin-2 receptor
(cd25) monoclonal antibody used in cadaveric renal transplantation. transplantation
60:748–756 (1995).

230

mentre, kovarik, and gerbeau

2. j. m. kovarik, p. wolf, d. durand, g. mourad, y. lebranchu, p. lang, b. bourbigot,
d. cantarovich, d. girault, c. gerbeau, a. g. schmidt, and j. p. soulillou. disposition
of  xxxd286xxx , an interleukin-2 receptor monoclonal antibody, in recipients of mismatched
cadaver renal allografts. transplantation 64:1701–1705 (1997).
3. g. p. basadonna, a. j. matas, k. j. gillingham, et al. early versus late acute renal allograft rejection: impact on chronic rejection. transplantation 55:993–995 (1993).
4. m. davidian and d. m. giltinan. nonlinear models for repeated measurement data,
chapman & hall, london, 1995.
5. c. osborne. statistical calibration: a review. int. statist. rev. 59:309–336 (1991).
6. m. a. gruet and e. jolivet. calibration with a nonlinear standard curve: how to do it?
comput. slat. 9:249–276 (1994).
7. q. zeng and m. davidian. bootstrap-adjusted calibration confidence intervals for
immunoassay. j. am. statist. assoc. 92:278–290 (1997).
8. s. l. beal, a. j. boeckmann, and l. b. sheiner. nonmem user's guide, university of
california at san francisco, san francisco, 1992.
9. j. r. schwenke and g. a. milliken. on the calibration problem extended to nonlinear
models. biometrics 47:563–574 (1991).
10. j. d. unadkat, s. l. beal, and l. b. sheiner. bayesian calibration. anal. chim. acta
181:27–36(1986).
11. d. m. giltinan and m. davidian. assays for recombinant proteins: a problem in nonlinear
calibration. statist. med. 13:1165–1179 (1994).
12. j. l. steimer, a. mallet, j. l. golmard, and j. f. boisvieux. alternative approaches to
estimation of population pharmacokinetic parameters with the nonlinear mixed effect
model. drug metab. rev. 15:265–292 (1984).
13. d. j. roe. comparison of population pharmacokinetic modeling methods using simulated
data: results from the population modeling workgroup. statist. med. 16:1241–1262
(1997).
14. b. p. carlin and a. e. gelfand. approaches for empirical bayes confidence interval. j.
am. statist. assoc. 85:105–114 (1990).
15. j. f. robinson-cox. multiple estimation of concentrations in immunoassay using logistic
models. j. immunol. meth. 186:79–88 (1995).
16. b. nashan, r. moore, p. amlot, a. g. schmidt, k. abeywickrama, and j. p. soulillou.
randomised trial of  xxxd286xxx  versus placebo for control of acute cellular rejection in
renal allograft recipients. lancet 350:1193–1198 (1997).
17. s-plus user's manual, statistical sciences, seattle, wa, 1991.
18. b. a. belanger, m. davidian, and d. m. giltinan. the effect of variance function estimation on nonlinear calibration inference in immunoassay data. biometrics 52:192–210
(1996).
19. j. wakefield. an expected loss approach to the design of dosage regimens via samplingbased methods. statistician 43:13–29 (1994).
20. e. f. vonesh and v. m. chinchilli. linear and nonlinear models for the analysis of
repeated measurements, marcel dekker, new york, 1997, pp. 359–364.
21. e. f. vonesh. a note on the use of laplace's approximation for nonlinear mixed-effects
models. biometrika 83:447–452 (1996).

