 xxxd2500xxx  for opiate detoxification: review of recent randomised and open controlled trials

at the time of writing,  xxxd2500xxx  is being investigated for possible preliminary clinical trial in the u.s.

the authors have been investigators for several of the studies reported in this review, and funding support has been provided by the britannia pharmaceutical company.


abstract

the objective of this article was to review the data from recently published trials of  xxxd2500xxx  in the treatment of opiate withdrawal, with particular attention to evidence on efficacy, side‐effects (particularly hypotension), and the acceptability of this new treatment to the patient population. the authors reviewed data contained within peer‐reviewed published reports of clinical trials of  xxxd2500xxx  compared with detoxification using reducing doses of the opiate agonist methadone or the alpha‐adrenergic agonist clonidine. five published reports of clinical trials of  xxxd2500xxx  have been identified from peer‐reviewed journals in the eight years between 1990 and 1998‐all published within the last three years. three of the reports compare  xxxd2500xxx  with clonidine, while the remaining two compare it with methadone detoxification. the three comparisons with clonidine find  xxxd2500xxx  to be similar in its moderating effect on the withdrawal syndrome, but without the same extent of problems with hypotension. comparisons with methadone show a more rapid resolution of withdrawal symptoms with  xxxd2500xxx —particularly with the accelerated 5‐day  xxxd2500xxx  protocol. such problems of hypotension as were encountered with  xxxd2500xxx  were adequately managed with dose reduction. acceptability of the treatment to the patient (as measured by retention in treatment) appears to be greater with  xxxd2500xxx  than clonidine, although possibly less than with methadone.  xxxd2500xxx  is an alpha‐2 adrenergic agonist that is increasingly used in the management of opiate withdrawal—notably in the uk. the available data indicate that it is a useful new addition to the armamentarium of the clinician. future studies should explore its application with improved protocols and in new treatment settings. this article reviews the recent advances in the study of  xxxd2500xxx  as a new treatment for opiate detoxification. it examines the background of the development and introduction of  xxxd2500xxx  into the u.k., with data on the extent to which it is now used in the u.k. in the treatment of opiate addiction.1 a review is then provided of the published evidence on the use of  xxxd2500xxx  in the management of opiate detoxification, mainly concentrating on the data from recent double‐blind randomised trials. finally, the possible future role of  xxxd2500xxx  in this field is considered.

background and extent of use

 xxxd2500xxx  is an alpha–2‐adrenergic agonist with effects similar to clonidine. the use of clonidine in the treatment of opiate withdrawal was developed during the late 1970s and 1980s,1–5 although its wider application has been significantly restricted by the side effect profile of the drug, in particular, the co‐occurrence of symptomatic hypotension.6-10 consequently, early investigators began to look for clonidine analogues that might deliver the benefits without such marked hypotensive effects (see figure 1).

chemical structures of  xxxd2500xxx  and clonidine.

one candidate drug was  xxxd2500xxx , which had been developed during the 1970s in the u.s. as a new drug for the treatment of hypertension. researcher‐clinicians in the addictions field in the u.s. conducted preliminary studies with  xxxd2500xxx  in the hope that it might have advantages over clonidine (with which they had been developing new treatment protocols).11-13 however, the human clinical data for its approved use (for the treatment of hypertension) were disappointing and the pharmaceutical company decided to cease production, so the drug was consequently abandoned.

in contrast, in the substance abuse field, this disadvantage of  xxxd2500xxx  as an anti‐hypertensive could alternatively be seen as a reason why  xxxd2500xxx  might actually be well‐suited to the management of opiate withdrawal. indeed, with the identification of three different sub‐types of al‐pha–2‐adrenoceptors with different patterns of binding and activity,14 this has raised the possibility of a receptor‐level explanation of varying effects between different alpha–2‐agonist drugs, such as clonidine, guanfacine, and  xxxd2500xxx . during the 1990s, clinical trials of  xxxd2500xxx  have been conducted in the u.k. and, in the case of one of the studies, in taiwan.

in the u.k.,  xxxd2500xxx  has had a product licence for treatment of opiate detoxification since 1992. since this time, the extent of use of  xxxd2500xxx  has steadily increased, so that, during 1998, more than 18,000 courses of treatment with  xxxd2500xxx  were given to opiate addicts across the u.k. (see figure 2). over this same period, several clinical reports describing its use in the u.k. for the treatment of opiate addiction have been published, 15-17 as well as the controlled trials reviewed in this paper.

 xxxd2500xxx  detoxifications annually in the u.k. 1993–1999 calculated on the basis that each pack of  xxxd2500xxx  tablets 0.2 mg × 60 equates to a single detoxification under  xxxd2500xxx . data supplied by britannia pharmaceuticals, 1999. *estimated figure for 1999 (sales for first 6 months, doubled).

method: review of the recently published evidence

selection of criteria for assessment of potential new drug treatments for opiate detoxification

before examining the evidence on a potential new drug for use in the management of opiate detoxification (in this instance,  xxxd2500xxx ), it is important to consider the context within which the evaluation is being undertaken. existing drug treatments are already widely used for this clinical condition. the most well‐established approach for management of opiate detoxification has been with tapering doses of an alternative agonist such as methadone. this methadone detoxification has been considered as one of the “industry standards” against which new approaches to detoxification should be measured. however, concerns about the abuse potential of methadone, alongside emerging data on the incomplete nature of symptom relief under cover of tapering doses of methadone,18-20 led clinicians to look for new non‐opiate approaches to detoxification, of which the most widely used has been clonidine.2, 4 methadone and clonidine therefore become yardsticks against which a new drug treatment needs to be measured.

in considering the parameters for the evaluation of detoxification, it is also appropriate to consider several different aspects—overall severity of withdrawal, intensity of peak symptom severity, rates of completion, acceptability to the target population, side effects, etc. in this article, attention will be paid to the short‐term outcome data from the  xxxd2500xxx  trials that have recently been published, since the particular area of interest is whether opiate detoxification itself can be effectively managed with drug (a) or drug (b), while the area of the longer term rehabilitation and relapse rates can reasonably be considered as a separate area of study.

an examination will now be made of the data that have recently become available from controlled trials. these studies have mostly been conducted on in‐patient populations of opiate addicts and report either on a comparison of  xxxd2500xxx  with methadone as the “industry standard” or a comparison of  xxxd2500xxx  with the most closely‐related anti‐withdrawal drug, clonidine. for each of these trials, the available data have been examined to address three areas: the adequacy of management of the withdrawal syndrome, the extent of problems of hypotension, and the acceptability of the treatment to the patient population.
results: review of five peer‐reviewed treatment trials
bearn et al, 1996, drug and alcohol dependence, 43:97–89

in the first published randomised controlled trial of  xxxd2500xxx  in the treatment of opiate withdrawal, bearn et al21 studied 86 opiate addicts admitted to a specialist in‐patient unit for detoxification and aftercare treatment. forty‐two were randomised to  xxxd2500xxx  and 44 to methadone.

the withdrawal syndromes seen under treatment with the two drugs are shown in figure 3. the course of the withdrawal syndrome under cover of the linear reduction of methadone shows a time course similar to that which had previously been found and reported,18-20 with a gradual increase in symptom severity up to a peak soon after the conclusion of the linear reduction—here showing as a peak at day 13—followed by a gradual reduction down to low levels of symptom severity after about day 20. a somewhat different picture is seen with the  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification—a more rapid increase in symptom severity during the earlier stages of withdrawal, peaking at around days 8 to 10, with a steady reduction beyond day 10 down to low levels beyond day 15.

symptom severity and effect on blood pressure—bearn et al, 1996. reprinted from drug & alcohol dependence, 43, by bearn, j., gossop, m., strang, j. randomised double‐blind comparison of lofex‐idine and methadone in the inpatient treatment of opiate withdrawal, pp. 87–89. copyright 1996, with permission from elsevier science.

in view of the known hypotensive problems often seen with clonidine, special attention was paid to changes in blood pressure during  xxxd2500xxx  treatment. in practice, neither  xxxd2500xxx  nor methadone produced any major hypotensive effect (see figure 3)—certainly not sufficient to contra‐indicate continued treatment. symptomatic hypotension was experienced by two of the study subjects, both female subjects in the  xxxd2500xxx  group who reported dizziness. as a result, the dose was reduced; in both cases, treatment was then able to continue at this lower daily dose.

the acceptability of the treatment to the study population can be assessed by looking at the proportion who voluntarily remained in treatment through the detoxification. there was a tendency for earlier dropout to occur in the  xxxd2500xxx  group. six of the  xxxd2500xxx  study subjects dropped out of treatment within the first 10 days, compared with only one of the subjects in the methadone group. however, if the measure taken is the proportion who remained in treatment long enough for levels of symptom severity to drop to low level (this is operationally defined, for the sake of this comparison, as being at day 20), then there was no significant difference in the proportion of patients who remained in treatment to this point. sixty‐nine per cent of the  xxxd2500xxx  group and 77% of the methadone group were still in treatment at day 20. it is unclear which of these two measures provides the better assessment of the two methods. this issue requires further exploration.

the second published randomised controlled trial of  xxxd2500xxx  was published in early 1997. this was a double‐blind randomised controlled trial of  xxxd2500xxx  versus clonidine on an in‐patient unit. kahn and his colleagues22 had originally undertaken this study prior to the disappearance of  xxxd2500xxx  from the market in the mid–1980s. while their sample size was small (only 28 in total), they were nevertheless able to compare levels of withdrawal symptomatology and levels of change in blood pressure across the two groups (14 subjects on  xxxd2500xxx  and the 14 on clonidine).

patients were admitted on day minus 4 of this figure (figure 4), and were maintained on a stabilizing dose of oral methadone for the first four days—up until day zero. between days zero and 4, methadone dose was maintained, but the patient was additionally given one of the study medications—either  xxxd2500xxx  or clonidine. daily dose of the study medication was gradually increased over this next four day period (between days 0 and 4) and then maintained as a steady dose for the next ten days, prior to being reduced over the next four days (i.e. tapering over days 14–18). the supply of methadone was abruptly terminated at day 4—as soon as the patient was stabilized on the maximum dose of either  xxxd2500xxx  or clonidine.

symptom severity and effect on blood pressure—kahn et al, 1997. reprinted from drug & alcohol dependence, 44, kahn, a., mumford, j.p., rogers, g.a., beckford, h. double‐blind study of  xxxd2500xxx  and clonidine in the detoxification of opiate addicts in hospital, pp. 57–61. copyright 1997, with permission from elsevier science.

symptom severity remained broadly static at low levels up to day 3, since no reduction in methadone dose had yet commenced. from day 4 onwards (i.e., after abrupt cessation of methadone), symptom severity rapidly increased to a peak between days 5 to 8 (i.e., the second to fourth days of opiate abstinence). however, perhaps the most obvious observation is of the extremely similar time course seen with the two study medications.

kahn and his colleagues also reported on changes in blood pressure readings over time (see figure 4). standing systolic blood pressure fell markedly during the study, especially over the first four days (during which the study medication dose was being increased), and during the next five days during which this maximum dose of study medication was being prescribed. however, this pronounced drop of systolic blood pressure was only seen in the cloni‐dine group. the systolic blood pressure of the  xxxd2500xxx  group remained much more constant.

this in‐patient study from lin et al23 in taiwan is particularly interesting for a number of reasons. first, it looks specifically at the treatment of heroin addicts, rather than opiate addicts who have already been stabilized on methadone. second, it presents  xxxd2500xxx ‐clonidine comparative data from a much larger sample: 80 subjects randomised between the two conditions instead of the 28 subjects described by kahn and his colleagues.

the broadly similar time course of the withdrawal syndrome of heroin addicts being detoxified under cover of either  xxxd2500xxx  or clonidine can be seen in figure 5. overall, the time course is similar to that described by other investigators. however, the investigators report on a diurnal variation in symptom severity, with withdrawal symptomatology being at its worst in the morning readings. this raises the interesting possibility that it may be possible to achieve better management of the withdrawal syndrome by varying the dosing schedule—perhaps an increased dose prior to this anticipated more severe morning reading, or alternatively more frequent dosing.

symptom severity and effect on blood pressure—lin et al, 1997. reprinted from drug & alcohol dependence, 48, by lin, s.‐k., strang, j., su, l.w., tsai, c.j., hu, w.h. double‐blind randomised controlled trial of  xxxd2500xxx  versus clonidine in the treatment of heroin withdrawal, pp. 127–133. copyright 1997, with permission from elsevier science.

changes in levels of systolic and diastolic blood pressure over time are displayed in figure 5, showing remarkably little reduction in blood pressure readings in either the  xxxd2500xxx  or clonidine group. this lack of difference may partly be explained by the clinical program, which permitted the withholding of doses if staff found low blood pressure readings. there were twice as many occasions on which it was necessary to withhold medication in the clonidine group compared with the  xxxd2500xxx  group.

the retention rates in treatment over time were also compared. in both groups, there was a high rate of self‐discharge from the treatment program over the first few days. this self‐discharge rate was significantly greater in the clonidine group, among whom two‐thirds had discharged themselves from treatment by day 5, compared with less than half of the  xxxd2500xxx  group. the self‐discharge rates may be seen as a cause for concern in both of these groups, and this area warrants more careful attention in future studies.

in this second paper from bearn and her colleagues,24 data were presented on an accelerated five‐day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification regimen. this is compared with the standard u.k. 10‐day methadone treatment and with the 10‐day  xxxd2500xxx  treatment. in view of the different durations of treatment, the investigators undertook this study with an open design, with both patients and staff aware of the identity of the treatment. twenty‐two patients received the accelerated five day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification, while 20 received the 10‐day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification, and 19 received the 10‐day linear reduction on methadone. the pre‐treatment characteristics of patients in the three groups were broadly similar, being opiate addicts using an average of 1 gram of street heroin daily, at a typical u.k. purity of about 40%, and with a third of the patients also requiring benzodiazepine cover.

the five‐day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification resulted in more rapid resolution of withdrawal symptoms (see figure 6). symptom severity was reduced to low levels by day nine—a reduction of severity not achieved until day 12 with the 10‐day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification and day 20 with the methadone detoxification.

symptom severity and effect on blood pressure—bearn et al, 1998. reprinted from drug & alcohol dependence, 50, by bearn, j., gossop, m., strang, j. accelerated  xxxd2500xxx  treatment regimen compared with conventional  xxxd2500xxx  and methadone treatment for inpatient opiate detoxification, pp. 227–232. copyright 1998, with permission from elsevier science.

data were also presented on whether the more rapid induction onto clinically effective doses of  xxxd2500xxx  was associated with a greater drop in blood pressure. the overall effect on blood pressure across the whole group was small, and was no greater among patients receiving the accelerated five day  xxxd2500xxx  detoxification (see figure 6). nevertheless, two patients in the 10‐day  xxxd2500xxx  treatment and 3 in the five‐day  xxxd2500xxx  treatment experienced side effects requiring a reduction in  xxxd2500xxx  dose—although for all of these patients, the symptoms resolved with the reduction in dosage.

the acceptability of the more rapid treatment was also examined with regard to the proportion of patients remaining in the treatment. no significant differences were detected between the treatments. approximately three quarters of the subjects in all three study groups completed detoxification, with a mean length of stay of approximately twenty days for all three groups.

the main conclusions from the study of bearn et al24 were that the five‐day  xxxd2500xxx  treatment seemed clinically acceptable and effective at alleviating withdrawal distress without leading to any increase in either side effects or self discharge from the program. on this basis, the authors concluded that it was now appropriate to proceed to randomised double‐blind trial of the accelerated  xxxd2500xxx  withdrawal regimen.
carnwath and hardman, 1998, drug and alcohol dependence, 50:251–254

in the latest published controlled trial to date, from carnwath and colleagues10 in manchester, the results are presented of a randomised double‐blind comparison of  xxxd2500xxx  with clonidine—on this occasion, on an outpatient basis. fifty opiate addicts were detoxified as outpatients— under cover of either a 12‐day  xxxd2500xxx  (26 subjects) or clonidine detoxification (24 subjects).

withdrawal symptom severity for the two groups is shown in figure 7. no significant differences were detected. completion rates (71% for the  xxxd2500xxx  group, compared with 50% for the clonidine group) were also not significantly different.

symptom severity and effect on blood pressure—carnwath & hardman, 1998. reprinted from drug & alcohol dependence, 50, by carnwath, t., hardman, j. randomised double‐blind comparison of  xxxd2500xxx  and clonidine in the outpatient treatment of opiate withdrawal, pp. 251–254. copyright 1998, with permission from elsevier science.

patients receiving clonidine were significantly more likely to experience hypotension between days 7 and 10 (see figure 7), and it seems likely that this accounts for the significantly greater number of extra home visits that needed to be undertaken by the nursing staff for the clonidine group.

the results of this study suggest that  xxxd2500xxx  may be more suitable for ambulatory detoxification than clonidine, and might consequently be more widely used in a variety of different clinical settings.

discussion: considering the future

three particular aspects of the data that have recently become available on  xxxd2500xxx  can now be considered. first, do we now have evidence that  xxxd2500xxx  is effective? second, what evidence do we have on its safety? and third, do we have evidence on the extent to which it is acceptable to the target addict population?

efficacy can now be gauged by reference to the recently published data from randomised and other controlled trials. these data are now available for scientific scrutiny and include comparison both with the u.k. standard methadone detoxifi‐cation (as shown in both of the bearn et al studies21, 24) and comparison with the most widely‐used non‐opiate treatment, cloni‐dine (in the kahn et al study, 22 the lin et al study23 and the carnwath and hardman10 outpatient study). the studies conducted thus far would suggest that  xxxd2500xxx  may offer the benefits without the more extensive side effects associated with clonidine.

with regard to the evidence on safety, particular attention in this review has been paid to the problem of hypotension. this has been a limiting factor in the use of clonidine for detoxification. here, the evidence seems encouraging, with a less pronounced hypotensive effect with  xxxd2500xxx . although some hypotension was encountered, this was less frequent and less severe than similar problems with clonidine. furthermore, simple remedial actions of withholding a dose and adjusting the 24‐hour dose were sufficient to deal with this problem. it also seems likely that the fewer side‐effects of  xxxd2500xxx  will make it suitable for use in an outpatient setting, thus making the drug much more widely applicable to the target population of addicts.  xxxd2500xxx  is also likely to be more acceptable in clinical settings where particular concerns are expressed about methadone. for example, in the prison environment, there may be particular concerns about diversion, abuse, and overdose risk.  xxxd2500xxx  may also be useful in countries where methadone is not available. additionally, the drug may be greatly more acceptable to those clinicians for whom methadone is seen as an unacceptable opiate agonist.

finally, is the drug attractive to the target population? caution is required in view of the substantial rates of self‐discharge from treatment seen in the lin et al study,23 and also the high rate of early discharge amongst the  xxxd2500xxx  group in the first trial by bearn et al21 nevertheless, there were high levels of acceptance in the other studies, and  xxxd2500xxx  has, to a considerable extent, rapidly established itself in u.k. practice, with more than 18,000 courses of detoxification being prescribed during 1998.

conclusion

we are now, for the first time, in a position where we can look at data from randomised and other controlled trials on the effectiveness of  xxxd2500xxx  in the management of the opiate withdrawal syndrome. encouraging results are now available from a number of studies, including the controlled trials described above. all would seem to indicate that  xxxd2500xxx  is a valuable new addition to our armamentarium. the challenge for the future is to explore whether there are ways in which we can improve the protocols for delivering the  xxxd2500xxx , and explore new settings in which the drug can usefully be prescribed.
