review article

drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1: 19-31
0114-5916/99/0001-0019/$06.50/0
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

preclinical in vitro cardiac
electrophysiology
a method of predicting arrhythmogenic potential of
antihistamines in humans?
icilio cavero,1 michel mestre,1 jean-michel guillon,2 edith heuillet1 and alan g. roach1
1 rhône-poulenc rorer, centre de recherche de vitry-alfortville, vitry sur seine, france
2 institut de recherche p. fabre, castres, france

abstract

the cardiac action potential results from a dynamic balance between inward
depolarising na+ and ca2+ currents and outward k+ repolarising currents. during
a cardiac cycle, the resultant of repolarisation phase from all ventricular cells is
represented by the qt interval of the surface ecg. congenital long qt syndrome
(lqts) is characterised by polymorphic ventricular tachycardia sometimes with
twisting qrs morphology (torsade de pointes) which, although usually selflimiting, can result in sudden cardiac death.
acquired lqts can be induced by a variety of drugs, including some nonsedative histamine  xxxg1078xxx  antagonists ( xxxd236xxx , terfenadine). the committee for proprietary medicinal products of the european union has recently
proposed studying the action potential in in vitro heart preparations as a preclinical test for predicting the propensity of noncardiovascular drugs to induce malignant qt prolongation in humans.
the effects of several histamine  xxxg1078xxx  antagonists on the electrically
evoked action potential have been evaluated in rabbit purkinje fibres. in this
preparation,  xxxd236xxx  (0.3 to 10 mumol/l) prolongs the duration of the action
potential measured at the level where repolarisation is 90% complete (apd90).
this effect is dependent on drug concentration, incubation time, pacing frequency
and k+ or mg2+ concentration.  xxxd236xxx  also markedly depresses the rate of
rise of the action potential (vmax). terfenadine showed qualitatively similar, but
quantitatively smaller, effects in this model. the histamine  xxxg1078xxx  antagonists cetirizine, ebastine, carebastine, loratadine and fexofenadine do not significantly affect apd90 at 1 mumol/l, but cetirizine and carebastine prolong it slightly
 xxxd1891xxx  mumol/l.
in conclusion, in rabbit purkinje fibres,  xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine produce
adverse electrophysiological effects at concentrations which may be achieved in
the human myocardium in certain clinical situations. apd90 lengthening induced
by carebastine and cetirizine is minor and occurs at concentrations that are very
unlikely to be encountered clinically, since these drugs, in contrast to  xxxd236xxx 
and terfenadine, do not accumulate in the myocardium.
direct extrapolation of preclinical results to humans requires great caution,
since malignant qt prolongations by terfenadine and  xxxd236xxx  are extremely
rare clinical events. however, since prolongation of the qt interval often pre-

20

cavero et al.

cedes the development of torsade de pointes, any significant delay in cardiac
repolarisation produced by noncardiovascular drugs in preclinical, and particularly in clinical, studies should, in general, be considered to indicate a potential
cardiac risk in humans. its significance should subsequently be evaluated in appropriate studies in patients with conditions known to predispose to arrhythmias.

the committee for proprietary medicinal products (cpmp) of the european union has recently
published a document containing recommendations for assessing the potential of noncardiovascular drugs to prolong the qt interval in humans.[1]
this official intervention has been prompted by numerous reported cases of sudden cardiac death associated with the use of drugs from various therapeutic classes. in particular, certain nonsedative
histamine  xxxg1078xxx  antagonists, such as  xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine, can prolong the qt interval
and, in the most serious cases, this effect can culminate in fatal ventricular fibrillation resulting
from episodes of torsade de pointes. this cardiac
adverse reaction has been clearly documented in
attempts at suicide using overdoses of  xxxd236xxx 
and terfenadine. it has also been observed in patients who have taken therapeutic doses of these
drugs but in whom there were concomitant risk factors predisposing to arrhythmias. these included
congenital or acquired long qt syndrome (lqts),
congestive heart failure, severe hepatic or renal
dysfunction, bradycardia, electrolyte imbalance
(hypokalaemia produced by potassium-wasting diuretics, hypomagnesaemia, acidosis) and certain
drug regimens (e.g. agents interfering with drug
metabolism).[2-4]
the preclinical studies proposed by the cpmp
for determining the arrhythmogenic potential of a
compound include in vitro and in vivo models,
which are routinely used to demonstrate the effects
of drugs on electrophysiological and electrocardiographic parameters. in particular, in vitro purkinje
fibre preparations from any laboratory animal species (e.g. rabbit, guinea-pig, dog or pig) are considered to be suitable experimental models provided
that the major ionic currents underlying the investigated cardiac action potential do not differ sub© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

stantially from those encountered in human cardiac
tissues.[1]
the aims of this article are to discuss basic ideas
concerning the cardiac action potential, congenital
and acquired lqts and in vitro preparations for
studying the cardiac electrophysiological actions
of drugs. additionally, electrophysiological effects of some nonsedative histamine  xxxg1078xxx 
antagonists are detailed and their clinical relevance
is discussed.
1. cardiac action potential and ecg
the cardiac action potential is the integrated
electrical activity of excitable heart cells and results from several small inward and outward currents contributed by numerous pathways (probably
more than 15) that include ionic pumps and exchangers and, most importantly, voltage-gated ion
channels. each of these mechanisms possesses individual voltage-dependent and kinetic properties.
the characteristic forms of the action potential
measured in different parts of the heart are determined by cyclical changes in the intensity of inward
depolarising, and outward repolarising, currents.
hence, the initial depolarisation phase of the action
potential is attributable to the predominance of
inward na+ and ca2+ currents (ina, ica), whereas
the repolarisation phase can result from several
outward k+ currents (ik: ikto – transient outward; the
3 components of delayed rectifier: ikur – ultrarapid
delayed k rectifier; ikr – rapid delayed rectifier; iks
– slow delayed rectifier; ik1 – inward rectifier).
repolarisation reflects both increases in k+ current
and the inactivation or reduction of inward currents. the plateau phase of the action potential that
immediately follows the initial depolarisation is
the outcome of a dynamic, transient equilibrium
between inward and outward ionic currents.
figure 1 depicts an idealised profile of an action
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

a

hkv1.4
ikto hkv4.2
hkv4.3

+25mv

ikur (hkv1.5: in human atria)

1

ica

2

ikr kvherg
iks hkmin

apd50

0

ina

3
4

apd90

−90mv
0
b

+
hkvlqt1
ik1 hkir
(at least 4)

300 msec

r

t
p
q

s

qt interval

fig. 1. (a) idealised morphology of the action potential measured
under in vitro conditions in a cardiac ventricular myocyte with

the 5 phases (0, 1, 2, 3 and 4) used to describe this electrical
event and the main ionic currents mediating each phase. (b)
idealised normal surface ecg pattern during a cardiac cycle.
the p wave is due to depolarisation of atrial myocytes, the qrs
complex to the ventricular depolarisation phase and the t wave
to the repolarisation phase of ventricular cells. apd50, apd90 =
action potential duration at 50 or 90% complete repolarisation,
respectively; hkir = human inward k+ rectifier channel; hkmin =
human k+ channel subunit; hkv = human voltage-dependent
k+ channel; hkvlqt1 = human voltage-dependent k+ channel
mediating iks ; ica = inward ca2+ current; ikto = transient outward
k+ current; ikur = ultrarapid delayed k+ rectifier current; ikr = rapid
delayed k+ rectifier current, iks = slow delayed k+ rectifier current; ik1 = inward k+ rectifier current; ina = inward na+ current;
kvherg = herg voltage-dependent k+ channel mediating
ikr.

potential generated by a ventricular myocyte and
the main ionic currents and ion channels mediating
each phase of this electrical event in the human
ventricle.[5,6] it should be noted that qualitatively
and quantitatively different currents may contribute to the action potential generated by cells in
other parts of the heart. for example, in the human
atria, a sustained k+ current (isus) partly carried by
an hkv1.5 channel (one of the ultrarapid compo© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

21

nent of the delayed outward rectifier current) intervenes in the early repolarisation process. thus, excitable cardiac cells contain many channels and, in
particular, multiple subtypes of k+ channels, each
of which may be a target for a genetic disease or
for the wanted or unwanted action of a drug.
the surface ecg reflects the sum of the synchronised electrical activities (action potentials)
generated by all cardiac cells during a heart cycle.
the p wave of the ecg results from the depolarisation of the atria. the beginning of the q wave and
the termination of the t wave indicate, respectively, the initiation and the end of ventricular
repolarisation. the qt segment of the ecg, as
such, or in a form corrected (qtc) by the heart rate
value by using, for example, the formula of bazett
rr ) or of fridericia (qtfc =
(qtbc = qt ⁄ ⎯√⎯⎯
3
⎯⎯⎯
rr ) as well as its dispersion (wider qt inqt ⁄ √
terval in any 2 of the 12 standard ecg leads), are
clinically used markers of the cardiac repolarisation process. although qt interval duration represents the sum of both ventricular depolarisation
(qrs intervals) and ventricular repolarisation (qt
minus qrs), qt prolongations very rarely result
from widening of qrs (an exception to this rule is
provided by the effects of the class i antiarrhythmics such as  xxxd1991xxx  or  xxxd2113xxx ).[7] however,
it should be noted that qt interval measurements
are an approximate estimation of the time required
for ventricular repolarisation, since the beginning
of the q and the end of t waves cannot always be
determined with accuracy. furthermore, the values
of qt interval can change depending on autonomic
drive to the heart and the selected ecg lead to
measure it and heart rate (the correction formula
by bazett is inaccurate, since it under- or overestimates the value of qt for low and high rates,
respectively). in conditions of stable sinus rhythm,
a qtc value greater than 430 (adult males) to 450
(adult females) msec (or up to 550 msec according
to some authorities) and a qt dispersion value
greater than 40 to 60 msec are generally considered
abnormal.[4,7,8]
in conclusion, despite a number of constraints
against the accurate determination of the qt interdrug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

22

cavero et al.

val, this parameter is a valuable tool for detecting
wanted and unwanted effects of drugs on cardiac
repolarisation and for studying the factors and clinical conditions that may increase or predispose to
an increase in its magnitude.
2. congenital and acquired forms
of lqts
the shape of the cardiac action potential can be
profoundly altered even by small changes in any of
the ionic currents that contribute to it. hence, any
drug- or disease-provoked increase in inward current or decrease in either one or more k+ channel
currents can diminish the intensity of the net outward current responsible for the repolarisation process and thereby cause a phenotypical prolongation
of the action potential.
the hereditary forms of lqts are generally autosomal, dominant, familial disorders characterised by indications of prolonged ventricular
repolarisation in the ecg and a propensity for
polymorphic tachycardia, sometimes with twisting
qrs morphology on either side of the ecg isoelectric line. this is referred to as torsade de
pointes and is usually self-limiting, but can lead to
episodes of recurrent syncope and sudden death.
these events often affect young, otherwise healthy
individuals, particularly during conditions of psychological and physical stress. the delay in the
repolarisation process favours early and late
afterdepolarisations (particularly at the level of the
purkinje conducting system). these are produced
by premature openings of na+, and l-type ca2+
channels, which further worsen the lengthening of
the action potential, a trigger for torsade de
pointes.[9]
genetic analyses have demonstrated that the genome of individuals afflicted with lqts is such
that they have defective genes encoding for abnormal proteins constituting cardiac ionic channels.
to date, 3 main specific mutations in cardiac ion
channel genes ( xxxg1268xxx , herg,  xxxg2028xxx ) have
been clearly identified.[10-12] furthermore, the
same gene may be the target of different mutations
affecting different individuals, suggesting a high
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

degree of polymorphism in the inheritance of certain cardiac channels.[10-12]
although rapidly inactivating na+ currents are
primarily responsible for the initial upstroke of the
action potential, a persistent late component of this
current can sometimes contribute to the plateau
phase. the mutant  xxxg2028xxx  gene at the  xxxg2028xxx  locus
on chromosome 3 encodes an abnormal na+ channel  xxxg216xxx  protein. the mutant channel phenotypes show dispersed reopenings and prolonged
bursts, which lead to lengthening of the tail portion
of the inward na+ current, an effect that can cause
prolongation of the action potential.[10]
several defective genes also encode for the alpha
subunit, which intervenes in the formation of a
k+herg (human erg-related gene) channel carrying
ikr and of the alpha ( xxxg1268xxx ) subunit, which coassemble with the  xxxg217xxx  (hkmin) to constitute the k+
channels carrying the iks current (fig. 1). the mutant herg and the  xxxg1268xxx  genes responsible for
the  xxxg1246xxx  and  xxxg1268xxx  are, respectively, located on
chromosomes 7 and 11. all these mutations and
others (lqt4 and  xxxg1245xxx ) that affect cardiac
repolarisation channels lead to either a reduction in
the tissue density of normally expressed k+ channels, to abnormally operating channels or to assembly of nonfunctional channels. thus, their ultimate
consequence is a decrease in the amplitude of the
outward current leading to a prolongation of the
qt interval of the ecg.[10,11]
in summary, in patients with lqts, the fine
equilibrium between inward and outward currents
responsible for the plateau phase of the action potential is shifted in the inward direction and this
leads to action potential lengthening which can culminate in torsade de pointes, particularly in the presence of concurrent risk factors favouring cardiac
dysrhythmias.
cardiac repolarising outward k+ currents, and
particularly herg ikr, can be either a primary desirable, or a secondary unwanted, site of action for
certain members of numerous clinically used drug
classes. for instance, the therapeutically relevant
property of class iii antiarrhythmics (d-sotalol,
dofetilide) is blockade of repolarising k+ channels.
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

the resulting prolongation in the action potential
duration produces a useful increase in cardiac refractoriness. this increase in refractoriness is exploited therapeutically for suppressing ectopic activity, which acts as a trigger for re-entrant
electrical circuits. however, when the effects of
these drugs in prolonging the action potential duration become very marked, torsade de pointes
may ensue. additionally, class iii antiarrhythmics
can lengthen action potentials of midmyocardial
cells and purkinje fibres to a greater extent than
those generated by subendocardial myocytes. the
resultant dispersion in ventricular refractoriness
disturbs the smooth synchronisation of the overall
repolarisation process. this condition favours
arrhythmogenic re-entrant mechanisms which, in
turn, can initiate ventricular fibrillation.[13]
many other currently used drugs (antihistamines –  xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine; antipsychotics
– haloperidol, thioridazine; antibacterials – erythromycin; antifungal agents – ketoconazole; an
agent for treating incontinence – terodiline; an
agent with prokinetic activity –  xxxd1708xxx ) can
block k+ channels, in general, and the rapid component of the delayed rectifier k+ channel current
(ikr), in particular. this may result in serious cardiac consequences for the cardiac repolarisation
process already mentioned.[5,14]
it is important to mention that abnormalities in
systems responsible for cardiac electrogenesis
other than ionic channels could lead to prolongation of the repolarisation phase of the cardiac action potential. for example, the electrogenic
 xxxg2161xxx  is a major contributor to the
plateau phase of the cardiac action potential and
provides a major source of the current that gives
rise to the qrs complex of the ecg. it is thus
possible that certain patients affected by congenital
or acquired lqts may also suffer delayed cardiac
repolarisation as a result of abnormalities in the
function of the  xxxg2161xxx .
in conclusion, k+ channel mutations underlie
certain forms of congenital lqts and, because the
native k+ channels are also direct or indirect pharmacological targets for many currently used drugs,
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

23

the products of the same native or mutated genes
appear to be responsible for both the congenital
and acquired forms of lqts. it is tempting to speculate that patients responding in an exaggerated or
unexpected manner to certain drugs, thereby acquiring lqts, may carry cardiac channel abnormalities which have no pathological consequence
for normal life but may predispose them to the adverse effects of drugs with the potential to prolong
qt.[10] this may be attributable to at least 2 distinct
mechanisms. the drug can reveal the phenotype of
an underlying genetic disease either by reducing
further the impaired function of a mutated channel
or by altering the function of a native channel that
is essential for a normal cardiac repolarisation process in individuals with a mutated channel.[10]
finally, additional endogenous factors recognised
to worsen adverse effects associated with long qt
intervals and large qt dispersion include diminished
baroreflex sensitivity, reduced heart rate variability due to a shift of the sympathovagal balance
towards a sympathetic predominance, and the occurrence of ventricular early or late afterpotentials.[15]
3. in vitro study of the action potential
in ventricular tissues from experimental
animals
the cpmp has proposed the use of cardiac papillary muscle and/or purkinje fibre preparations as
an approach to assessing the likelihood of a drug
causing qt prolongation in humans.
technically, the action potential profile is measured by using glass microelectrodes to penetrate
into the membrane of single cells of cardiac tissues.
these multicellular preparations used for this purpose are mounted in isolated tissue chambers, perfused with a warm (35 to 37°c), oxygenated (95%
o2/5% co2) physiological salt solution (e.g.
tyrode) and then paced via bipolar silver electrodes to deliver generally square wave electrical
pulses of approximately 1 msec duration, twice
threshold intensity (20 to 150mua) and 1hz frequency. after an appropriate equilibration period
(generally 30 to 60 minutes) to achieve steadystate conditions, action potentials are recorded from
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

24

a cell, using standard glass microelectrodes (filled
with 3 mol/l kcl, with a resistance range of 30 to
50 mohm) connected to an appropriate amplifier.
under normal conditions, the resting transmembrane potential of a functional ventricular myocyte
or a fibre of the specialised conducting system lies
within –80 and –95mv. on excitation, from a
threshold potential of about –70mv, a rapid regenerative depolarisation due to na+ influx into the
cell develops and shifts the membrane potential to
a value within the range +25 to +35mv (phase 0 of
the cardiac cell action potential) [fig. 1]. thus,
measuring the rate of depolarisation, which is
given by the first derivative (dv/dt) of the phase 0
of the action potential (vmax: v/sec), provides information on the function of na+ channels with an
increase in vmax indicating an enhanced channel
function and a reduction reflecting an impaired
channel function.
in addition to the na+ conductance, a second
inward depolarising current becomes activated at
membrane potentials of around –50mv and persists throughout the plateau phase of the action potential. this is initially due to extracellular ca2+
entering the myocyte through slow ca2+ channels
and subsequently to additional ionic pathways (e.g.
 xxxg2161xxx ) that contribute substantially
to the elevation in cytosolic ca2+ concentration
(fig. 1). outward currents overcoming inward ones
are essentially carried by k+. thus, the duration of
the action potential measured at selected points
(25, 50 and 90%) of the repolarisation process
(apd25, apd50, apd90; msec) are parameters providing an overall estimation of the function of the
ca2+ and k+ channels (fig. 1). an additional parameter that can be estimated from apd values is the
slope of the terminal repolarisation phase, the approximate value of which is given by the ratio (r)
of apd50 over apd90. thus, if r increases, the
final repolarisation is delayed. in order to compare
the effects of a group of drugs on terminal
repolarisation, the ratios obtained before (rb) and
after (ra) tissue incubation with the drug are calculated and the additional ratios (rb/ra) are analysed.
an rb/ra value lower than 1 indicates that the drug
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

cavero et al.

increases the repolarisation time, whereas a value
greater than 1 indicates that the final repolarisation
process is accelerated. this parameter is useful
when the changes produced by drugs in apd50 and
apd90 are of different magnitude (fig. 2).
the resting potential (em:mv) is also a routinely measured parameter in electrophysiological
studies. its value corresponds to the transmembrane potential (~ –90mv) at full repolarisation. it
provides information on the function of the inward
rectifier k+ channel carrying the ik1 current, which
acts to clamp the cell at the resting potential.
hence, when the transmembrane potential of the
resting cell is less than –90mv, the cell is said to
be in a partially depolarised state.
in conclusion, the changes produced by drugs in
any of the electrophysiological parameters used to
describe quantitatively the unicellular cardiac action potential reflect alterations in one or more of
the many ionic currents that underlie this electrical
event. however, it should be emphasised that the
study of the action potential using a simple
microelectrode is generally insufficient to determine the precise ion channel current(s) affected by
the compound under investigation. such information can, nevertheless, be obtained by using the
patch clamp recording techniques. this allows
study of single ion channels and is especially appropriate when measuring drug effects in human
cardiac cells or in cloned human cardiac ion channels which should be preferentially expressed stably in mammalian cells, although an effect on one
or more single channels could well be modified or
nullified in whole tissue preparations or in vivo
conditions by opposing effects on other channels
and homeostatic mechanisms. nevertheless, the
nullified adverse effect may manifest itself again
under particular pathological conditions.
4. experimental variables to consider
when determining in vitro
drug-induced electrophysiological
effects
the in vitro electrophysiological effects of a
drug may depend on several experimental varidrug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

25

20mv

0

50 msec

c4
c1 c0

c2

c3

−80

fig. 2. characteristic effects of three concentrations (c2, c3, c4) of  xxxd236xxx  (0.1, 1 and 10 mumol/l, respectively) and its vehicle

[c1: dimethylsulfoxide (dmso) 1%] on the shape of the action potential profile in rabbit purkinje fibres paced at 1hz and bathed in
a standard salt solution (tyrode). c0 is the action potential measured under baseline conditions.

ables, such as concentrations investigated, incubation time, pacing frequency of the preparation,
concentrations of ions (k+, mg2+ or h+) in the bath
solution and baseline values of electrophysiological parameters.[16-18] thus, the selection of
appropriate experimental variables (such as low
stimulation frequency or low k+ concentrations) is
sometimes essential for revealing and quantifying
adequately the possible electrophysiological effects
of a drug. failure to do so may sometimes explain
differences in results reported by independent investigators. although the values of experimental
variables necessary for clearly observing the effects of a compound on electrophysiological
parameters may be far from the physiological
ones (and thus considered by some investigators to
be of reduced scientific interest), it should be kept
in mind that the main purpose of safety cardiac electrophysiology studies is to determine the potential risk
for a drug to provoke qt interval prolongation, not
only in healthy humans but, most importantly, in patients with cardiac problems who may be prescribed
such a drug.
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

results with  xxxd236xxx  obtained in studies of
rabbit purkinje fibres will be used to exemplify the
role of certain experimental variables on vmax and
the prolongation of the action potential repolarisation phase (apd50 and apd90). as discussed
above, the latter effect is considered to have the
potential to predict the occurrence of drug-induced
qt prolongation in humans.

5. electrophysiological effects of
 xxxg1078xxx  antagonists
in rabbit purkinje fibres,  xxxd236xxx  produces
concentration-dependent changes in the shape of
the action potential. in particular, the highest concentration studied reduces the rate of repolarisation
so markedly that the action potential assumes a triangular shape (fig. 2).
after a 30-minute superfusion of the purkinje
fibres with  xxxd236xxx , the apd50 and apd90 increase in a concentration-dependent (0.1 to 10
mumol/l) manner. in these experiments, 1 and 10
mumol/l concentrations of  xxxd236xxx  also dedrug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

26

pressed the depolarisation rate (vmax) of the action
potential (fig. 3).[17]
a study of the kinetics of the onset of the electrophysiological effects of a small concentration
(0.3 mumol/l) of  xxxd236xxx  indicates that the prolongation of the action potential fails to attain
steady-state conditions even after 3 hours of incubation. interestingly, this concentration produces a
selective, marked augmentation of apd50 and
apd90 without modifying vmax[17] (fig. 3). this
indicates that  xxxd236xxx  is more potent in inhibiting the function of ca2+ and k+ channels than it is
in impairing na+ channel function.
reducing the pacing frequency of the purkinje
fibre preparation increases the duration of the action potential and decreases the depression of vmax
produced by  xxxd236xxx . at a very low pacing frequency the magnitude of the  xxxd236xxx -induced
prolongation of the action potential is greater than
that measured at high frequencies, whereas the reverse holds true for vmax (fig. 3). such phenomena
are a characteristic feature of most of the known
class iii antiarrhythmic agents and reflect the dependency of the drug action on the frequency of
channel opening (reverse use dependence).[5]
the influence of reducing the stimulation frequency on the prolonging effect of  xxxd236xxx  on
the action potential is clearly potentiated by
decreasing the extracellular kcl concentration
(fig. 4).
figure 5 shows the effects in apd90 produced
by 1 and 10 mumol/l concentrations of  xxxd236xxx ,
terfenadine, ebastine, carebastine, cetirizine,
fexofenadine, loratadine and vehicle (dimethylsulfoxide; dmso). the results reported were measured at the end of a 30-minute superfusion of
paced (1hz) rabbit purkinje fibres with a standard
salt solution (4.0 mmol/l kcl and 0.5 mmol/l
mgcl2). each of the 3 concentrations (0.1, 1 and
10 mumol/l: results for the 0.1 mumol/l are not represented) of the compounds studied was superfused for 30 minutes before increasing the concentration rapidly to the next highest in the series. of
all the compounds studied, only  xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine produced a significant prolongation of the
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

cavero et al.

action potential at 1 mumol/l concentration.  xxxd1891xxx 
mumol/l, the effects of these compounds increased
slightly, and carebastine and cetirizine slightly but
significantly prolonged the action potential. the
other compounds studied did not significantly affect this parameter (fig. 5).
dmso slightly but significantly decreased
apd90 when compared with the corresponding
value measured in control preparations (data not
shown) at the end of 60 and 90 minutes of perfusion
(fig. 5).
 xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine also produced concentration-dependent decreases in vmax (38.3 ±
9.5% and 25.4 ± 4%, respectively  xxxd1891xxx  mumol/l).
ebastine  xxxd1891xxx  mumol/l, but not at 1 mumol/l, produced a small significant reduction in vmax (14.2 ±
3.1%), which was not seen with carebastine,
cetirizine or loratadine.
6. discussion
health authorities of the european community
are now alerted to the fact that drug-induced prolongation of the qt interval (acquired lqts) is
associated with an increased risk of fatal ventricular arrhythmic events (torsade de pointes). this serious cardiac problem can be experienced also by
individuals with congenital lqts, which stems
from unfavourable mutations in genes coding for
subunits that are essential for the correct functioning of cardiac ionic channels.[10-12] since in these
patients the probability of torsade de pointes is
high, the prolongation of the qt interval by noncardiovascular drugs is currently viewed as an undesirable adverse effect and the risks it presents to
humans should be carefully assessed. for this reason, the cpmp has recently demanded that new
noncardiovascular medicinal products be routinely
subjected to appropriate preclinical tests to determine whether they adversely influence cardiac
electrogenesis.[1]
the extrapolation of undesirable cardiac electrophysiological effects of a compound to humans
should satisfy a few reasonable criteria. firstly, the
mechanism affected by the test compound should
have a counterpart in the human heart. this may
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

27

b

a

20
40

30
−20
20

ast
(0.3 mumol/l)

vmax
apd50
apd90

10

−40

change from initial value (%)

change from initial value (%)

0

−60
0
−80
0

60

120

180

0

time (min)

0.01

0.1

1

ast (mumol/l)

c

d
600

900

800

apd90 (msec)

600
400
500

ve
ast (1 mumol/l)

vmax (v/sec)

500

700

400
300
300

200

200
0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

frequency (hz)

fig. 3. (a) time-course of the onset of the effects of 0.3 mumol/l  xxxd236xxx  (ast) on the maximal rate of depolarisation (vmax) and the
action potential duration measured at 50% (apd50) and 90% (apd90) of the repolarisation. (b) changes in vmax, apd50 and apd90

measured at the end of 30 minutes’ superfusion of each  xxxd236xxx  concentration investigated. these studies were carried out in
rabbit purkinje fibres paced at 1hz (n = 7-8). the results shown are from preparations which did not respond with early afterpotentials
to  xxxd236xxx . (c and d) pacing frequency-dependent effects of ast or its vehicle (ve) alone on vmax, apd50 and apd90 in rabbit
purkinje fibres (n = 11) [original data from adamantidis et al.[17]].

© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

28

cavero et al.

permission for any future reprints (english or translated) must be reapplied for (i.e. permission for
one time use in english only)
permission granted by: lippincott, williams & wilkins
fax: +1 410 528 4298

fig. 4. extracellular k+ concentrations and pacing frequency-dependent effects of  xxxd236xxx  (ast) and its vehicle (ve) on the action

potential duration measured at 90% of repolarisation (apd90) in rabbit purkinje fibres (n = 5) [adapted from adamantidis et al.,[17]
with permission].

apd90 (% change from baseline values)

not be always the case, since proteins regulating
ionic movements in human heart cells are certainly
similar, but not fully homologous, to corresponding ones in the hearts of experimental animals. a
corollary to this observation is that a compound
lacking electrophysiological activity in animal
testing could, nonetheless, adversely affect the
function of certain ionic pathways in the human
heart. however, both these issues could be ad-

dressed in part by testing the compound under investigation on cloned human cardiac channels expressed preferentially in mammalian cells or, even
better, on native channels present in samples of human heart tissues obtained during cardiac surgery.
furthermore, for extrapolation to humans, it is
generally accepted that undesirable effects in in
vitro cardiac preparations should occur at clinically
relevant concentrations of the drug. these concen-

1 mumol/l
10 mumol/l

*
30

*

20

*
10

*

*
*

0

vehicle

 xxxd236xxx  terfenadine

ebastine carebastine cetirizine fexofenadine loratadine

fig. 5. effects of vehicle [1% dimethylsulfoxide (dmso)],  xxxd236xxx , terfenadine, ebastine, carebastine, cetirizine, fexofenadine and

loratadine on action potential duration at 90% of the repolarisation (apd90) measured at the end of 30 minutes’ superfusion of each
concentration (1 and 10 mumol/l) in rabbit purkinje fibres paced at 1hz and bathed in a salt solution (tyrode) containing a standard
concentration of k+. ∗ p < 0.05 vs vehicle, unpaired t-test.

© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

trations should be similar to those occurring in human plasma, and more correctly in the human myocardium, after therapeutic doses (taken alone or in
combination with other drugs by patients with or
without diseases known to impair drug clearance
or metabolism) or, in exceptional cases, supratherapeutic doses taken in suicide attempts.[16,17]
thus, for drugs with unwanted electrophysiological activity, it is essential to know whether they, as
well as their major metabolites, accumulate in the
myocardium. the study of the time-course effects
of  xxxd236xxx  (fig. 3) clearly indicates that heart
tissue gradually becomes impregnated with this
drug, since a steady-state increase in apd90 was
not achieved even after 3 hours of superfusion of
rabbit purkinje fibres with a salt solution containing 0.3 mumol/l of  xxxd236xxx . this observation
was directly confirmed in the langendorff perfused rabbit heart, in which the ratio of drug concentration in left ventricle tissue to that in the perfusion medium (containing 1 mumol/l of
 xxxd236xxx ) reached a value of 450 after a 3-hour
period of  xxxd236xxx  perfusion (llenas et al., personal communication). in concurrent experiments,
the ratio for terfenadine was found to be approximately 250.
in dogs, the heart concentration of  xxxd236xxx 
was reported to be 300-fold higher than that in
plasma[19] this implies that human heart tissue
concentrations of  xxxd236xxx  and terfenadine will
be many times higher than those measured in human plasma. thus, great caution should be exercised when preclinical electrophysiological effects
determined in rabbit purkinje fibres or in any other
experimental animal heart preparation are extrapolated to the human myocardium by considering
only human plasma concentrations of these drugs.
additionally, preclinical electrophysiological
studies should be carried out by using drug incubation times sufficiently long to achieve steadystate concentrations in the biophase. however, this
may often not be possible because of experimental
difficulties (a very long incubation time can affect
the viability of the preparation). this is of particular importance when drugs with substantially dif© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

29

ferent physicochemical properties are compared.
for example, cetirizine and carebastine (each
tested  xxxd1891xxx  mumol/l on rabbit purkinje fibres)
slightly prolonged the cardiac action potential but
did not significantly accumulate in the rabbit heart
(llenas et al., personal communication). in the latter respect, these agents contrast with  xxxd236xxx 
and terfenadine, as in humans their cardiac tissue
and plasma concentrations are expected to be similar. thus, cetirizine and carebastine should not be
expected to significantly affect qt interval duration in humans, since their maximal human plasma
concentrations, even in the most unfavourable
clinical situations, are substantially lower than 10
mumol/l.
according to a recent letter to the lancet[2]
comparing the cardiac adverse effects of nonsedating antihistamines on the basis of spontaneous adverse reactions reported to who, cetirizine is also
clearly much better tolerated by the heart than terfenadine, since complications in patients with
cetirizine included cardiac rhythm disorders, only
two of which were fatal versus 98 for terfenadine.[2] however, in this report the spontaneous rate
of cardiac events in a matched population not taking the drug was not measured concurrently.[2] furthermore, up to now, no case of torsade de pointes
has been causally related to the intake of cetirizine[20] or ebastine,[21] the parent compound of carebastine.
an important issue is whether the extent of the
prolongation of the action potential repolarisation
phase in preclinical cardiac preparations is predictive of the magnitude of qt interval prolongation
and its consequences in humans. this is almost certainly not the case, since  xxxd236xxx  is more potent
than terfenadine in prolonging the action potential
in rabbit purkinje fibres but clinically it appears to
cause fewer cardiac adverse effects than terfenadine.[2] it is possible that the site of action of these
compounds or their affinity for this site on rabbit
purkinje fibre k+ channels is not the same as that
in the human heart channels. moreover, terfenadine may have additional sites of action on ion transporting mechanisms in the human heart cells.
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

30

the prolongation of the qt interval by a drug
seems to have poor predictive value for mortality
and morbidity in individuals without cardiac problems, who are generally studied in the early clinical
development phases of a drug and constitute the
great majority of patients using histamine  xxxg1078xxx 
antagonists. however, there appears to be better predictive value for prolonged qt for patients with preexisting cardiac disorders.[22,23] thus, drugs that
lengthen the action potential in in vitro heart preparations, and particularly in the rabbit purkinje fibres, should be investigated for their cardiac tolerability, particularly in patients with concurrent
cardiac problems. this conclusion has important
consequences for the development and postmarketing surveys of drugs that, in preclinical and possibly early clinical studies, are found to delay the
repolarisation process. an appropriate assessment
of their cardiac tolerability requires studying populations with known cardiac risks including, whenever ethically possible, patients with congenitally
mutated cardiac ion channels, and particularly
those phenotypes not showing a qt prolongation.[10] indeed, some fatal terfenadine-related adverse events have been linked to patients with
lqts.[3] recently, it was reported that a patient
developed a very long qt prolongation (to 700
msec from baseline value of 440 to 480 msec) after
receiving  xxxd1708xxx , which blocks cardiac
repolarisation channels. this patient was subsequently demonstrated to have an underlying congenital lqts.[24] these results indicate that, in
some individuals, lqts may remain a silent proarrhythmogenic substrate until revealed by a trigger (e.g. a drug blocking repolarisation k+ channels). thus, it is tempting to support the proposal
of napolitano et al.[24] that patients who experience
drug-induced torsade de pointes, whenever appropriate, be screened with the goal of identifying
whether they carry lqts genes. this would help
physicians to take preventive measures for these
patients, as well as their affected relatives, when
they need drug treatment that carries potential cardiac risk.
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

cavero et al.

it is important to stress that prolongation of qt
interval, in a reasonable range, is not itself necessarily followed by torsade de pointes. however,
any increase in qt interval should be considered
as a risk factor for torsade de pointes, since this
electrocardiographic abnormality often precedes
the appearance of torsade de pointes. although the
2 phenomena do not appear to be causally, but are
circumstantially, related, the establishment of such
a possible relationship for a given drug should be
studied by using therapeutic as well as, if possible,
supratherapeutic doses of the drug in normal patients and in patients with identified cardiac risks
predisposing to arrhythmias.
in conclusion, prolongation of repolarisation by
a noncardiovascular drug in preclinical heart preparations should be simply taken as an indication
that the drug has the potential to cause cardiac morbidity and mortality, particularly in individuals
with cardiac risk factors. however, the translation
of such a preclinical observation into the clinical
reality requires great caution, even when all experimental measures have been taken to satisfy a few
basic pharmacological assumptions such as confirmation in human cardiac preparations of the site of
action of the drug demonstrated in animals. additionally, the possible myocardial tissue concentrations of the drug producing the adverse effects in
animals should also be indirectly (from animal or
human body volume distribution data) estimated in
order to avoid the exclusive use of plasma concentrations in the extrapolation of preclinical results to
humans. although the latter point may be critical,
the appearance and magnitude of a drug effect on
cardiac repolarisation in preclinical preparations
depend also on the experimental conditions
adopted. thus, as a general rule, investigators
should also select, whenever possible, experimental conditions mimicking as closely as possible the
most unfavourable clinical conditions for drug use.
this is because cardiac rhythm disorders associated with drugs prolonging qt interval occur principally in individuals with additional cardiac risk
factors and abnormally altered biological functions
or parameters.
drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

assessing arrhythmogenic potential of antihistamines

clearly, the translation of animal findings to
clinical situations is one of the most difficult problems faced by pharmaceutical research. however,
for a noncardiovascular drug with the potential to
induce qt prolongation it may be possible to obtain a reliable point estimate of the risk of adverse
cardiac reactions if the drug is carefully investigated in sufficiently large populations of carefully
selected patients with known cardiovascular risks
and for a sufficiently long period. furthermore,
physicians should avoid, whenever possible, prescribing drugs with the potential to adversely modify cardiac repolarisation to patients who have suspected or identified cardiac disorders. however, if
such a therapy becomes necessary, the patient
should be informed of the possible undesirable and
serious effects of the medication. finally, and perhaps most importantly, the decision to institute any
type of drug therapy should always obey the classical golden rule of drug clinical development, prescription, and use – that the expected therapeutic
benefit from a treatment must always outweigh the
expected potential risk for an individual patient
and, in general, for all members of population segments who may be exposed to the drug.
acknowledgements
the authors wish to thank drs william crumb, dominique thuringer and roger small for their suggestions for
improving the manuscript and mme evelyne pasquet for the
preparation of the manuscript.

references
1. committee for proprietary medicinal product. points to consider: the assessment of the potential for qt interval prolongation by non-cardiovascular medicinal products.
cpmp/986/96: 1997
2. lindquist m, edwards rj. risks of non-sedating antihistamines. lancet 1997; 49: 1322
3. woosley rl. cardiac action of antihistamines. ann rev toxicol 1996; 36: 233-52
4. morganroth j, brown am, critz s, et al. variability of qtc
interval: impact on defining drug effect and low frequency
cardiac event. am j cardiol 1993; 72: 26b-31b
5. katz am. selectivity and toxicity of antiarrhythmic drugs: molecular interactions with ion channels. am j med 1998; 104:
179-95

© adis international limited. all rights reserved.

31

6. sanguinetti mc, keating mt. role of delayed rectifier potassium channels in cardiac repolarization and arrhythmias.
news physiol sci 1997; 12: 152-7
7. morganroth j. relations of qtc prolongation on the electrocardiogram to torsades de pointes: definition and mechanisms.
am j cardiol 1993; 72: 10b-13b
8. statters db, malik m, ward d, et al. qt dispersion, problems
of methodology and clinical significance. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1994; 5: 372-685
9. ackerman mj, clapham de. ion channels – basic science and
clinical diseases. n engl j med 1997; 336: 1575-86
10. priori sg, barhanin j, hauer rnu, et al. genetic and molecular
basis of cardiac arrhythmias. impact on clinical management.
eur heart j 1999; 20:174-95
11. jongsma hj. sudden cardiac death. a matter of faulty ion channels. curr biol 1998; 8: r568-71
12. roden dm, lazzara r, rosen m, et al. multiple mechanisms
in the long-qt syndrome current knowledge, gaps, and future
directions. circulation 1996; 94: 1996-2012
13. roden dm. current status of class iii antiarrhythmic drug therapy. am j cardiol 1993; 72: 44b-49b
14. hondeghen lm, snyders dj. class iii antiarrhythmic agents
have a lot of potential but a long way to go. circulation 1990;
81: 686-90
15. zipes dp, wellens hjj. sudden cardiac death. circulation
1998; 98: 2334-51
16. caron j, adamantidis m, bordet r, et al. effets proarrythmiques des antihistaminiques h1. lettre pharmacol
1996; 10: 200-7
17. adamantidis mm, lacroix dl, caron jf, et al. electrophysiological and arrhythmogenic effects of the histamine type-1
receptor antagonist  xxxd236xxx  on rabbit purkinje fibers: clinical relevance. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1995; 26: 314-27
18. pusieux fl, adamantidis mm, dumotier bm, et al. cisaprideinduced prolongation of cardiac action potential and early
afterdepolarizations in rabbit purkinje fibres. br j pharmacol
1996; 117: 1377-9
19. michels m, van peer a, woestenborghs r, et al. pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of  xxxd236xxx  in the dog. drug
dev res 1986; 8: 53-62
20. carmeliet e. effects of cetirizine on the delayed k+ currents in
cardiac cells: comparison with terfenadine. br j pharmacol
1998; 124: 663-8
21. ebastine periodic safety update reports (1st-3rd). barcelona,
spain: almirall-prodesfarma. (data on file)
22. thomas m, maconochie jg, fletcher e. the dilemma of prolonged qt interval in early drug studies. br j pharmacol
1996; 41: 77-81
23. elming h, holm e, jun l, et al. the prognostic value of the qt
interval and qt interval dispersion in all-cause and cardiac
mortality and morbidity in a population of danish citizens.
eur heart j 1998; 19: 1391-400
24. napolitano c, schwartz pj, cantu f, et al. identification of a
long qt syndrome molecular defect in drug-induced torsades de pointes [abstract 1169]. circulation 1997; 96: i-211

correspondence and reprints: i. cavero, centre de recherches de vitry-alfortville, 13, quai jules guesde, b.p. 14
94403 vitry sur seine, cedex-france.

drug safety 1999; 21 suppl. 1

