familial polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
m. reitzik, b.d.s.(rand), p.d.s.r.c.s.(eng.),
m.b. ch.b., and
j. f. lownie, b.d.s., h.dip.dent.(rand),
johannesburg, xouth, africa
department
university

of maxillo-facial
of the

and

oral

surgery,

witwatersrand

a case of polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia of the craniofacial
type is presented, together with substantial evidence that this condition had a genetic basis in this patient. a review of the literature
indicates that there is absolutely no previous
evidence of a genetic basis to this condition.
the possibility
that the propositus
suffered from polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia of the jaffe or the albright
type was
excluded.

t

he term fibrous dysplasia was first used by lichtensteiq3 in 1938, to describe
a benign, self-limiting,
nonencapsulated lesion that occurs mainly in young
subjects.
fibrous dysplasia may be either monostotic or polyostotic. monostotic fibrous
dysplasia is twenty to thirty times as common as the polyostotic form.2 when
the polyostotic type is found, the bones generally affected are the femur, the
tibia, the fibula, the humerus, the radius, the ulna, and the pelvic bone. in half
the patients with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia there are associated skull lesions.
zimmerman and associates9 and sherman and g1auser6 report that 15 per cent
of all patients with the polyostotic form of the disease have lesions in the maxilla
and mandible. usually the lesions are first noticed in childhood or early
adolescence, girls being affected twice as often as boys.
although polyostobic fibrous dysplasia involving
the jaws has been well
documented, a survey of the literature reveals no evidence of a familial basis
to the disease.
case report
a lo-year-old
caucasian boy presented for treatment
of a bony hard swelling of the
right side of the mandible in the premolar region (fig. 1). the boy’s parents had first
noticed the swelling 6 months previously. on int,raoral examination,
it was observed that the
patient was in the mixed-dentition
stage, and there was an obvious deformity of the mandible
in the region of the right mental foramen. the expansion of the bone extended from the
mandibular
right canine to the first permanent molar on the same side. the swelling was

769

fig.

8.

hard, smooth, and nontender to palpation. the overlying mucosa appeared normal, and there
was no paresthesia or anesthesia of the lower lip.
on further examination of this patient, several similar bone-hard swellings, varying from
1 to 3 em in diameter, were found to be present in various regions of the skull (fig. 2). no
other such lesions were detected clsowhere in the body; nor was there any evidence of caf6-aulait pigmentation or premature puberty. the patient’s father, his paternal grandmother, and
several other mrmbers of his family had similar lesions all over the skull.
radiographic

findings

radiologic examination revealed a well-defined unilocular radiolucency, about 4 cm. in
diameter, in the right body of the mandible, with a peripheral radiopaque band. this lesion
demonstrated a slight expansion of the lower border of the mandible and also extended

volume 40
number 6

etamilial

polyostotic

fibrous

dys@sia

771

fig. 3.
to the developing apices of the right first and second mandibular
premolars (fig. 3). the
maxilla and the remainder of the mandible appeared normal.
the lateral-skull
and posteroanterior
radiographs
showed several lesions scattered at
random throughout the skull (fig 4). some of these lesions were well-demarcated radiolucent
areas with a peripheral
radiopaque band similar to the mandibular
lesion, while others
showed mottled radiopacities
throughout
the lesions. a full skeletal survey revealed no
further abnormalities in any other bones.
biochemical

investigations

the serum alkaline phosphatase was 28.9 king-armstrong
units (normal, 3 to 12 kingarmstrong
units). the serum calcium, phosphorus, and acid phosphatase levels were within
normal limits. this significant increase in the serum alkaline phosphatase level is indicative
of increased osteoblastic activity in the absence of other causes, such as liver disease.
histologic

findings

a biopsy yielded granular gelatinous material with no obvious lining. histologic examination of the lesion revealed a mass of cellular fibrous tissue containing
osteoid and woven
bone and showing marked osteoblastic activity
(fig. 5). in view of the associated lesions in
the skull, a diagnosis of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of the craniofacial
type was made.
family

history

as the patient’s father and several other members of his family had similar multiple skull
lesions, the family was questioned in an effort to establish a family tree and to determine
whether the condition as described in the patient might have a genetic basis. the family
tree is shown in fig. 6.
finally, a radiologic examination of the patient’s father revealed several identical lesions

772

oral rurg.
december, 1975

reitzik ami lowmie

e‘ig. 4. note numerous radiopaque

fig.

stroma.

5 . characteristic

(‘chinese letter”

lesions with occasional radiolueent

appearance

of bony trabeculae

lesions.

in fibrl 3us ti! 3sue

scattered :tt random throughout the skull (fig. 7). the fact that it has appeared in exrery
generation in this family but occurs only in the children of an affected parent su cw :sts an
autosomal dominant trait.

discussi on

fibm ius dysplasia is usually found in the maxilla, where the 110x-nnal blone
is replacl ed by a cellular fibrous tissue containing islands of trabeculae of mc:ta-

b’amilial

volume 40
number 6

polyostotic

fibrous dysphia

773

fig. 6. paternal grandmother,
aged 65 years, had similar cranial lesions and her sister,
aged 59 years, had both cranial lesions and a mandibular
lesion. the latter’s daughter, aged
26 years, was confirmed by biopsy to have fibrous dysplasia of the mandible. all other affected
members were known to have had multiple skull lesions. black square denotes affected male;
black circle, affected female; white square, unaffected male; white circle, unaffected female;
x, confirmed by biopsy.

fig. 7. lytic
the propositus.

lesions with

sclerotic

borders

present

in the cranial

vault

of the father

of

oral surg.
december, 1975

plast,ic l~one.5 the cause of tht condition is unknown, although standish ant1
(+orlin’ state: ” it tloes not appear to be neoplastic, i!lltd t,hcrc is 110cvidcncc for
a gcnctic basis.” lic~htensteiii~’ is of the opinion that some perverted activity of
the specific bone-forming mcsenchyme may he responsible for the condition.
ilowcver, a high alkaline phosphatase activity in the osteoblasts in the lesions
seems to suggest that there may be an exaggerated response of these ostcoblasts
to some kind of stimulus whose origin is unknown.’
three distinct radiologic types of fibrous dysplasia are recognized. the first
shows a diffuse homogeneous sclerosis followin, 0 the contour of the bone. the
second is a multilocular lytic lesion, oval in shape, with septa, vertical thinning,
and expansion of the involved bone. the third is of a unilocular radiolucent
pattern.“, 6 the cases described here thus showed a radiologic pattern consistent
with the diagnosis of fibrous dysplasia.
in view of the fact that the patient had no associated skin pigmentation or
endocrinal disturbances, it is evident that the condition is not of the ,jaffe or
albright
types. this particular
entity is craniofacial
polyostotic
fibrous
dysplasia with a strong familial history.
the authors would like to express their thanks to professor m. shear for the histologic
for typing
study, mrs. m. jansen for the photographic
assistance, mrs. j. pearson-buffoni
the manuscript, and mrs. a.-k. van den hoek for the illustration.
references

hyperplasia
of bone; a histochemical appraisal of fibrous
dysplasia of bone, cancer 10: 1157-1161, 1965.
jaffe, h. l.: fibrous dysplasia of bone, a disease entity and specifically not an expression of neurofibromatosis,
j. mt. sinai hosp. 12: 364-381, 1945.
lichtenstein, l. : polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, arch. surg. 36: 874-898, 1938.
pindborg, j. j.: the manifestations
of fibrous dysplasia in mandible and maxilla, br.
dent. j. 92: 6-9, 1952.
pindborg, j. j., and kramer, t. r. ft.: histological
typing of odontogenic tumours, jaw
cysts and allied lesions, geneva, 1971, world health organization, p. 37.
sherman, r. s., and glauser, 0. j.: radiological identification
of fibrous dysplasia of the
jaws, pathology 71: 553.558, 1958.
standish, 8. m., and gorlin, r. j.: in gorlin, r. j., and goldman, h. m. (editors) :
thoma’s oral pathology, ed. 6, st. louis, 1970, the c. v. mosby company, vol. 1, p. 541.
windholz, f. : cranial manifestations
of fibrous dysplasia of bone: their relation to
leontiasis ossea and to simple bone cysts of the vault, am. j. roentgenol. 58: 51-63,
1947.
zimmerman, d. c., and others: fibrous dysplasia of the maxilla and mandible, oral
surg. 11: 55-68, 1958.

1. changus, g. w. : osteoblastic

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

reprint requests to:
dr. m. reitzik
department of maxillo-facial
and oral surgery
university of the witwatersrand
johannesburg, south africa

