agonist and antagonist actions of yohimbine as compared to fluparoxan  xxxd2216xxx (2)-adrenergic receptors (ar)s, serotonin (5-ht)(1a), 5-ht(1b), 5-ht(...  herein, we evaluate the interaction of the alpha(2)-ar antagonist, yohimbine, as compared to fluparoxan, at multiple monoaminergic receptors and examine their roles in the modulation of adrenergic, dopaminergic and serotonergic transmission in freely-moving rats. yohimbine displays marked affinity at human (h)alpha(2a)-, halpha(2b)- and halpha(2c)-ars, significant affinity for h5-ht(1a), h5-ht(1b), h5-ht(1d), and hd(2) receptors and weak affinity for hd(3) receptors. in [(35)s]gtpgammas binding protocols, yohimbine exerts antagonist actions at halpha(2a)-ar, h5-ht(1b), h5-ht(1d), and hd(2) sites, yet partial agonist actions at h5-ht(1a) sites. in vivo, agonist actions of yohimbine at 5-ht(1a) sites are revealed by way100,635-reversible induction of hypothermia in the rat. in guinea pigs, antagonist actions of yohimbine at 5-ht(1b) receptors are revealed by blockade of hypothermia evoked by the 5-ht(1b) agonist, gr46,611. in distinction to yohimbine, fluparoxan shows only modest partial agonist actions at h5-ht(1a) sites versus marked antagonist actions at halpha(2)-ars. while fluparoxan selectively enhances hippocampal noradrenaline (nad) turnover, yohimbine also enhances striatal dopamine (da) turnover and suppresses striatal turnover of 5-ht. further, yohimbine decreases firing of serotonergic neurones in raphe nuclei, an action reversed by way100,635. fluparoxan increases extracellular levels of da and nad, but not 5-ht, in frontal cortex. in analogy, yohimbine enhances fcx levels of da and nad, yet suppresses those of 5-ht, the latter effect being antagonized by way100,635. the induction by fluoxetine of fcx levels of 5-ht, da, and nad is potentiated by fluparoxan. yohimbine likewise facilitates the influence of fluoxetine upon da and nad levels, but not those of 5-ht. in conclusion, the alpha(2)-ar antagonist properties of yohimbine increase da and nad levels both alone and in association with fluoxetine. however, in contrast to the selective alpha(2)-ar antagonist, fluparoxan, the 5-ht(1a) agonist actions of yohimbine suppress 5-ht levels alone and underlie its inability to augment the influence of fluoxetine upon 5-ht levels.