archives of biochemistry and biophysics
vol. 374, no. 2, february 15, pp. 279 –285, 2000
doi:10.1006/abbi.1999.1624, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

carvedilol inhibits the exogenous nadh dehydrogenase
in rat heart mitochondria
paulo j. oliveira,* dario j. santos,† and antónio j. m. moreno* ,1
*centro de neurociências de coimbra, universidade de coimbra, portugal; and †departamento de engenharia
biológica e ambiental, universidade de trás-os-montes e alto douro, portugal

received august 10, 1999, and in revised form november 5, 1999

there are several reports on the oxidation of external nadh by an exogenous nadh dehydrogenase in
the outer leaflet of the inner membrane of rat heart
mitochondria. until now, however, little was known
about its physiological role in cellular metabolism.
the present work shows that carvedilol ({1-[carbazolyl-(4)-oxy]-3-[2-methoxyphenoxyethyl)amino]- xxxd3026xxx -(2)}) is a specific inhibitor of an exogenous
nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria.
carvedilol does not affect oxygen consumption linked
to the oxidation of succinate and internal nadh. it is
also demonstrated that the inhibition of exogenous
nadh dehydrogenase by carvedilol is accompanied by
the inhibition of alkalinization of the external medium. in contrast to the addition of glutamate/malate
or succinate, exogenous nadh does not generate a
membrane potential in rat heart mitochondria, as observed with a tpp ⴙ electrode. it is also demonstrated
that the oxygen consumption linked to nadh oxidation is not due to permeabilized mitochondria, but to
actual oxidase activity in the inner membrane. the
enzyme has a k m for nadh of 13 ␮m. carvedilol is a
noncompetitive inhibitor of this external nadh dehydrogenase with a k i of 15 ␮m. carvedilol is the first
inhibitor described to this organospecific enzyme.
since this enzyme was demonstrated to play a key role
in the cardiotoxicity of anticancer drugs of the anthracycline family (e.g., adriamycin), we may suggest that
the administration of carvedilol to tumor patients
treated with adriamycin might be of great help in the
prevention of the cardioselective toxicity of this antibiotic. © 2000 academic press
key words: rat heart mitochondria; exogenous
nadh dehydrogenase; inhibitor; carvedilol.

1
to whom correspondence should be addressed. fax: 351-39826798. e-mail: moreno@cygnus.ci.uc.pt.

0003-9861/00 $35.00
copyright © 2000 by academic press
all rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

in contrast to yeast or plants, where the presence of
exogenous nadh dehydrogenases is not a matter of
discussion, the existence of an enzyme of that kind in
animals, namely in heart, is a source of debate and few
studies have been made so far regarding the possible
physiological role of the enzyme or its action in different pathological processes.
it is a well known fact that nad ⫹ and nadh do not
permeate the inner mitochondrial membrane (as described by lehninger (6)), but several reports show an
oxygen consumption associated with the oxidation of
external nadh in yeast and plants. in the first case,
the existence of an exogenous nadh dehydrogenase in
the cytoplasmic leaflet of the inner membrane has been
demonstrated. this enzyme is responsible for the oxidation of exogenous nadh, delivering electrons to the
respiratory chain through the ubiquinone pool. in
plants, the presence of external nadh dehydrogenases, sometimes coupled with nonphosphorylating
pathways, was confirmed and their role has been studied with some detail for the past several years (2–5, 7).
with animals, however, very little is known about specific nadh dehydrogenases that directly promote oxidation of exogenous nadh in the inner mitochondrial
membrane. the existence of this enzyme has been
studied in the cardiac muscle; published works by rasmussen (8, 9) and by nohl (10, 11) present similar
conclusions. the presence of an external nadh dehydrogenase in the outer leaflet of the inner mitochondrial membrane is responsible for a high respiratory
rate linked to the oxidation of external nadh, albeit
not coupled with adp phosphorylation (9, 11). this
high respiratory rate was shown to be inhibited by
typical respiratory chain inhibitors (8 –11). the inhibition by cyanide proved that electrons from external
nadh are delivered to oxygen in cytocrome oxidase. it
was also pointed out by nohl and schonheit (11) that
the oxidation of exogenous nadh is associated with
279

280

oliveira, santos, and moreno

fig. 1. structure of carvedilol ({1-[carbazolyl-(4)-oxy]-3-[2-methoxyphenoxyethyl)amino]- xxxd3026xxx -(2)}).

the disappearance of protons from the medium, being
those protons used by cytochrome oxidase to produce
water.
as far as its physiological role, nohl and schonheit
(11) propose that this external nadh dehydrogenase
might be responsible for the oxidation of external
nadh during its excessive accumulation in the cytosol. alternatively, this enzyme has been associated
with some pathological conditions related to the production of oxygen free radicals released during normal
metabolic events (12), under conditions of ischemia/
reperfusion (13), and most of all with the cardioselective toxicity of adriamycin, an anticancer drug that
accepts the reducing equivalents from the external
nadh dehydrogenase (14).
a specific inhibitor of the internal nadh dehydrogenase, namely ethoxyformic anhydride (efa), 2 has
been used to descriminate between the internal and
external oxidase activities (10 –12), although it was
shown previously that efa also inhibits complex iii
(15). the discovery of a specific inhibitor for this exogenous dehydrogenase could be a key to identifying this
enzyme in rat heart mitochondria. the aim of this work
was to study the effect of carvedilol ({1-[carbazolyl-(4)oxy]-3-[2-methoxyphenoxyethyl)amino]- xxxd3026xxx -(2)})
(fig. 1), a cardioprotective drug also shown to protect
mitochondrial bioenergetics during oxidative stress
(16), on the activity of the external rat heart nadh
dehydrogenase, in an attempt to demonstrate its selective inhibitory actions.
materials and methods
carvedilol was obtained from boehringer (mannheim, germany)
and potassium cyanide from merck (darmstadt, germany); all other
coumponds were purchased from sigma chemical co. (st. louis,
mo). carvedilol was prepared in dimethylsulfoxide (dmso). rat
heart mitochondria from male wistar rats (250 –300 g) were prepared using a conventional procedure (20), with slight modifications.
2
abbreviations used: bsa, bovine serum albumine; rcr, respiratory control ratio, tpp ⫹, tetraphenylphosphonium cation, k m ,
michaelis–menten constant, k i , inhibition constant; rhm, rat heart
mitochondria; dnp, 2,4-p-dinitrophenol; fccp, carbonyl cyanide
p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone; doc, sodium deoxycolate;
efa, ethoxyformic anhydride.

briefly, the rats were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and the hearts
were imediately excised and minced finely in an ice-cold isolation
medium containing 250 mm sucrose, 1 mm egta, 10 mm hepes–
koh (ph 7.4), and 0.1% defatted bsa. the minced blood-free tissue
was then ressuspended in 40 ml of isolation medium containing 1 mg
protease type viii (sigma no. p-5390) per mg of tissue and homogenized with a tightly fitted homogenizer (teflon:glass pestle). the
suspension was incubated for 1 min (4°c) and then rehomogenized.
the homogenate was then centrifuged  xxxd1891xxx ,000g for 10 min (sorvall
rc-5c, plus, ss 34 rotor, 4°c). the supernatant fluid was decanted
and the pellet, essentially devoid of protease, was gently homogeneized to its original volume with a loose-fitting homogeneizer. the
suspension was centrifuged at 500g for 10 min and the resulting
supernatant was centrifuged  xxxd1891xxx ,000g for 10 min. the pellet was
resuspended using a paint brush and repelleted twice  xxxd1891xxx ,000g for
10 min. egta and defatted bsa were omitted from the final washing medium. mitochondrial protein content was determined by the
 xxxd2444xxx  method calibrated with bsa. oxygen consumption of isolated
mitochondria was monitored polarographically with a clark oxygen
electrode connected to a suitable recorder in a 1-ml thermostated
water-jacketed closed chamber with magnetic stirring at 25°c. the
standard respiratory medium consisted of 300 mm sucrose, 2 mm
edta, 20 mm triethanolamine, and 2.1 mm kh 2po 4, ph 7.4. mitochondria were suspended at a concentration of approximately 1
mg/ml in the respiratory medium. state iv respiration was measured in the presence of 10 mm glutamate/malate, 8 mm succinate
(plus 2 ␮m rotenone), or 5 mm nadh. state iii respiration was
initiated by adding adp in excess (1 mm). the respiratory control
ratio (rcr) was calculated using oxygen consumption rates during
state iii and subsequent state iv respiration. the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential (⌬⌿) was estimated with a tpp ⫹ electrode
acording to kamo et al. (21) without correction for the “passive”
binding contribution of tpp ⫹ to the mitochondrial membranes because the purpose of the experiments was to show relative changes in
the potential rather than absolute values. a matrix volume of 1.1
␮l/mg protein was assumed. reactions were carried out at 25°c in 1
ml of the standard respiratory medium supplemented with 3 ␮m
tpp ⫹ and 1 mg of mitochondria. respiratory rates and ⌬⌿ were
measured simultaneously. the effect of carvedilol was studied with a
preincubation of 3 min at 25°c. proton movements were followed
with mitochondria (1 mg) suspended in 1 ml of a reaction medium
consisting of 150 mm sucrose, 75 mm kcl, 2 mm glycylglycine, 1 mm
egta, ph 7.4 (at 25°c), using a jenway model 3305 ph meter
connected to a suitable recorder.  xxxd3484xxx  (3 ␮g/mg protein) was
added to eliminate any transmembrane electric potential. an oxygen
electrode was inserted in the reaction cell to follow ph changes and
the respiratory rates, simultaneously. the effect of carvedilol was
studied after a preincubation period of 3 min. when using glutamate/
malate or nadh as substrates, total deenergization of mitochondria
was achieved before each assay. mitochondrial integrity was determined by the  xxxg522xxx  assay, as described previously (17, 18).
k m and k i were determined using the initial rate of oxygen consumption versus the substrate (nadh) concentration in the presence or
absence of the inhibitor (50 ␮m), according to lineweaver–burk
plots.

results

as can be seen in fig. 2, the addition of external
nadh to rhm caused an increase in oxygen consumption which is greater than when succinate or glutamate/malate were used, consistent with that previously described by nohl (11). some classic inhibitors,
such as rotenone, antimycin a, cyanide, azide, or  xxxd2682xxx  caused a total inhibition on the respiratory
rate. after azide addition a slight oxygen consumption

inhibition of the external nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria

fig. 2. typical traces of oxygen consumption stimulated by external nadh, glutamate/malate, and succinate. state iv was initiated
with 5 mm nadh, 10 mm glutamate/malate, or 8 mm succinate.
adp in excess (1 mm) was added to stimulate state iii respiration.
the effect of several inhibitors on the oxygen consumption sustained
by exogenous nadh is also shown (0.5 ␮g antimycin a, 1 mm kcn,
2 ␮m rotenone, 200 ␮m sodium azide, or 10 ␮m  xxxd2682xxx ). the
numbers adjacent to the curves indicate n atoms oxygen/minute/mg
protein.

could still be observed, which is in agreement with
slater (19). adp gave rise to the transition to state iii
respiration, with a rcr of 1 for nadh (no coupling),
and about 3 for succinate and 7 for glutamate/malate
(fig. 3). the rcr values for glutamate/malate and
succinate were indicative of a good mitochondrial preparation (20), which was also confirmed by the citrate
synthase assay, where about 4% of damaged mitochondria were found (data from three independent preparations). the addition of nadh to the medium in the

fig. 3. comparison between state iv and state iii respiration for
external nadh, succinate and glutamate/malate in the conditions of
fig. 2. data are mean ⫾ se for three independent experiments.

281

fig. 4. typical traces of the effect of carvedilol (100 ␮m) on oxygen
consumption sustained by external nadh, glutamate/malate, and
succinate in rhm (1 mg/ml). substrate concentrations were as indicated in fig. 2. also shown is the effect of adding the detergent doc
(0.1% final concentration) on the respiratory rate sustained by external nadh (5 mm) inhibited by 100 ␮m carvedilol. the numbers
adjacent the curves indicate n atoms oxygen/minute/mg protein.

absence of mitochondria did not stimulate oxygen consumption (data not shown). as previously described by
nohl and schonheit (11), uncouplers like dnp have no
effect in the respiratory rate induced by external
nadh. in our own experiments, the addition of 0.5 ␮m
fccp decreased the oxygen consumption by 5–10%
(data not shown). increasing concentrations of calcium
did not cause any alteration in state iv respiration
sustained by nadh.
the addition of 100 ␮m carvedilol to rhm consuming external nadh caused a near total inhibition of
the oxygen consumption, as can be seen in fig. 4. the
slight oxygen consumption observed after the addition
of carvedilol was due to the oxidation of endogenous
substrates, which is not affected by the drug. a similar
carvedilol concentration caused a stimulation by almost 60% of state iv respiration induced by succinate
and a 10% stimulation when glutamate/malate was
used (figs. 4 and 5). however, it is apparent in fig. 4
that after the inhibition of nadh supported respiration by carvedilol, the addition of succinate or glutamate/malate restored oxygen consumption. adp increased the respiratory rate, though with a lower rcr.
to separate internal and external sites of nadh consumption, we permeabilized rhm with doc 0.1% after inhibition of the exogenous nadh dehydrogenase
with 100 ␮m carvedilol. the result was a sudden in-

282

oliveira, santos, and moreno

the michaelis–menten constant (k m ) and the inhibiton constant (k i ) were estimated by a lineweaver–
burk analysis based on the measurement of initial
oxygen consumption for several nadh concentrations
with and without added carvedilol (fig. 10). the shape
of the plot is typical of a noncompetitive inhibition.
standard equations were used in order to calculate the
kinetic constants (22). k m was calculated to be 13 ␮m
of nadh, while the estimated k i was 15 ␮m for carvedilol.
discussion
fig. 5. effect of 100 ␮m carvedilol on the oxygen consumption
sustained by external nadh, glutamate/malate, and succinate in
rhm (1 mg/ml). substrate concentrations were as described in fig.
2. the effect (inhibition or stimulation) was calculated as the difference in respiratory rate before and after the addition of carvedilol.
data are mean ⫾ se of three independent experiments.

crease in oxygen consumption due to the oxidation of
nadh by the internal nadh dehydrogenase.
rat liver mitochondria displayed very small oxygen
consumption values linked to the oxidation of external
nadh which were not inhibited by carvedilol (data not
shown).
the carvedilol inhibition of cardiac mitochondrial
respiratory rate sustained by 5 mm external nadh is
concentration dependent (fig. 6). in this case, instead
of being applied after the addition of nadh, we preincubated mitochondria with the drug for 3 min.
figure 7 shows the simultaneous measurement of
cardiac mitochondrial membrane potential and oxygen
consumption. it is noteworthy that external nadh did
not generate any membrane potential (no tpp ⫹ uptake). the small increase in the register was due to an
addition artifact, as confirmed by the same effect in the
absence of mitochondria (not shown). however, the
addition of glutamate–malate developed a membrane
potential of about ⫺210 mv (without correction for
passive membrane binding). adp addition caused an
increase in the respiratory rate and an expected drop
in the membrane potential, related to its phosphorylation. the same figure shows that mitochondria also
developed a membrane potential in response to glutamate–malate after adding carvedilol, although to a
lesser extent (see discussion). carvedilol inhibited mitochondria were also capable of phosphorylating added
adp, but again, in a suspressed manner.
carvedilol also inhibited in a dose-dependent manner the media alkalinization induced by exogenous
nadh oxidation (fig. 8). the inhibition of oxygen consumption was accompanied simultaneously by an inhibition in the rate of media alkalinization. as seen in
fig. 9, we observed a larger inhibiton of the alkalinization rate of the media as compared to the inhibition of
oxygen consumption.

the existence of this exogenous nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria raises important questions related to its physiological role. the enzyme oxidizes external nadh at the level of complex i, delivering electrons to cytochrome oxidase without
generating a protomotive force. acording to what is
currently known it is striking that electrons can be
carried from complex i to iv without the simultaneous
proton pumping to generate an electrochemical potential across the inner mitochondria membrane.
it is well established that plants and yeast can oxidize external nadh. in plants, for instance, there is a
rotenone-insensitive ca 2⫹-dependent external nadh
dehydrogenase (2, 7) that is not coupled to normal
phosphorylating pathways (4, 7). the existence of such
an enzyme in animals is, however, still controversial.
in liver mitochondria, the oxidation of external nadh
has been attributed to the existence of a system containing nadh–  xxxg1456xxx  5 reductase/ xxxg1456xxx  5
in the outer mitochondrial membrane or with the electron shuttle between the two mitochondrial membranes by desorbed  xxxg569xxx  (23, 24). in a recent
article, bodrova et al. (25) pointed out that, under some

fig. 6. effect of different concentrations of carvedilol on oxygen
consumption sustained by 5 mm external nadh. rhm (1 mg/ml)
were preincubated with carvedilol for 3 min at 25°c in the reaction
buffer. data are mean ⫾ se of three independent experiments.

inhibition of the external nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria

283

fig. 7. traces obtained with simultaneous measurements of mitochondrial electric potential and oxygen consumption in rhm (1 mg/ml).
the concentrations of nadh and glutamate/malate were 5 and 10 mm, respectively. adp was added in excess (1 mm). respiration
stimulated by nadh was inhibited by 100 ␮m carvedilol. the shown values of the electric potential were calculated as described under
materials and methods.

experimental conditions, oxidation of external nadh
could generate a membrane potential even without the
participation of added  xxxg569xxx .
in muscle mitochondria, especially in heart muscle,
there are few works published regarding a possible
exogenous nadh dehydrogenase. rasmussen studied
the external oxidation of nadh in pigeon heart mitochondria (9) while nohl (10 –14) used rat heart mito-

fig. 8. comparison of the records of ph increase in the absence
and presence of increasing carvedilol concentrations. 5 mm nadh
was added to the reaction media with mitochondrial protein (1 mg/
ml). rhm were preincubated with carvedilol for 3 min before each
assay.  xxxd3484xxx  (3 ␮g/mg protein) was added in order to dissipate
membrane potential. the record is representative of three different
preparations and recorded as described under materials and methods.

chondria. both studies raise the question of whether
there is a nadh dehydrogenase in the outer leaflet of
the inner mitochondrial membrane of heart muscle.
perhaps this is  xxxg220xxx  of complex i that delivers
electrons to the ubiquinone pool. the electron pathway
through the mitochondrial complexes is inhibited by
several widely used inhibitors (rotenone,  xxxd2682xxx ,
antimycin a, azide, and cyanide) (9 –11; fig. 2). this
implies that the electron route is from external nadh
through complex i to complex iv, where electrons are
delivered to the oxygen. that oxidation was not coupled to adp phosphorylation and was insensitive to
uncouplers. we demonstrated, in simultaneous measurements of membrane potential and oxygen con-

fig. 9. inhibitory action of carvedilol on oxygen consumption and
disapperance of protons from the media. both measurements were
made at the same time under the conditions described under materials and methods. data are mean ⫾ se of three independent experiments.

284

oliveira, santos, and moreno

fig. 10. lineweaver–burk plots of the initial rates of oxygen consumption by rhm (1 mg/ml) in the absence and presence of carvedilol (50 ␮m). the reactions were started with 5 mm nadh. carvedilol was incubated with rhm for 3 min in the reaction media at
25°c. (inset) the relation between initial oxygen consumption and
[nadh] in the presence and absence of the inhibitor. the data are
means of four different preparations. k m and k i were determined
from the lineweaver–burk plot to be 13 and 15 ␮m, respectively.

sumption (fig. 7), that there is no generation of membrane potential coupled to the oxidation of external
nadh. in a study involving ischemia/reperfusion (13),
nohl et al. reported that the exogenous nadh dehydrogenase was mainly responsible for the generation of
ros, a fact that confirmed previous data (12), when it
was discovered that the so-called exogenous nadh
oxido-reductase is a novel and very active generator of
superoxide anion in rat heart mitochondria. this novel
enzyme was subsequently implicated to be responsible
for the selective cardiotoxicity of anthracyclines like
adriamycin (13, 14).
until now, no inhibitor was known to selectively
inhibit this enzyme. in this study, we demonstrate
that carvedilol ({1-[carbazolyl-(4)-oxy]-3-[2-methoxyphenoxyethyl)amino]- xxxd3026xxx -(2)}) (fig. 1), a cardioprotective drug that also protects mitochondrial function during the generation of free radicals (for a review
see 16), inhibits the oxygen consumption linked to the
oxidation of external nadh. carvedilol does not inhibit oxygen consumption linked to internal nadh or
succinate. with external nadh, near 90% inhibition of
the respiratory rate was attained. the low respiratory
rate after the addition of 100 ␮m carvedilol may be due
to the oxidation of endogenous substrates, not affected
by the drug. the large increase in oxygen consumption
after the addition of doc 0.1% (fig. 4) to the inhibited
exogenous nadh-sustained respiration indicates that
the destruction of the inner mitochondrial membrane
allows access of exogenous nadh to the internal
nadh dehydrogenase of complex i. this can be considered as a key evidence for the existence of an exog-

enous nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria.
simultaneous measurements of membrane potential
and oxygen consumption confirmed the reason for the
nonphosphorylation of adp: the oxidation of exogenous nadh is not coupled to the generation of membrane potential (fig. 7). following carvedilol (100 ␮m)
inhibition of the respiratory rate sustained by exogenous nadh, rhm were still capable of developing a
membrane potential by oxidizing glutamate–malate,
albeit at a lower potential (ca., 34 mv lower). carvedilol decreases the potential generated by succinate or
glutamate/malate (16), which is associated with the
stimulation of respiratory rates sustained by those
substrates. according to other results in our laboratory
(manuscripts in preparation), the drop in the membrane potential is caused by an increased h ⫹ leak,
either by a weak protonophoric action or by disruption
of membrane order. both possibilities can explain the
increased proton leak in the presence of carvedilol and
the drop in membrane potential accompanied by a
stimulation of the respiratory rate. it is worth noting
that the carvedilol concentrations used for preventing
lipid peroxidation and oxidative damage to mitochondria during events of ros generation (like in ischemia/
reperfusion) are 5–10 ␮m, in which only a very small
increase in proton leak is observed (16), being much
more extensive in the range of concentrations used in
this work (50 –100 ␮m).
rasmussen (9) and nohl (11) described the disappearence of protons from the media coupled to the
oxidation of external nadh, a fact that nohl and
schonheit (11) considered to be a consequence of the
use by cytochrome oxidase of those protons to reduce
oxygen. we found that carvedilol inhibited the alkalinization of the media in a dose-dependent manner (fig.
8). comparing the inhibition of ph changes with oxygen consumption (fig. 10), we observed that ph alterations have a larger inhibition than the oxygen consumption. one possible line of reasoning is that rhm
may have a small quantity of endogenous substrates,
whose oxidation supports respiration that is not inhibited by carvedilol. regardless, inhibition of the respiratory rate associated with the oxidation of exogenous
nadh is coincident with the inhibition of the ph variation caused by the drug.
the k m for the exogenous nadh dehydrogenase was
determined as 13 ␮m. k i for carvedilol was calculated
as 15 ␮m. the inhibition was found to be noncompetitive, according to lineweaver–burk plots. the inhibition mechanism is unknown, but it is possible that
carvedilol, due to its great lipophilicity (26) disturbs
the hydrophobic domains of the enzyme, which could
include reversible combination with –sh groups buried
in the lipid membrane.

inhibition of the external nadh dehydrogenase in rat heart mitochondria

the discovery of a specific inhibitor of the exogenous
nadh dehydrogenase can be of great value to further
studies on this enzyme. the physiological role of the
enzyme is still unknown as pointed by nohl and schonheit (11), but may involve the liberation of highly reactive oxygen species in events of ischemia and reperfusion, in which case carvedilol may have important
cardioprotective value.
this also opens new horizons regarding the potential
protective role of the drug in the cardiotoxicity of adryamicin and other agents that are known to cause a
mitochondrially mediated cardiomyopathy.
acknowledgments
this work was supported by fct (fundação para a ciência e
tecnologia); research project praxis/psau/s/16/96. we are greatful to dr. lino gonçalves (cardiology service—university of coimbra) for kindly providing us with carvedilol and to prof. kendall
wallace (univ. duluth, mn) for critical reviewing of the manuscript.

references
1. jagow, g. v., and klingenberg, m. (1970) eur. j. biochem. 12,
583–592.
2. day, d. a., and wiskich, j. t. (1974) plant physiol. 53, 104 –109.
3. groen, b. h., van mil, h. g. j., berden, j. a., and van dam, k.
(1992) biochim. biophys. acta 1140, 37– 44.
4. moore, a. l., leach, g., whitehouse, d. g., van der bergen,
c. w. m., wagner, a. m., and krab, k. (1994) biochim. biophys.
acta 1187, 145–151.
5. moller, i. m., and lin, w. (1986) annu. rev. plant physiol. 37,
309 –334.
6. lehninger, a. l. (1951) j. biol. chem. 190, 345–359.

285

7. moller, i. m., rasmusson, a. g., and fredlund, k. m. (1993)
j. bioenerg. biomembr. 25, 377–383.
8. rasmussen, u. f. (1969) febs lett. 2, 157–162.
9. rasmussen, u. f., and rasmussen, h. n. (1985) biochem. j. 229,
631– 641.
10. nohl, h. (1987) eur j. biochem. 169, 585–591.
11. nohl, h., and schonheit, k. (1996) arch. biochem. biophys. 331,
259 –264.
12. nohl, h. (1987) febs lett. 214, 269 –273.
13. nohl, h., koltover, v., and stolze, k. (1993) free radicals res.
commun. 18, 127–137.
14. nohl, h. (1998) z. naturforsch. 53c, 279 –285.
15. yagi, t., vik, s. b., and hatefi, y. (1982) biochemistry 21, 4777–
4782.
16. moreno, a. j. m., santos, d. j. s. l., and palmeira, c. m. (1998)
rev. port. cardiol. 17, ii-63–ii-78.
17. srere, p. a., brazil, h., and conen, l. (1963) acta chem. scand.
17, s129 –s134.
18. coore, h. g., denton, r. m., martin, b. r., and randle, p. j.
(1971) biochem j. 125, 115–127.
19. slater, e. c. (1967) methods enzymol. x, 48 –56.
20. darley-usmar, v. m., rickwood, d., and wilson, m. t. (1987) mitochondria—a practical approach, irl press limited, england.
21. kamo, n., muratsugu, m., hongoh, r., and kobatake, v. (1979)
j. membr. biol. 49, 105–121.
22. lenhinger (1970) biochemistry, worth publishing, new york.
23. matlib, a. m., and o’brien, p. j. (1976) arch. biochem. biophys.
173, 27–33.
24. bernardi, p., and azzone, g. f. (1981) j. biol. chem. 256, 7187–
7192.
25. bodrova, m. e., dedukhova, v. i., mokhova, e. n., and skulachev, v. p. (1998) febs lett. 435, 269 –274.
26. cheng, h.-y., randall, c. s., holl, w. w., constantinides, p. p.,
yue, t.-l., and feuerstein, g. z. (1996) biochim. biophys. acta
1284, 20 –28.

