in vivo regulation of mu-opioid receptor density and gene expression in cxbk and outbred swiss webster mice.  chronic in vivo treatment with the opioid agonist  xxxd2070xxx  downregulates mu-opioid receptor density, produces tolerance, and regulates gene expression in the mouse. after cessation of treatment, there is an increase in mu-opioid receptor mrna level associated with the recovery of mu-opioid receptors. however, the effect of  xxxd2070xxx  on the regulation of mrna during treatment is currently not known. in this study,  xxxd2070xxx -induced changes in mu-opioid receptor density, mrna, and opioid analgesic potency were determined in two mouse strains that differ in basal mu-opioid receptor density in brain. cxbk mice (mu-opioid receptor deficient) and outbred swiss webster mice were implanted s.c. with placebo pellets (controls) or  xxxd2070xxx  minipumps (250 microg/kg/day) for 1-7 days and mu-opioid receptor density or mrna levels in whole brain were assessed or mice were tested for  xxxd2070xxx  analgesia following 7 days of treatment. in control cxbk mice, mu-receptor density was approximately 40% less than that for the swiss webster, although mrna abundance was similar in both strains.  xxxd2070xxx 's potency was 4-fold greater in control swiss webster compared to cxbk mice.  xxxd2070xxx  treatment decreased ( approximately 25-40%) mu-receptor density similarly in both strains throughout treatment. the magnitude of analgesic tolerance to  xxxd2070xxx  was 8-fold in both mouse strains.  xxxd2070xxx  produced a biphasic effect on receptor mrna in both strains with levels decreased (25%) by 3 days and increased (30-40%)  xxxd2274xxx  days. mrna levels remained elevated (55%) 16 h following the end of the 7 day  xxxd2070xxx  treatment. taken together, these data suggest that in vivo  xxxd2070xxx  treatment that produces mu-opioid receptor downregulation and tolerance, can regulate mu-opioid receptor mrna abundance. receptor downregulation may initially induce decreases in mrna levels since downregulation preceded a decrease in gene expression. prolonged (>3 days) receptor downregulation may be responsible for increasing message levels and may be important in recovery of receptors following treatment. in addition, the magnitude of changes in receptor density, mrna, and tolerance were similar in both cxbk and swiss webster mice, indicating that the mechanisms required for receptor regulation and its functional consequences are independent of basal mu-opioid receptor density.