[molecular genetics in the hereditary form of long qt syndrome].  progress in molecular genetics contributed to the discovery of pathophysiologic mechanisms of hereditary diseases as well as better diagnostics and efficient therapy. several defective ge- nes have been discovered on different chromosomes (3,4,7,11 and 21 pair of chromosomes), and also their relationship with some types of lqts (long qt syndrome). gene dysfunction leads to the dysfunction of ion channels, which consequently causes prolonged duration of repolarization in cardiac muscle. these changes are manifested on electrocardiogram with prolonged duration of qt interval (over 0.44 sec.). familial forms of lqts are inherited as autosomal dominant (roman ward syndrome) and autosomal recessive (jervell lange-neilsen syndrome). the final form of lqts is defined even with hearing loss. clinical survey: malignant ventricular arrhythmia, syncope and sudden death. molecular architecture of voltage-gated ion channels: duration of voltage-gated ion can be regulated by na and k channels. cardiac action potential plateau is an indicator of the balance of inward and outward ionic currents. during this process of voltage-gated potential two currents are activated: depolarized inward current (it happens in the na channels) and repolarized outward current (it happens in the k channels). na channels are polypeptides incorporated in cell membrane. their main function is to control excitability in myocardial cell. they consist of two subunits: alpha and beta. class ib of anty-arrhythmics (lidocaine, mexiletine and  xxxd3387xxx ) as well as  xxxd2924xxx  blocks na channels in the state of inactivation, in fact, during the depolarization of the cell. for controlling the cardiac voltage-gated potential the most important are voltage-sensitive k channels. for appearance of k ions delayed refraction of k channels (kv) is of importance. depending on the velocity of activation, kv are divided into two groups: channels with rapid activation (kvr) and channels with slow activation (kvs). by activation of these delayed rectification channels (kv) beta agonists shorten the action potential of the heart.