overview symposium

robert w. piepho

t

en angiotensin-convertingenzyme (ace) inhibitors are
currently marketed in the
united states for the treatment of
hypertension. six of these have been
approved for use in heart failure and
three for use after myocardial infarction. while there are similarities
among the ace inhibitors, individual agents differ in their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
properties. this article reviews the
pharmacology and basic pharmacokinetic properties of ace inhibitors.
ace has a vital function in regulation of the renin–angiotensin system
(ras). physiological functions such
as maintenance of systemic blood
pressure, electrolyte and fluid balance, and blood volume are mediated
by the ras via  xxxg99xxx .1,2  xxxg99xxx , a potent vasoactive substance and stimulator of aldosterone
secretion, is converted from biologically inactive  xxxg99xxx  by both
ace and non-ace pathways.2 in addition to its effects on the ras, ace
also cleaves the c-terminal dipeptide
from bradykinin, thereby inactivating
it. bradykinin causes vasodilation by
stimulating  xxxd2738xxx  production
and causes natriuresis through direct
tubular effects.1 therefore, ace regulates the balance between the vaso-

abstract: the pharmacology of angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors and their role in the renin–angiotensin system (ras) are described, and
pharmacokinetic properties and common
adverse events are presented.
ace inhibitors play a vital role in the
ras by regulating the potent vasoconstrictor  xxxg99xxx . all ace inhibitors
share the same basic structure; however,
they can be separated on the basis of their
functional (binding) group: carboxyl, sulfhydryl, or phosphinyl. these functional
groups are, in part, responsible for differences in the pharmacokinetic and safety
profiles of these agents. captopril and lisinopril are the only ace inhibitors that are
not prodrugs requiring activation through
hepatic biotransformation. differences
among the ace inhibitors in lipophilicity
are described; fosinopril has the greatest
lipophilicity and lisinopril the least. ace is
found in numerous tissues, and there is
increasing evidence of differences among
ace inhibitors in their ability to inhibit tissue ace. most ace inhibitors are eliminated mainly by the kidneys and to a lesser
extent through the liver. lisinopril is the

constrictive and salt-retentive properties of  xxxg99xxx  and the vasodilatory and natriuretic properties of
bradykinin. figure 1 portrays the role
of ace in the ras and the development of high blood pressure. when

robert w. piepho, ph.d., is dean and professor, school of pharmacy, university of missouri—kansas city, 505 rockhill road,
kansas city, mo 64110.
based on the proceedings of a closed roundtable meeting held
december 4, 1999, during the ashp midyear clinical meeting in
orlando, florida, and supported by an unrestricted educational

only ace inhibitor that does not require
hepatic metabolism. in the selection of an
ace inhibitor for once-daily use to treat
hypertension, differences in trough–peak
ratios are clinically relevant. fosinopril,
ramipril, and  xxxd3409xxx  have minimum
trough–peak ratios of 50% or greater. ace
inhibitors are generally well tolerated,
with hypotension, cough, and hyperkalemia being the most frequently reported
adverse effects for the entire class. drug
interactions across the ace inhibitor class
as well as agent-specific interactions are
described.
factors to be considered in the selection
of an ace inhibitor include differences in
potency, affinity for ace, pharmacokinetics,
and toxicity that are related to structural
properties of the drug; whether the
trough–peak ratio enables use of a oncedaily dose; and potential adverse effects related to a drug’s functional (binding) group.
index terms: angiotensin-convertingenzyme inhibitors; drug interactions; pharmacokinetics; toxicity
am j health-syst pharm. 2000; 57(suppl
1):s3-7

 xxxg99xxx  binds with the angiotensin type 1 (at1) receptor, it causes
vasoconstriction, cell growth, sodium
and fluid retention, and sympathetic
activation, all of which play a role in
hypertension.3

grant from monarch pharmaceuticals. dr. piepho received an honorarium for participating in the symposium and for writing this
article.
copyright © 2000, american society of health-system pharmacists, inc. all rights reserved. 1079-2082/00/1001-00s3$06.00.

am j health-syst pharm—vol 57 oct 1, 2000 suppl 1

s3

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article-abstract/57/suppl_1/s3/5156955 by guest on 30 january 2019

overview of the
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors

symposium overview

s4

tissue ace activity
lipophilicity and tissue binding.
ace, a bivalent dipeptidyl carboxyl
metallopeptidase, is present in endothelial cells, in epithelial or neuroepithelial cells, in the brain as
membrane-bound form, and in a
soluble form in blood and numerous body fluids.9 the physiochemical characteristics of ace inhibitors
help determine at least part of their
pharmacologic potency. in general,
the greater the lipophilicity of an
agent, the greater its penetration of
biological membranes.
all of the ace inhibitors are orally absorbed, but differences in the
lipophilicity and molecular size of a
drug affect the rate of crossing cell
membranes or the blood–brain barrier.6 by crossing the cell membrane,
an ace inhibitor can block the tissue ras and all the paracrine and
autocrine functions of the tissue-

generated  xxxg99xxx .6 experimental animal data suggest that
ace inhibitors may exert inhibitory
effects of different degrees and specificity on the tissue ras of various
organs because of different abilities
to cross various cell membranes.6 of
the currently available ace inhibitors, fosinopril has the greatest lipophilicity and lisinopril the least.5,6
table 15,10 lists the binding group,
prodrug status, and lipophilicity of
the various ace inhibitors.
the ability to penetrate a lipid barrier is only one factor in the inhibition
of ace.11 tissue ace binding by a
particular drug is another critical determinant of inhibitory activity.
among ace inhibitors, only ramipril
has been shown to inhibit tissue ace
activity in vivo in humans.12
potency. the potency of ace inhibitors is generally determined by
measuring the amount of the ace

figure 1. the renin–angiotensin and kallikrein–kinin systems (at1 = angiotensin type 1,
 xxxg101xxx  = angiotensin type 2). adapted from reference 1, with permission.
renin–angiotensin system

 xxxg99xxx 
non-renin

renin

 xxxg99xxx 
non-ace

kallikrein–kinin
system

bradykinin
ace

 xxxg99xxx 

at1 receptors

inactive peptides

 xxxg101xxx  receptors

figure 2. active site of angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ace) binding with the ace inhibitor captopril.

am j health-syst pharm—vol 57 oct 1, 2000 suppl 1

zn

h

ch3

o

o–

s - ch2 - ch - c - n - ch - c = 0
captopril

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article-abstract/57/suppl_1/s3/5156955 by guest on 30 january 2019

areas of differentiation
chemical structure. although
all of the ace inhibitors are 2-methylpropionyl- xxxd2434xxx  analogues,
these agents can be differentiated by
their individual chemical structures.
ace inhibitors exert their effect on
ace by forming a zinc ligand (figure 2).4 the functional group binding to ace via the zinc moiety is the
primary structural difference
among these agents.5 most of the
ace inhibitors, including benazepril, enalapril, perindopril, lisinopril, moexipril,  xxxd3063xxx , ramipril,
and  xxxd3409xxx , have a carboxyl
functional group. captopril is the
only currently marketed ace inhibitor that contains a sulfhydryl
group, and fosinopril is the only one
with a phosphinyl group.6,7 as will
be described later, some of the pharmacodynamic characteristics of
these agents may be linked to these
binding groups.
prodrug status. all of the ace
inhibitors except captopril and lisinopril are prodrug esters and must
undergo hepatic biotransformation
(ester hydrolysis) to be converted to
active metabolites.8 these esters are
hydrolyzed by first-pass metabolism
to the active compound.5 the active
moiety is denoted by the suffix “-at.”5
for example, enalaprilat is the active
metabolite of the prodrug enalapril.
these prodrugs were developed to
improve absorption and bioavailability, providing an in vivo depot to prolong drug action.8 as expected, some
differences in initial absorption are
observed with the prodrug ace inhibitors. however, with long-term
use this difference in absorption is not
clinically significant.5
patients with severe hepatic dysfunction may be better suited for
treatment with captopril and lisinopril, which do not require hepatic bioactivation.6 however, the need to select one drug over another for this
reason rarely arises, because the prevalence of concomitant hypertension
and liver damage is very low.6

overview symposium

pharmacokinetics
route of elimination. most ace
inhibitors are eliminated mainly by
the kidneys and to a minor extent
through the liver.6 whether eliminated as the parent drug or after
transformation of the prodrug, all
ace inhibitors are eliminated as active compounds.6 thus, when the
route of elimination is altered (e.g.,
by renal disease), there is a tendency
for accumulation of the active compound. however, there is also a
compensatory rise in the fractional
excretion of drug through the alternate route of elimination (e.g., the
liver) when one route of elimination
(e.g., the kidneys) is reduced. lisinopril is the only ace inhibitor that
requires no activation or metabo-

lism by the liver.6 the effect of peritoneal dialysis on the serum concentration of most of the ace inhibitors is not known.5
trough–peak ratios. trough effect is the decrease in effect, such as
blood pressure, observed at the end
of the dosing interval, just before the
next dose is taken. once-daily medications for the treatment of hypertension are usually taken in the
morning; therefore, trough effects
usually occur at the time of day
when blood pressure sharply increases during the normal arousal
process.15 typically, peak effects occur two to four hours after dosing.
according to the sixth report of the
joint national committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and
treatment of high blood pressure
(jnc-vi), the optimal formulation
of antihypertensive therapy should

provide 24-hour efficacy with oncedaily dosing and have at least 50% of
the peak effect remaining after the
end of the 24-hour dosing interval.16
this provides protection against the
possible deleterious consequences of
a trough effect.
data from published studies suggest that not all commercially available once-a-day ace inhibitors
comply with the fda recommendation of a trough–peak ratio greater
than 50% (table 2).15 only enalapril, fosinopril, ramipril, and  xxxd3409xxx  have average trough–peak
ratios of greater than 50%, while
only fosinopril, ramipril, and  xxxd3409xxx  have minimum trough–
peak ratios above this level.
advantages of using agents with
once-daily dosing rather than shortacting agents in the treatment of hypertension include (1) better patient

table 1.

pharmacologic properties of the various
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors5,10
drug

binding group

prodrug

lipophilicitya

carboxyl
sulfhydryl
carboxyl
carboxyl
phosphinyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
carboxyl
sulfhydryl

yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

+
+
++
++
+++
0
na
+
++
+
++
++
+++

benazepril
captopril
enalapril
enalaprilat
fosinopril
lisinopril
moexipril
perindopril
 xxxd3063xxx 
ramipril
 xxxd3237xxx 
 xxxd3409xxx 
 xxxd3559xxx 

a
+ = slight, ++ = moderate, +++ = high, 0 = none, na = not available. reprinted from reference 10, with
permission.

table 2.

trough–peak ratios of angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitorsa
drug
fosinopril
ramipril
 xxxd3409xxx 
enalapril
lisinopril
benazepril
captopril
 xxxd3063xxx 
moexipril

studies (n)

trough–peak ratio (%)

1
2
4
6
8
1
1
3
2

64
50–63
50–100
40–79
30–70
40
25
<10–40
0–9

a

adapted with permission.15

am j health-syst pharm—vol 57 oct 1, 2000 suppl 1

s5

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article-abstract/57/suppl_1/s3/5156955 by guest on 30 january 2019

inhibitor required to block 50% of
the plasma activity of ace.6 high
potency allows for the use of very
low drug doses and minimizes the
potential for toxicity. the duration
of ace inhibitory activity is another
consideration. while all ace inhibitors are capable of blocking 100% of
ace activity at very high concentrations, the inhibition disappears at
varying rates.6 slower dissociation of
ace-inhibitor complexes results in
longer duration of action and may
enable once-daily dosing.
differences in potency and stability of ace-inhibitor complexes were
investigated among three agents
with structural similarities: ramipril,
enalapril, and captopril. in in vitro
testing, ramipril rapidly forms an
initial enzyme-inhibitor complex
with ace with an affinity 7 times
higher than that of enalapril and 47
times higher than that of captopril,
thereby conferring relatively high
potency.13 additionally, this ramipril–enzyme complex dissociates 72
times more slowly than the ace
complex with captopril and 6 times
more slowly than enalapril–ace
complex.13,14 this slow dissociation
of ramipril from ace allows for a
long duration of action—and a favorable dosing regimen.6

symposium overview

safety
adverse events. ace inhibitors
are generally well tolerated. while
there have been no studies comparing the safety of the available ace
inhibitors, some similarities have
been identified. as anticipated with
antihypertensive agents, ace inhibitors can cause hypotension with
dose-dependent severity.1 the frequency of hypotension is increased
in renin-dependent states, such as
during low sodium intake and diuretic use.1 for patients in such
states, a lower starting dose of ace
inhibitor is recommended.1
angioedema, a serious hypersensitivity reaction, has been associated
with ace inhibitors. the reaction is
characterized by swelling of the lips,
tongue, mouth, nose, throat, and
other parts of the face. angioedema
is most likely to occur in the first
month of therapy, although it has
been reported to occur years after
the initiation of therapy.1

ace inhibitors can also cause a
dry, persistent cough, which may
necessitate the discontinuation of
therapy.1,17 cough is reported more
frequently in women than in men
and in asian than in caucasian populations.1 the cause of this characteristic cough is unknown, but it
may be due to increased levels of
bradykinin or  xxxg2240xxx  and stimulation of vagal c fibers.
therapy with ace inhibitors can
cause hyperkalemia, since these drugs
block the formation of  xxxg99xxx ,
which stimulates the production of
aldosterone.1 hyperkalemia can be
precipitated by concomitant use of
potassium supplements, salt substitutes, or potassium-sparing diuretics.1 however, hyperkalemia associated with ace inhibitors is rarely
reported in patients with normal renal function and is most common in
patients with underlying renal impairment.
the ace inhibitors with a sulfhydryl binding group are more commonly associated with neutropenia,
nephrotic syndrome, taste disturbances, and skin rashes than those
with a carboxyl or phosphinyl binding group.1,18 these adverse effects
are not attributed to ace inhibition; the exact mechanisms involved
are not well defined.18
although rash is more frequently
reported in patients taking ace inhibitors with a sulfhydryl group,
there does not appear to be crossreactivity among the agents.1 skin
rash is generally dose related, has

been reported to occur in 1% of patients, and is usually a pruritic maculopapular eruption. taste disturbances have been reported more
frequently with captopril than with
the other ace inhibitors. neutropenia has been reported in less than
0.05% of patients but occurs more
frequently in patients with renal insufficiency or collagen vascular disease.1
drug interactions. some of the
drug interactions observed with
ace inhibitors occur across the entire class, while others are agent specific. table 31,5,18,19 presents some
specific drug interactions with ace
inhibitor therapy. as previously mentioned, hyperkalemia can occur with
concomitant use of a potassium-sparing diuretic, salt substitute, or potassium supplement.1 use of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids)
has been reported to lessen the hypotensive effects of ace inhibitors.18
the mechanism behind this interaction is believed to involve prostaglandin inhibition by nsaids. nsaids
inhibit prosta-glandin synthesis
through blockade of the enzyme cyclooxygenase, while ace inhibitors
stimulate the release of vasodilating
prostaglandins by blocking the catabolism of bradykinin.
agent-specific drug interactions
include an interaction of captopril,
enalapril, or lisinopril with lithium.
concomitant therapy with these
ace inhibitors plus lithium for 10
days to several weeks has been reported to result in lithium toxicity.19

table 3.

drug interactions with angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors18,19
interacting drug
interactions across class
diuretics/sympatholytics
potassium-sparing diuretics
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
lithium
interactions for specific ace inhibitors
food/antacids
tetracyclines
probenecid
allopurinol

s6

am j health-syst pharm—vol 57 oct 1, 2000 suppl 1

effect
additive hypotension
hyperkalemia
loss of hypotensive action
lithium toxicity
decreased absorption of captopril and moexipril
decreased absorption of tetracyclines with  xxxd3063xxx 
increased concentration of captopril
increased hypersensitivity with concomitant captopril

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article-abstract/57/suppl_1/s3/5156955 by guest on 30 january 2019

compliance; (2) the possibility of
lower cost with fewer tablets to be
taken daily; (3) hypertension control that is smoother and more persistent, rather than intermittent; and
(4) protection against sudden death,
heart attack, or stroke associated
with the abrupt increase of blood
pressure upon arising from overnight sleep.16 in addition, agents
with a high trough–peak ratio provide a more sustained antihypertensive effect in the event of a missed
dose.

overview symposium

conclusion
structural differences among the
ace inhibitors alter basic properties
such as potency, ace affinity, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity. trough–
peak ratios determine which agents
can effectively be taken once every
24 hours.
in general, ace inhibitors are well
tolerated. some adverse events are reported more frequently with agents
having a sulfhydryl binding group.
hypotension is clinically the most important safety concern with ace inhibitor therapy. increased potassium
levels are also of concern, especially in
patients with impaired renal function
or those taking potassium-sparing diuretics or potassium supplements.

persistent cough may necessitate discontinuation of therapy.
references
1. brown nj, vaughan de. angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors. circulation. 1998; 97:1411-20.
2. greenwald l, becker rc. expanding
the paradigm of the renin-angiotensin
system and  xxxg36xxx  inhibitors. am heart j. 1994;
128:997-1009.
3. hollenberg nk. european society of cardiology:  xxxg99xxx  antagonists in hypertension and beyond.  xxxg99xxx 
antagonists: why is there so much excitement? am j manag care. 1998; 4(suppl
7):s384-7.
4. ondetti ma. structural relationships of
angiotensin converting-enzyme inhibitors to pharmacologic activity. circulation. 1988; 77(pt 2):174-8.
5. white cm. pharmacologic, pharmacokinetic and therapeutic differences
among ace inhibitors. pharmacotherapy.
1998; 18:588-99.
6. leonetti g, cuspidi c. choosing the right
ace inhibitor: a guide to selection. drugs.
1995; 49:516-35.
7. materson bj, preston ra. angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors in hypertension. a dozen years of experience.
arch intern med. 1994; 154:513-23.
8. reid jl. from kinetics to dynamics: are
there differences between ace inhibitors? eur heart j. 1997; 18:e14-8.
9. skidgel ra, erdos e. biochemistry of  xxxg99xxx -converting enzyme. in: robertson jis, nicholls mg, eds. the reninangiotensin system. new york: gower

medical publishing; 1993:10.1-10.10.
10. verme-gibboney c. oral angiotensinconverting-enzyme inhibitors. am j
health-syst pharm. 1997; 54:2689-703.
11. rangoonwata b, rosenthal j. management of hypertension and its sequelae
with ace inhibitors: biochemical,
pharmacological, and clinical aspects.
int j clin pract. 1998; 52:492-500.
12. erman a, winkler j, chen-gal b et al.
inhibition of angiotensin converting
enzyme by ramipril in serum and tissue
of man. j hypertens. 1991; 9:1057-62.
13. vasmant d, bender n. the renin-angiotensin system and ramipril, a new
converting enzyme inhibitor. j cardiovasc pharmacol. 1989; 14(suppl 4):s4652.
14. bünning p. kinetic properties of the angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor
ramiprilat. j cardiovasc pharmacol.
1987; 10(suppl 7): xxxg1111xxx -5.
15. zannad f, matzinger a, larche j.
trough/peak ratios of once daily angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
and calcium antagonists. am j hypertens. 1996; 9:633-43.
16. the sixth report of the joint national
committee on prevention, detection,
evaluation, and treatment of high
blood pressure. arch intern med. 1997;
157:2413-46.
17. luque ca, vasquez ortiz m. treatment
of ace inhibitor-induced cough. pharmacotherapy. 1999; 19:804-10.
18. mignat c, unger t. ace inhibitors.
drug interactions of clinical significance. drug saf. 1995; 12:334-47.
19. hebel sk, bernham th, eds. drug facts
and comparisons. st. louis: facts and
comparisons, inc.; 2000.

am j health-syst pharm—vol 57 oct 1, 2000 suppl 1

s7

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article-abstract/57/suppl_1/s3/5156955 by guest on 30 january 2019

 xxxd3063xxx , which contains magnesium, binds with tetracyclines, causing a 28–37% decrease in the
absorption of concomitant tetracyclines.19 there have been two case
reports of severe hypersensitivity reactions in patients taking captopril
and allopurinol.19 one of these cases
resembled a serum sickness syndrome and the other, stevensjohnson syndrome.

