j mol cell cardiol 32, 2007–2024 (2000)
doi:10.1006/jmcc.2000.1232, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

modulation of potassium channels in the
hearts of transgenic and mutant mice
with altered polyamine biosynthesis
a. n. lopatin, l. m. shantz, c. a. mackintosh, c. g. nichols and a. e. pegg
1

department of physiology, university of michigan medical school, ann arbor, mi 48109, usa;
department of cell biology and physiology, washington university school of medicine, 660 south
euclid avenue, st. louis, mo 63110, usa; and 2the department of cellular and molecular
physiology, pennsylvania state university college of medicine, hershey, pa 17033, usa

3

(received 4 may 2000, accepted in revised form 16 august 2000)
a. n. l, l. m. s, c. a. m, c. g. n  a. e. p. modulation of potassium channels
in the hearts of transgenic and mutant mice with altered polyamine biosynthesis. journal of molecular and
cellular cardiology (2000) 32, 2007–2024. inward rectification of cardiac ik1 channels was modulated by genetic
manipulation of the naturally occurring polyamines.  xxxg1626xxx  (odc) was overexpressed in mouse
heart under control of the cardiac -myosin heavy chain promoter (mhc). in odc transgenic hearts, putrescine
and cadaverine levels were highly elevated (>35-fold for putrescine), spermidine was increased 3.6-fold, but
 xxxd3234xxx  was essentially unchanged. ik1 density was reduced by >38%, although the voltage-dependence of
rectification was essentially unchanged. interestingly, the fast component of transient outward (ito,f) current was
increased, but the total outward current amplitude was unchanged. ik1 and ito currents were also studied in
myocytes from mutant gyro (gy) mice in which the  xxxg2181xxx  gene is disrupted, leading to a complete
loss of  xxxd3234xxx . ik1 current densities were not altered in gy myocytes, but the steepness of rectification was
reduced indicating a role for  xxxd3234xxx  in controlling rectification. intracellular dialysis of myocytes with putrescine,
spermidine and  xxxd3234xxx  caused reduction, no change and increase of the steepness of rectification, respectively.
taken together with kinetic analysis of ik1 activation these results are consistent with  xxxd3234xxx  being a major
rectifying factor at potentials positive to ek, spermidine dominating at potentials around and negative to ek, and
putrescine playing no significant role in rectification in the mouse heart.
 2000 academic press
k w: k+ currents; rectification; polyamines;  xxxg1626xxx .

introduction
cardiac cells contain inwardly rectifying k channels
(kir channels) that are open at very negative potentials and show a reduced conductance at positive
membrane potentials, a phenomenon termed inward or anomalous rectification.1 the classical
‘‘strong’’ inward rectifier channel (ik1) is present
in atrial and ventricular myocytes. essentially, no
current flows through ik1 channels at potentials
positive to −40 mv,2,3 such that very little current

flows through this channel during the action potential, even though it is the dominant conductance
at the resting potential.3 thus ik1 is essential for
maintaining a stable resting potential but may play
a lesser role in determining action potential shape.
in patch-clamp experiments with cloned strong
inward rectifier kir2.1 and kir2.3 channels, we
demonstrated that rectification involves soluble intrinsic rectifying factors (irfs), and following partial
purification and biochemical characterization, identified irfs as polyamines.4–6 the naturally occurring

please address all correspondence to: dr anatoli lopatin, university of michigan medical school, department of physiology, room
7812, medical science ii 0622, 1150 w medical center drive, ann arbor, mi 48109–0622, usa. fax: 734 936 8813; e-mail:
alopatin@umich.edu

0022–2828/00/112007+18 $35.00/0

 2000 academic press

2008

a. n. lopatin et al.

polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and  xxxd3234xxx )
are small, positively charged molecules synthesized
by decarboxylation of amino acids.  xxxd3234xxx  and
spermidine are, respectively, about 100-fold and
ten-fold more potent blockers of kir channels than
putrescine or mg2+, respectively,3,7 and the voltagedependence of current block by these particles is
also considerably steeper than mg2+ block.5,6,8 intracellular polyamine levels, which can be regulated
through biosynthesis, degradation, uptake, and release, are essential for cell growth and have important roles in stabilizing dna and rna.9–11
nanomolar to micromolar concentrations of free
polyamines would be sufficient to reproduce the
degree of rectification seen in native cells, and
induction of inward rectification may be the most
profound property of cytoplasmic polyamines. total
cellular concentrations (10–10 000 12) are
clearly sufficient to cause very strong rectification,
although free cytoplasmic concentrations are not
measurable with certainty.
given the role of polyamines in causing inward
rectification, it is possible that physiological regulation of inward rectification and hence cardiac
excitability, might occur through alterations in polyamine levels. bianchi et al.13 and shyng et al.14
used pharmacological agents to inhibit ornithine
decarboxylase (odc) and  xxxd3156xxx  decarboxylase ( xxxg152xxx ), the rate-limiting enzymes
involved in the synthesis of polyamines. both groups
demonstrated a consequent relief of inward rectification of cloned kir2.1 and kir2.3 channels
expressed in xenopus oocytes and cell lines. we also
transfected a mutant chinese hamster ovary (ocho) cell line deficient in odc15 with cdna encoding kir2.3, and showed that expressed kir2.3
currents displayed altered inward rectification and
kinetics when putrescine was removed from the
culture medium.14 these experiments provide direct
evidence for polyamine involvement in rectification
in vivo, and demonstrate that rectification can be
modulated in vivo by changes in cellular polyamine
concentrations.
cardiac hypertrophy is associated with both enhanced cellular excitability and elevated polyamine
levels,16,17 and the implications of polyamine-induced rectification for cardiac excitability and potential therapeutic directions may be significant.18
to genetically manipulate cardiac levels of polyamines we have generated transgenic mice overexpressing a truncated and highly active form of
the putrescine synthesizing enzyme (odc) in the
heart, and examined the effects of increased polyamine levels in cardiac myocytes from these mice
using the patch-clamp technique. we have also

studied myocytes from mutant gyro (gy) mice.
male gy mice have a profound  xxxd3234xxx  deficiency
and increased spermidine levels due to disruption
of the x-linked  xxxg2181xxx  gene.19,20 we
have studied two types of k channels, ik1 and ito,
and describe multiple effects of altered polyamine
levels on their properties.

materials and methods
generation of transgenic mice expressing odc
transgenic mice were generated by dna microinjection of fertilized c57bl/6xsjl oocytes using
standard techniques.21 the transgene was an 8 kb
fragment derived from not i digestion of a pbr322based vector containing a murine -myosin heavy
chain (mhc) promoter22 upstream of a murine odc
cdna engineered to contain an introduced stop
codon at position 425. we previously showed that
this truncation creates a stable protein with wildtype odc activity.23 during the fetal stage of development of mouse cardiac muscle, the -mhc
gene is expressed in the atrium, while the -mhc
gene is expressed in the ventricle. after birth, mhc is downregulated and -mhc becomes the
predominant mhc transcript in both atrium and
ventricle, remaining so in the adult.22
genomic dna was isolated from the tails of
potential founder mice (dneasy tissue kit, qiagen,
valencia, ca, usa) and subjected to pcr analysis
to identify mice bearing the transgene. the 5′ sense
primer was an -mhc promoter sequence and the
3′ antisense primer was an oligonucleotide that
corresponded to an odc coding sequence. the amplified product therefore, spanned the junction between the -mhc promoter and the odc sequence
and was only detected in mice bearing the transgene. from several founders identified, the line
with the highest odc expression was chosen
(mhcodc21), and the transgene was maintained
in the hemizygous state by breeding with b6d2
females, resulting in approximately equal numbers
of transgenic pups (termed odc) and normal littermates (termed wt-b6d2). transgenic progeny
were identified using the same pcr procedure and
all experiments were carried out using f1 generation mice.

production of mutant gy mice
the mutant mouse strain, gyro, (gy), has been described extensively as a model for human x-linked

polyamines and inward rectification

hypophosphatemic rickets.24,25 the gy mutation, originally found among the offspring of an irradiated
female, involves partial deletion of the phosphate regulating  xxxg1738xxx  gene. the mutation is x-linked and
dominant with affected males and females showing
hypophosphatemia.19,20 the gy mutation also involves the  xxxg2181xxx  gene, which lies directly upstream from  xxxg1738xxx . loss of  xxxg2181xxx 
activity is a recessive trait and thus, only males are
affected.19,20 gy males have additional symptoms to
the hypophosphatemia such as inner ear abnormalities, hyperactivity and reduced viability. profound  xxxd3234xxx  deficiency has been reported in
various organs of gy males,19,20 including the heart
[mackintosh et al. (2000) in press]. gy mice were bred
on the b6c3h background and b6c3h littermate
males, termed wt-b6c3h, are used as controls in
the experiments. wt-b6c3h males and gy males
were distinguished by pcr using two sets of primers,
amplifying intron 3 of the  xxxg2181xxx  gene20
and exon 3 of the  xxxg1738xxx  gene.25
since gy and odc mice were originally raised
on different genetic background (b6c3h and b6d2,
respectively), in all experiments with transgenic
animals the data were compared to those from
respective wild-type controls. although the total
spermidine level differs between b6c3h and b6d2
controls, it is not clear that this reflects any difference in free concentration and in any case there
are dramatically greater differences in polyamine
levels between transgenic and control animals (see
results).

2009

solutions a, b and c were oxygenated with 100%
o2 for at least 20 min before cell isolation. kint
(m): 140 kcl, 10 kegta, 10 k∗hepes, 5 k2atp,
1 mg2+, ph=7.35 with koh.

preparation of isolated cardiomyocytes
ventricular myocytes were isolated from adult mice
(6 weeks to 5 months old) using standard procedures.27 briefly, hearts were excised from anesthetized ( xxxd2604xxx ; schering-plough animal
health corp., nj, usa; according to manufacturer’s
instructions) animals and perfused retrogradely
through the aorta for 5 min with solution a (above).
hearts were then perfused for 10–12 min with
solution b maintained at >32°c. the enzyme solution was filtered through a 0.8 m filter and
recirculated if necessary. the lower third of the
heart was cut off and the right ventricle outer
wall removed. the left ventricle was sliced into
>2×2 mm pieces and transferred into solution c
at room temperature. the rest of the heart was
flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°c
for biochemical analysis. after a series of gentle
mechanical dispersions by glass pipette trituration,
cell suspensions were transferred, without filtering,
into separate wells of 12- or 24-well culture plates
in modified tyrode solution supplemented with
300  ca2+ and left at room temperature. cells
were used in experiments within 1–5 h.

electrophysiology
determination of cardiac polyamine levels
tissue extracts were prepared in 0.2  perchloric
acid and used for assay of polyamines and analogues
having free amino groups using ion-pair, reversed
phase hplc and post-column derivative formation
with ophthalaldehyde.26

solutions
modified tyrode solution (m): 137  xxxg2020xxx , 5.4 kcl,
0.5 mgcl2, 0.16 nah2po4, 3 nahco3, 5 hepes, 5
glucose, ph 7.35 with naoh. alterations to this
solution were as follows: solution a (m): 4.5
mgcl2, 20 m hepes, 10 m glucose. solution b:
solution a +1 mg/ml collagenase type 2 (worthington) +20  cacl2. solution c: solution a
+130 mg/100 ml taurine (sigma chemical co.)
+500 mg/100 ml bovine  xxxg124xxx  (boehringer mannheim biochemicals) +150  cacl2.

whole-cell voltage-clamp experiments28 were carried out using an axopatch 200b amplifier at
the lowest gain (=0.1) to allow for complete
compensation of capacitive currents. micropipettes
were pulled from thin-walled glass (wpi inc., new
haven, ct, usa) on a horizontal puller (sutter
instrument, co., novato, ca, usa). series resistance
compensation was set above 90% in all experiments.
pipette tip resistance was in the range of 500 k
to 2 m when filled with kint solution (see above).
pipettes having access resistance in whole cell mode
greater than 2 m were discarded. with these precautions the maximal voltage error at >10 na
ionic current did not exceed a few millivolts at
maximum. when necessary, patch-clamp adjustments and measurements were made within
1 min after establishing whole-cell configuration to
minimize cell dialysis. the use of perforated patches
was ruled out as it does not provide input resistance
low enough to control large inward currents and

2010

a. n. lopatin et al.

it is also very time consuming. it also does not
protect from small molecules like polyamines leaking through the perforated membrane. recordings
were only obtained from ca2+-tolerant, rod-shaped
ventricular cells, and all experiments were conducted at room temperature. the bath solution
was modified tyrode solution supplemented with
300  ca2+. recording pipettes contained kint
solution with addition of putrescine and  xxxd3234xxx 
in some experiments. membrane capacitance was
measured after establishing the whole-cell configuration, using ±5 mv voltage steps. pclamp 6.0
software and a digidata 1200 converter were used
to generate voltage pulses and perform data collection. data were normally filtered at 5 khz. offline analysis was performed using clampfit and
microsoft excel programs. linear leak currents (cells
with leak currents more than 5% of ik1 current
were discarded) were corrected off-line.
ionic currents were routinely measured as the
response to 4-s voltage ramps (1 hz) from −120 mv
to +20 mv or to 2-s voltage ramps (1 hz) from
−120 mv to −50 mv. cells were held at −50 mv
and voltage-clamped for 80 ms at −120 mv before
applying voltage ramp to allow for deactivation
(fig. 4a, mu). for estimation of rectification ratio
(rr, below; fig. 2c,e), currents were measured at
the end of 2-s voltage pulses from −80 mv holding
potential to the voltages between −100 and
−50 mv. that ik1 currents at potentials negative
to −50 mv are not contaminated by other currents
is confirmed by the experiment in fig. 5c (insert),
which shows that intracellular application of
200   xxxd3234xxx  abolishes ionic current at
−50 mv, without affecting ik1 currents at
−120 mv. in other cases, the voltage protocol is
indicated in the text.

data analysis
relative currents
ik1 rectification was estimated using steady-state
relative current, i.e. current relative to that expected
for an unblocked current. this unblocked current
was approximated by a linear function i=
k(v−erev), where erev is reversal potential; k is a
slope factor so that i(−120 mv)=ik1 (−120 mv)
at time zero (fig. 4, dashed line). the usage of a
linear approximation is supported by our finding
that unblocked cloned strong inwardly rectifying
irk1 (kir2.1) channels display supralinear i/v relationships.29 ik1 channels deactivate at negative
membrane potentials with v1/2 >−145 mv and

effective valency z >−1 (unpublished data), far
enough from the potentials of half-maximal channel
block by intracellular polyamines which is characterized by v1/2 positive to −100 mv. thus, estimation of voltage dependence of rectification is not
affected in any significant way by ik1 deactivation.
relative currents were fitted with a boltzmann
equation (eqn. 1) in the voltage range from
−50 mv to −115 mv with the amplitude a allowed to float. data points around erev(±4 mv)
were excluded from the fit.
r(vm )=a/[1+exp{−(vm−v1/2 )}

(1)

where =zf/rt, vm is membrane potential and
v1/2 is the membrane potential at which 50% of
channels are blocked. z is effective valency (steepness of rectification) and f, r and t have their usual
meaning. since multiple polyamines contribute to
the rectification in native cells single boltzman
approximation will reflect their weighted contribution, i.e. effective valency should approach that
of specific polyamine if it becomes a dominant one.
thus increased concentration of specific polyamine
is expected to produce boltzman fits with z values
close to that obtained for this specific polyamine in
cloned channels: >2.6, 2.2 and 1.7 for  xxxd3234xxx ,
spermidine and putrescine, respectively, for hrk1
channels.5
as a routine procedure the degree of rectification
was estimated using rectification ratio rr=
100∗[i(-90) −i(-60)]/i(-90), where i(xx) is current
amplitude (absolute value) at xx mv of membrane
potential. thus, rr=0 and rr=100 correspond to
the absence and maximal rectification, respectively.
kinetic analysis of ik1 currents was performed
using chebyshev two exponential approximation
(see below) implemented in clampfit 6.0 software.
currents were routinely fit by two-exponentials—a
fast activating exponential, and a slow deactivating
exponential. activation time constants in the voltage range from −110 mv to −140 mv were fit
using the following equation: =a∗exp(-zfvm/rt),
where a is amplitude and z is the effective valency.

ito analysis
the decay phases of ito, in response to >700 ms
long depolarizing voltage steps from −80 mv to
+80 mv were fitted by the sum of two exponentials
using the following expression: i(t)=af∗exp(-t/
f)+as∗exp(-t/s)+c, where t is time, f and s
are time constants, af and as are corresponding
amplitudes and c is the amplitude of the steady

polyamines and inward rectification

state, non-inactivating component. fitting was carried out using clampfit 6.0 chebyshev algorithm.
the first 9 ms at the beginning of the voltage pulse
were omitted from the fitting procedure. for ito
analysis multiexponential (more than two exponentials) fitting using long voltage pulses (4.5 s,
xu et al.35) was avoided. with such long pulses
contribution of ito,f (>50 ms) and ito,s
(>200–300 ms) to the residual sum of fitting algorithm is only about 1% and >5%, respectively,
which may lead (assuming current noise, voltage
clamp errors and other factors) to the ‘‘loss’’ or
‘‘merging’’ of fast current components. with 700 ms
voltage pulse used in this study contribution of
ik,slow, which inactivates with >1 s, leads to a
systematic (present in all types of myocytes) overestimation (>25–30%) of ito,s amplitude and to,s
(assuming characteristic amplitudes of outward
current components). for this reason, analysis of
ito,s was excluded, and the ik,slow component of outward current was not analyzed in this study.
outward potassium currents at +80 mv are not
contaminated with inward sodium currents because
of fast inactivation of sodium channels (not shown).
inward calcium currents do not contribute to total
ionic current at +80 mv either because this potential is very close to the reversal potential for
ca2+ ions under our experimental conditions. the
concentration of free intracellular ca2+ and reversal
potential for ca2+ can be estimated using ki for
egta/ca2+ complex, i.e. >10−7 and (58/
2)∗log(300/0.1) >+100 mv, respectively. application of 20  ttx (to block sodium channels)
and 0.5 m co2+ (to block calcium channels) does
not affect outward currents (not shown). with
10 m egta in the cell ca2+-activated chloride
currents should be minimal.30,31
microsoft excel was used for further analysis.
data are represented by mean values ±... unless
indicated otherwise. a two-sample t-test assuming
unequal variances was used to compare data sets.

results

2011

creation of cadaverine. cardiac putrescine levels
were highly elevated (35-fold, p<0.001) in transgenic mice overexpressing odc (fig. 1b). the concentration of cadaverine, which was unmeasurably
low in wt-b6d2 hearts, was raised to even higher
values than putrescine in odc transgenic animals,
suggesting that the activity of odc was so high in
transgenic hearts that ornithine was depleted to
the extent that lysine was used as a substrate.
spermidine levels were also increased but to a much
lesser extent (3.5-fold, p<0.001) and  xxxd3234xxx  content was essentially unchanged (p>0.94, fig. 1b).
analysis of heart size did not show any signs of
hypertrophy or stunned development at any age
with normal heart weight to body weight ratio
(unpublished observation).
hearts of gy mice showed a considerable (5.4-fold,
p<0.001) increase in spermidine content compared
to wt-b6c3h male littermates and an undetectable
level of  xxxd3234xxx  (p<0.001), much lower than the
level found in wt-b6c3h controls (fig. 1c). levels
of putrescine were not statistically significantly different in gy myocytes compared to wt-b6c3h littermates (p>0.5). reduced size of gy mice24
[mackintosh et al. (2000) in press] is also reflected in
smaller heart size although qualitative visual inspection of gy hearts did not show any obvious signs
of hypertrophy or stunned appearance. heart size
was not analysed in more detail.
there is a significant difference in the absolute
levels of individual polyamines between two control
mice lines, wt-b6d2 and wt-b6c3h. although
total putrescine levels were essentially the same
(4.7±1.6 and 5±0.5 in wt-b6d2 and wt-b6c3h,
respectively), the total spermidine level was >4.3
times (p<0.01) and total  xxxd3234xxx  was >1.6 times
(p<0.01) higher in wt-b6c3h myocytes compared
to wt-b6d2 myocytes. these strain differences,
although statistically significant, are small compared to the dramatic changes of putrescine in odc
mice and  xxxd3234xxx  in gy mice, and thus were
not investigated in any detail in this study. to
completely eliminate the effects of strain differences
all data below were compared to their respective
controls.

cardiac polyamine levels in transgenic and mutant mice
a simplified scheme of biosynthesis of natural polyamines is shown in fig. 1a. under normal conditions ornithine is first converted to putrescine by
odc followed by conversion to spermidine and
 xxxd3234xxx , reactions catalysed by spermidine and
 xxxd3234xxx  synthases, respectively. when ornithine
is unavailable, polyamine synthesis can be supported by decarboxylation of lysine leading to the

density of ik1 current is reduced in putrescine
overproducing mice but is not changed in  xxxd3234xxx 
deficient gy mice
as a routine procedure, ik1 currents were recorded
in response to 4-s voltage ramps from −120 mv
to +20 mv (fig. 2b). at potentials far negative to
ek, ik1 channels rapidly deactivate and at potentials

2012

a. n. lopatin et al.

figure 1 polyamine levels in the heart are changed in odc transgenic and gy male mice. (a) simplified biochemical
pathway of polyamine biosynthesis. odc= xxxg1626xxx ,  xxxg152xxx = xxxd3156xxx  decarboxylase.
parallel pathway of synthesis of higher polyamines from lysine is not shown. (b) polyamine levels were measured in
hearts taken from eight odc and eight wt-b6d2 littermate control mice used in the electrophysiological experiments.
cadaverine level in wt-b6d2 was below the resolution (n/d=not detectable). (c) polyamine levels in the hearts of
four gy males and seven wt-b6c3h male littermate controls are compared.  xxxd3234xxx  level in gy mice is below
detection limit (arrowhead). cadaverine was not detectable (n/d).

close to and positive to ek ik1 channels are blocked
by intracelluar polyamines and mg2+ ions. thus,
there is a rather small window of membrane potentials where ik1 currents can be measured relatively free of deactivation or block, i.e. around
−100 mv.
in the current study, 78 myocytes from odc
transgenic mice (odc), 129 from wt-b6d2 nontransgenic littermates, 45 from gy males and 19
from wt-b6c3h normal male littermates were analysed. densities of ik1 currents (measured at
−100 mv, fig. 2b) displayed large variability (fig.
2a) with the mean value of 9.1±0.3 pa/pf and
5.6±0.2 pa/pf in wt-b6d2 and odc myocytes,
respectively (fig. 2d). this variability probably reflects regional heterogeneity of ik1 densities similar

to that reported for other k channels.32–36 ik1 density
does not correlate with mouse age (6 weeks to 5
months old; not shown), indicating no age-related
component of variability. the major consequence
of elevated levels of putrescine and cadaverine in
odc mice was a >38% reduction (p<0.001) of
average current density at −100 mv (fig. 2d).
reduction of current density was accompanied by
a 13.0% increase in membrane capacitance from
201.0±5.5 pf in wt-b6d2 to 227.2±7.6 pf in
odc mice respectively (p<0.006), which cannot
account for >38% reduction of ik1 currents. increase in membrane capacitance though was not
accompanied by increase of heart size with heart
weight to body weight ratio appearing normal
(unpublished observation).

polyamines and inward rectification

2013

figure 2 effects of altered pa levels on ik1 currents. (a) distribution of ik1 current densities in wt-b6d2 (n=129)
and odc (n=78) myocytes display considerable variability with mean value of 9.1 pa/pf. (b) ik1 currents were recorded
in response to 4-s voltage ramps from −120 mv to +20 mv from −50 mv holding potential. for statistical analysis
in (d) current amplitudes were measured at −100 mv (chi) (away from current deactivation (alpha) at far negative potentials
and rectification at and positive to ek). (c) rectification properties of ik1 vary considerably among cardiomyocytes. two
extreme steady-state ik1 i/v relationships from myocytes taken from the same wt-b6d2 mouse heart were normalized
at −100 mv and plotted against vm. normalized outward currents at −60 mv (arrow) differ more than two-fold.
currents used in (d) and (e) were measured at the end of 2-s voltage pulses from −80 mv holding potential to the
voltages between −100 and −50 mv. (d) mean value of ik1 current densities measured at −100 mv is reduced by
>38% in odc mice compared to wt. current density is not altered in  xxxd3234xxx  deficient gy (n=45) mice compared
to wt-b6c3h (n=19) littermate controls. (e) rectification ratio (rr, see methods) is not changed in odc mice
compared to wt-b6d2, but is significantly decreased in gy mice compared to wt-b6c3h control (n=16, 12, 12 and
12 for wt-b6d2, odc, wt-b6c3h and gy mice respectively).

in contrast,  xxxd3234xxx  deficiency in gy mice had
virtually no effect (p>0.9) on ik1 density when compared to results with wt-b6c3h normal male littermates (fig. 2d). both gy and wt-b6c3h have
somewhat higher (>11%) ik1 density compared to
wt-b6d2 mice. the average cell capacitance of gy
myocytes was significantly (p<0.01) reduced compared to wt-b6c3h control cells, from 201.4±17.9
pf (n=19) to 139.8±4.5 pf (n=45), respectively.
reduced cell capacitance correlates well with the
reduced size of the gy mice,24 and heart size [mackintosh et al. (2000); submitted], respectively.

degree of rectification is unaltered in odc mice but is
reduced in gy mice
as with ik1 current density, rectification properties
display considerable cell-to-cell variation. figure
2c shows two extreme steady-state current-voltage
relationships normalized at −100 mv taken from
a population of 16 wt-b6d2 myocytes from a

single mouse used for the analysis presented below.
brief examination shows significant variation of
i–v relations and amplitude of outward currents
(arrow) at −60 mv.
for routine quantification of rectification we used
the rectification ratio, rr (see methods). in the
example presented in fig. 2c the rectification ratio
varied from 78% to 89%, suggesting that the composition of the pool of polyamines and mg2+ ions
may vary significantly from cell to cell (see discussion). similar variability of rectification was observed in both odc and gy mice (not shown). the
average rectification ratio, however, was essentially
the same in wt-b6d2 and odc myocytes (fig. 2e;
p=0.55). thus, the reduction of average ik1 current
density in odc mice measured at negative membrane potentials virtually directly translates to reduction of outward current densities.
significant changes in rectification properties of
ik1 were found in gy mice. the average rectification
ratio was decreased in wt-b6c3h control littermates compared to gy mice (fig. 2e, p<0.001).

2014

a. n. lopatin et al.

this decrease of rectification ratio in gy mice directly translates to a significant [>40%=
100∗(rrgy-rrwt-b6c3h)/(100-rrwt-b6c3h)] increase of
outward currents measured at −60 mv, which is
not offset by the >11% higher ik1 density at negative membrane potentials (see above).

ik1 channel kinetics is altered in gy mice
we have shown5,37 that ‘‘activation’’ of strong inward rectifier potassium channels such as ik1, is
the time course of unblock of these channels by
intracellular polyamines and mg2+ ions. at negative
voltages the unblocking rate differs for each ion
(mg2+>put>spd>spm). at positive voltages each
channel will be blocked by one or another of these
ions and thus activation kinetics depends essentially
on the relative concentrations of polyamines and
mg2+ rather than absolute values.37 figure 3a, b
shows representative currents from wt-b6c3h and
gy myocytes in response to voltage steps from
−40 mv holding potential to voltages between
−60 and −140 mv. ik1 activation is faster in
cardiomyocytes from gy mice than normal wtb6c3h littermates (fig. 3a, b). ik1 activation in
wt-b6d2 or odc myocytes is essentially the same
as in wt-b6c3h myocytes (not shown). in both
gy and wt-b6c3h myocytes, current activation is
well fitted using a monoexponential approximation
(with a second exponential introduced to account
for slow current deactivation, see methods). activation taus (fig. 3c) display the characteristic
bell-shaped dependence on the membrane potential
found in native inward rectifiers and exogenously
expressed cloned channels.38 voltage dependence of
activation at extreme negative potentials is significantly (p<0.001) stronger in wt-b6c3h myocytes compared to gy myocytes with effective
valency z=0.74±0.01 (n=7) and 0.34±0.04
(n=7), respectively. as we have already shown37
in cloned strong inward rectifier hrk1 channels,
 xxxd3234xxx  unblock, or hrk1 current activation, is
steeply voltage-dependent and considerably slower
than spermidine unblock. although the present
data cannot be directly compared to that with
recombinant hrk1 channels, due to different ionic
conditions and different molecular identities of ik1
and hrk1 channels, the steep voltage-dependence
and slower monoexponential activation kinetics observed in wt-b6c3h myocytes are consistent with
 xxxd3234xxx  being the major polyamine underlying
rectification at positive potentials. faster monoexponential activation kinetics and shallower voltage-dependence found in gy myocytes are

figure 3 kinetics of ik1 activation is regulated by polyamines. (a), (b) current traces recorded from a wtb6c3h control and  xxxd3234xxx -deficient gy myocytes in
response to voltage steps from −40 mv holding potential
to voltages between −50 and −140 mv (10 mv step)
were fitted using two exponential approximation. (c)
activation time constants were plotted against the membrane potential and data in the range from −140 mv
to −110 mv were fitted as described in methods with z
values as indicated. averaged z values were significantly
(p<0.001) different: 0.74+0.01 (n=7) and 0.34+0.04
(n=7), for wt-b6c3h and gy myocytes, respectively.
gray lines underline the characteristic bell-shaped voltage-dependence of activation time constants over the
wider voltage range.

consistent with the virtual absence of free  xxxd3234xxx ,
and spermidine being the major blocking polyamine
at positive potentials in these cells. in wt-b6d2
and odc myocytes current activation kinetics are
similar to wt-b6c3h (not shown), again consistent
with  xxxd3234xxx  being the major rectifying factor at
potentials positive to ek in the normal heart.
in all cases, including odc myocytes, an in-

polyamines and inward rectification

stantaneous component of activation was not reliably determined, suggesting that putrescine, cadaverine and mg2+ actually contribute very little
to channel block at positive potentials in these
conditions. all kinetic analyses were performed
within 1 min after establishing the whole-cell configuration to minimize diffusion of polyamines (especially low molecular weight putrescine and
cadaverine) and mg2+ ions, although there were
no obvious changes in kinetics with time. while
we cannot exclude the possibility that intracellular
mg2+ might be chelated by diffusion of atp from
the pipette solution (methods), this does not apply
to polyamines, which diffuse rather slowly (see
below). the absence of an instantaneous component of activation is a rather surprising finding
and argues that low molecular weight polyamines
may not contribute significantly to strong inward
rectification at positive potentials in the normal
heart (see discussion).

effects of direct maniulation of polyamine levels in
cardiac myocytes
although diffusion rates for polyamines in the intracellular environment have never been determined
it is an experimental observation that  xxxd3234xxx  is the
most ‘‘sticky’’, slowly diffusing, natural polyamine,5
which may allow semi-quantitative separation of the
effects of different polyamines on the rectification
properties of ik1 channels in cardiac myocytes. we
suggest that if low molecular weight, highly diffusive
putrescine, cadaverine, mg2+, and to some extent
spermidine, are allowed to diffuse out of the cell under
whole-cell voltage clamp conditions, inward rectification should be relieved if these polyamines are
major rectifying factors. we continuously monitored
ik1 currents from the time of establishing whole-cell
configuration by repeated application of 4-s voltage
ramps from −120 mv to +20 mv from −40 mv
holding potential (only voltages negative to −50 mv
are shown in figs 4 and 5). in all types of myocytes,
including odc and gy cells, >15–20 min intracellular dialysis with kint caused significant
(>30–40% on average) increase of inward currents
measured at −100 mv (fig. 4a). this increase was
prevented and currents were even reduced, by inclusion of 10 m putrescine (fig. 4c) or 100 
spermidine (fig. 4e) in the pipette solution (fig. 4c).
although the rectification ratio (rr) is useful for
quick estimation of rectification more detailed information can be obtained by analysis of relative
currents using the boltzmann equation (see
methods), and a single boltzmann function gives a

2015

reasonable approximation of rectification around the
midpoint (v1/2). it is expected that if a specific polyamine contributes most to the rectification in myocytes then additional application of this polyamine
would cause leftward shift of rectification (v1/2) due
to increased block without significant change in the
steepness of rectification (z). alternatively, application of least contributing species would also shift
rectification (v1/2) to more negative membrane potentials but z would be increased or decreased depending on the valency of polyamine. dialysis of
10 m putrescine was accompanied by significant
decrease of voltage dependence of rectification (z=
2.0 before and z=1.6 after internal perfusion, fig.
4d), and leftward shift of v1/2 (from −97 mv to
−119 mv, fig. 4d). dialysis with 100  spermidine
also shifts v1/2 to more negative membrane potentials
(fig. 4f), but virtually no change in the steepness
of rectification is observed: (z=1.9 before and after
dialysis, fig. 4e). similar effects (not shown) were
observed when 10 m putrescine and 100  spd
were ‘‘washed into’’ odc myocytes. this suggests,
first, that the total concentration of all free divalent
cations (mg2+, putrescine and cadaverine) in intact
cells is probably much less than 10 m, even in odc
mice, which have massively increased total putrescine and cadaverine levels. second, putrescine
(as well as cadaverine and possibly mg2+) does not
significantly contribute to rectification at potentials
around, and negative to ek, but rather reduces ik1
currents in a weakly voltage-dependent manner,39
with spermidine being the major rectifying agent at
these potentials. further support for this suggestion
comes from fig. 4b. it shows (1) that in wt-b6d2
myocytes intracellular dialysis with kint for
>20 min causes significant increase in the steepness
of rectification. these data are consistent with slow
washout of spermidine, such that  xxxd3234xxx  replaces
spermidine as the major rectifying factor at potentials
around and negative to ek. at the end of dialysis
the steepness of rectification reaches a value z=3.2,
characteristic of that caused primarily by  xxxd3234xxx 
(fig. 5d). the unexpected result, though, is that
there was no significant shift of v1/2 to more depolarized potentials which would be consistent with
relief of rectification due to decrease of pool of total
free polyamines due to wash-out. bearing in mind
that most polyamines are in the bound state within
the cell, we can only suggest that intracellular dialysis with kint solution causes not only diffusion of
polyamines out of the cell but also their release from
intracellular stores. we speculate that under our experimental conditions and limited duration of intracellular perfusion of >20 min, diffusion of
spermidine overcomes its release from intracellular

2016

a. n. lopatin et al.

figure 4 effects of direct application of putrescine in wt-b6d2 mice. ik1 currents were measured during 15-min
internal dialysis in whole-cell mode either with standard kint solution or with kint solution including 10 m
putrescine or 100  spermidine. currents were recorded in response to voltage step from −50 mv holding potential
to −120 mv for 80 ms followed by 2-sec voltage ramp to −50 mv. currents are in na. (a) dialysis with polyaminesfree solution causes a consistent increase of inward currents but virtually no change in the current at potentials positive
to ek (black arrow, see also insert). dashed lines show linear approximation of unblocked ik1 channels (see methods).
(b) virtually no change in the voltage of half-maximal rectification (v1/2) is observed but the steepness of rectification
(z) is increased considerably for the data in (a). (c) increase of inward currents can be prevented or even reversed by
dialysis with 10 m putrescine. outward currents at potentials positive to ek (black arrow, see also insert) are not
measurably changed. (d) the voltage of half-maximal rectification (v1/2) is shifted to more negative potentials with
significant decrease of the voltage sensitivity of rectification (z) for the data in (c). (e) increase of inward currents can
be prevented by dialysis with 100  spermidine and inward currents at potentials positive to ek (black arrow, see also
insert) are measurably reduced. (f) the voltage of half-maximal rectification (v1/2) is shifted to more negative potentials
with no change of the voltage sensitivity of rectification (z) for the data in (e). relative currents in (b), (d) and (f) (see
methods) were fitted using a boltzmann equation with parameters as indicated. results similar to that in (b), (d) and
(f) were observed in three to five independent experiments. filled triangles point to current deactivation.

stores but diffusion of  xxxd3234xxx  (being much slower)
does not.
by contrast, intracellular dialysis of gy myocytes
with kint solution (fig. 5a) causes significant
(>seven-fold) increase of outward currents positive
to ek (at −65 mv), even though peak inward currents (at −120 mv) increased only by >1.8-fold,
similar to that in wt-b6d2 (fig. 4a) and odc
myocytes (not shown). intracellular dialysis of gy
myocytes with kint solution also caused a significant shift, or relief, of rectification to more positive potentials (v1/2 was changed from >−93 mv
to >−87 mv). the significant increase in outward

current and positive shift of v1/2 indicate reduced
inward rectification and are consistent with the
wash-out of spermidine no longer being replaced
by  xxxd3234xxx  as the rectifying factor (see above). a
decrease in the voltage-dependence of rectification,
with effective valency decreasing from 2.4 at the
beginning of perfusion to 2.1 after 20 min (fig. 5b)
is consistent with spermidine slowly diffusing out
of the cell and allowing mg2+ to contribute to
rectification. when 200   xxxd3234xxx  (fig. 5c, d) is
included in the kint pipette solution, intracellular
dialysis of gy myocytes causes increase of voltage
dependence (from z=2.0 to z=3.4 in this par-

polyamines and inward rectification

2017

figure 5 effects of direct polyamine manipulation in  xxxd3234xxx -deficient gy mice. ik1 currents were measured during
15-min internal dialysis in whole-cell mode either with standard kint solution or with kint solution including 200 
 xxxd3234xxx . currents were recorded in response to voltage step from −50 mv holding potential to −120 mv followed
by 2-s voltage ramp to −50 mv. currents are in na. (a) dialysis with  xxxd3234xxx -free solution causes consistent increase
of inward currents and large increase of outward currents at potentials positive to ek (black arrow, see also insert). (b)
relative currents (see methods) corresponding to that in (a) were fitted using boltzmann equation with parameters as
indicated. the voltage of half-maximal rectification (v1/2) is shifted to more positive potentials and the voltage sensitivity
of rectification (z) is reduced. (c) increase of inward currents is not prevented by application of 200   xxxd3234xxx  for
15 min. however, outward currents at potentials positive to ek (black arrow, see also insert) are blocked by this
treatment. (d) relative currents were fit as described above with parameters indicated in the figure. the voltage of
half-maximal rectification (v1/2) is shifted to more negative potentials and there is considerable increase in the voltage
sensitivity of rectification (z). results similar to that in (b) and (d) were observed in four to ten independent experiments.

2018

a. n. lopatin et al.

ticular example). this is accompanied by a near
abolition of outward currents, but peak inward
currents still increase >1.6-fold, consistent with
 xxxd3234xxx  only blocking at positive voltages due to
high voltage dependence of  xxxd3234xxx  block.37 similar results were obtained when 200   xxxd3234xxx 
was ‘‘washed into’’ wt-b6d2 and odc myocytes
(not shown).
taken together, these data are consistent with
 xxxd3234xxx  being a major rectifying factor in the wildtype myocytes at potentials positive to ek, spermidine dominating at or negative to ek and putrescine
contributing weakly to rectification.

the fast component of ito is upregulated in odc and
 xxxd3234xxx -deficient gy mice
in addition to ik1 we have also investigated the
effects of altered polyamine levels on the voltageactivated k+ current, ito. ito densities display great
variability, probably due to regional32,35,36,40 differences in cell properties. thus, an appropriate
statistical approach must be undertaken to avoid
data misinterpretation when working with a limited
number of cardiomyocytes isolated from the whole
apical part of left ventricle (see methods). in total
74 odc, 93 wt-b6d2, 25 gy and 40 wt-b6c3h
cells were analysed.
the amplitude of the fast (>40–50 ms) component of current activation (see methods) is referred to as ito,f35 (fig. 6a). inactivation times of
this fast component were much shorter than those
reported by xu et al.35 (fig. 6b) and an additional
slow component of ito, inactivating with
>200–300 ms (not shown), was present in all
cells. the distribution of inactivation times of ito,f
displayed significant variability, ranging from about
30 ms to 80 ms (fig. 6c), with a standard error
of only >2% of the average inactivation time,
consistent with the inherent variability of this process.43 the width of the distribution was similar in
gy mice (not shown).
ito,f inactivation rates (f) were not altered in odc
myocytes compared to wt-b6d2 mice (fig. 6b, p=
0.92). however, both gy mice and wt-b6c3h
controls displayed faster inactivation of ito,f with a
small but significant (p<0.001) increase of inactivation times in the  xxxd3234xxx  deficient mice (fig.
6b). in contrast to the reduction of ik1 density found
in odc mice, the ito,f current was significantly
(p<0.01) upregulated (>22%) in odc mice (fig.
6d). similarly, ito,f density was also upregulated
(>15%) in gy mice compared to wt-b6c3h controls but the increase was not statistically significant

(p>0.27) due to the lower number of studied cells.
complex regulation of k+ channels by polyamines is reflected in the finding that in both odc
and gy mice, compared to their respective controls,
other channels carrying outward currents are
downregulated. surprisingly however, the interplay
of ito,f and other outward currents results in virtually
no change (p>0.78) in the total outward current
amplitude (not shown). peak outward current densities were statistically indistinguishable (between
wt-b6d2 and odc and wt-b6c3h controls and
gy mice).
the steady-state inactivation of ito,f (see methods,
fig. 7a) was also affected in odc and gy myocytes.
in both odc and gy myocytes, steady-state inactivation was significantly (p<0.01) shifted to
more negative membrane potentials relative to the
respective controls (fig. 7b, c). the voltage sensitivity (z) of steady-state inactivation was affected
in a different way. there were no statistically significant differences in z between wt-b6d2, odc
and wt-b6c3h mice, but z was significantly
(p<0.06) increased in  xxxd3234xxx  deficient gy myocytes compared to wt-b6c3h controls (fig. 7d).

discussion
genetic manipulation of polyamine levels in the heart
polyamines are synthesized from ornithine and sadenosylmethionine (fig. 1a). the major biosynthetic enzymes (odc and  xxxg152xxx ) have been
cloned, as have the spermidine44 and spermine45
synthases, and other enzymes that regulate production of polyamines. since the cloning of the
constituent genes, considerable effort has been expended in generation of transgenic and gene knockout mice with altered polyamine metabolizing or
synthesizing enzymes.46–48 these mice have invariably demonstrated the ability to up- or downregulate the appropriate enzyme activities over
orders of magnitude. in general such studies have
shown further that total levels of the polyamines
can also be altered, although the free concentrations
and the effects of such changes in total polyamine
levels are unknown. generally, spermidine levels
can be altered much more easily than  xxxd3234xxx ,
the levels of which are rarely affected even when
the activities of the polyamine metabolizing enzymes are greatly altered. since polyamines are
synthesized in a sequential manner, it is expected
that overexpression of odc will primarily cause an
increase in putrescine production with progressively

polyamines and inward rectification

2019

figure 6 effects of altered pa levels on transient outward currents. (a) outward currents in response to a >700 ms
voltage step from −80 mv to +80 mv were fitted using double exponential approximation (dotted line represents
single exponential fit). the amplitude of the fast component, f, is referred to as ito,f. in this representative example
taken from a wt-b6d2 mouse the amplitude of slow component is 69% of ito,f. data were corrected for leak currents
and capacitance artifacts, with series resistance compensated to >90%. (b) inactivation times of fast component (ito,f).
(c) distribution of inactivation times of fast component (ito,f) in wt-b6d2 and odc mice. (d). current density for fast
(ito,f).

lesser effects on spermidine and  xxxd3234xxx  synthesis.
alternatively, disruption of the  xxxg2181xxx 
gene would be expected to eliminate  xxxd3234xxx  while
accumulating spermidine and, to a lesser extent,
putrescine.
the present results confirm this general picture
in transgenic hearts. although odc activity was
upregulated more than 6000-fold in the odc hearts
(unpublished observation) and the level of putrescine was increased >35-fold, only a >3.6-fold
increase in total spermidine and virtually no change
in total  xxxd3234xxx  was observed. in addition, odc
transgenic hearts accumulate large amounts of
cadaverine, which is formed by the decarboxylation
of lysine. lysine is a poor substrate for odc, with
a km approximately 100-fold higher than that of

ornithine.49 this suggests that the odc activity in
transgenic animals is so high that all of the available
ornithine is being converted to putrescine, leaving
lysine as the only substrate for odc. in gy hearts,
 xxxg2181xxx  activity was completely abolished [mackintosh et al. (2000) in press] and
cardiac  xxxd3234xxx  was undetectable by hplc, while
spermidine levels were increased.

polyamine-dependent regulation of inward rectification
it is now reasonably well established that polyamines are the major cause of strong inward rectification.4–6,8,37,50 analysis of the kinetics of

2020

a. n. lopatin et al.

polyamine unblock in cell lines reveals that multiphase ‘‘activation’’ of currents is consistent with
each individual polyamine contributing to rectification.37 two previous studies13,14 demonstrated
that manipulation of polyamine levels pharmacologically or genetically, in cell lines and xenopus oocytes, results in appropriate changes of
inward rectification. in those studies, pharmacological block of odc or  xxxg152xxx  relieved
inward rectification of kir2.1 channels (which are
the major molecular basis of ik1) in an exogenous
expression system. more significantly, putrescine
withdrawal from an odc deficient cell line15 led to
altered kinetics of kir2.3 currents in ways that
were directly predictable from the expected changes
of polyamine levels.14
based on such earlier studies and modeling predictions18 the expectation of transgenic overexpression of odc is that the marked elevation of
putrescine and/or cadaverine levels, if reflected in
altered free concentrations, should have led to a
greater fraction of inward rectification resulting
from putrescine block (rather than spermidine or
 xxxd3234xxx  block) and hence shallower (less voltagedependent) rectification, perhaps accompanied by
a reduced total current density (due to additional
voltage-independent channel block.39 similarly, the
expectation of the mutant gy male mice was that
the reduced  xxxd3234xxx  levels should result in shallower and reduced rectification.

contribution of putrescine, cadaverine and mg2+ to
rectification in the mouse heart

figure 7 steady-state inactivation of ito is altered in
odc-overproducing and in  xxxd3234xxx -deficient gy mice.
(a) steady-state inactivation of ito,f was measured according to the voltage protocol at the top with interpulse
duration of 4 s. ito,f (black arrow) was estimated as described in figure 6. (b) ito,f currents from two representative wt-b6d2 and odc myocytes were
normalized to the current amplitude at −100 mv, and
fit with a boltzmann equation with parameters as indicated. (c) averaged membrane potential of 50% inactivation (v1/2) and effective valency (z) were estimated
as shown in (b). steady-state inactivation was shifted to
more negative membrane potential in both putrescineoverproducing and  xxxd3234xxx -deficient hearts. voltage dependence of inactivation was significantly increased only
in  xxxd3234xxx -deficient hearts.

although myocytes were isolated from only the
‘‘apical’’ part of the left ventricle we found considerable variation of ik1 current density ranging
from about 5 to 15 pa/pf in wt-b6d2 myocytes.
rectification properties also displayed significant
spread (fig. 2c), suggesting that the balance of
intracellular polyamines and mg2+ also varies from
cell to cell, an effect not previously considered.
nevertheless, a rather surprising result of this
study is that the average rectification properties
of ik1 over the voltage range examined (−50 mv
to −120 mv) are essentially unaltered in odcoverexpressing mice (fig. 2e). although the density of ik1 in odc myocytes is reduced significantly
in the negative voltage range, washout of intracellular putrescine (and cadaverine in odc
myocytes) during internal dialysis with polyamine
free solution (fig. 4) causes similar increase in
current density in both odc and wt-b6d2

polyamines and inward rectification

myocytes. this suggests that either these polyamines do not significantly contribute to rectification, or their free concentrations are not
altered in spite of dramatic changes of total levels
in odc myocytes. in all mouse types tested, either
with normal (wt-b6d2, wt-b6c3h) or increased
(odc) levels of putrescine and cadaverine, there
was no significant instantaneous component of
activation. it is striking that in odc myocytes, a
>50-fold increase in putrescine and cadaverine
levels is still not accompanied by any significant
changes in rectification. we are forced to the
conclusion that most of the putrescine and cadaverine in the odc mice is not free and is in
fact sequestered within the cell. the activation
kinetics (fig. 3) also strongly suggest that at
potentials positive to ek neither putrescine, nor
cadaverine, nor probably mg2+, contribute significantly to inward rectification of ik1. the only
reasonable explanation for slow monoexponential
and strongly voltage-dependent activation of ik1
in wt and odc myocytes is that most of the
channels (at −40 mv) are blocked by  xxxd3234xxx .
it remains unclear why the current density is
reduced in odc myocytes. further studies are
necessary to differentiate between possible changes
of ik1 channel properties and/or level of their
expression under conditions of elevated polyamines.

 xxxd3234xxx  and spermidine are the major rectifying
factors in the mouse heart
intracellular dialysis of gy (fig. 5), wt-b6d2
(fig.4) or wt-b6c3h myocytes (not shown) with
kint, shows the same average current increase
at negative potentials, whether or not  xxxd3234xxx 
is included in the pipette. this is consistent with
 xxxd3234xxx  and spermidine causing no block at far
negative potentials (as shown in recombinant
cells,8 due to the steep voltage-dependence of
their block. positive to ek however, washout of
spermidine causes a large increase of outward
currents in  xxxd3234xxx -free gy myocytes (fig. 5a),
but virtually no change in control wt-b6c3h
myocytes (fig. 4). this strongly suggests that in
wild-type myocytes, ik1 channels are blocked
by  xxxd3234xxx  at depolarized potentials, and this
suggestion is further supported by the kinetics of
channel activation in gy and control wt-b6c3h
myocytes. in wt-b6c3h myocytes, activation is
a slow monoexponential process, in gy myocytes
current activation is still monoexponential, but

2021

considerably faster (fig. 3), consistent with activation resulting primarily from unblock of either
 xxxd3234xxx  (wt-b6c3h) or spermidine (gy) in the
two cases.37
at intermediate potentials (around ek) both
 xxxd3234xxx  and spermidine probably contribute to
steady-state rectification. figure 4b shows that intracellular dialysis of wt-b6d2 myocytes with polyamine-free kint leads to increase in voltage
sensitivity (from z=2.3 to 3.2). this is consistent
with washout of spermidine (charge +3) permitting
an increased contribution of  xxxd3234xxx  (charge +4)
to rectification.

effects of polyamine alterations on ito
previous manipulations of kv4.x and kv1.x, the
major gene families encoding the transient outward
currents in mouse heart,51–53 reveal that dominantnegative suppression of one component may lead
to a compensatory upregulation of other components.54 the present study demonstrates similar
phenomena. although total amplitude of outward
current was unaltered in both odc and gy mice,
both putrescine elevation and  xxxd3234xxx  reduction
correlated with a switch from slower to faster (ito,f)
components. we may speculate that such a switch
is related to the maintenance of action potential
characteristics. ito,f may be primarily related to early
repolarization, whereas slower inactivating components may be more involved in late repolarization
and maintaining the refractory period. the primary
role of ik1 is most likely also related to this latter
phenomenon. steady-state inactivation of ito,f in
both odc and gy mice was shifted to more negative
potentials which again may be a compensation for
increase in the amplitude of ito,f.

conclusions and implications
the present study is the first to examine the effects of
transgenic manipulation of intracellular polyamine
levels on cardiac k currents. overexpression of
 xxxg1626xxx  causes significant increase
of putrescine and cadaverine, the effect of which is
primarily a reduction of total ik1 density. disruption
of the  xxxg2181xxx  gene causes almost complete disappearance of  xxxd3234xxx , and this is accompanied by reduced inward rectification.
however, given the enormous changes of total
polyamine levels, the relatively small changes of ik1
current properties are striking, and highlight a

2022

a. n. lopatin et al.

probably critical need to regulate this current appropriately. together with the effects of direct
manipulation of polyamine levels by pipette dialysis,
the results indicate that  xxxd3234xxx  and spermidine
are major controllers of rectification in intact cells.
on the other hand, putrescine and cadaverine play
relatively little role in controlling rectification, although they may cause significant weakly voltagedependent block.
it is now appropriate to ask: what are the consequences of altered k currents on cell excitability?
the transgenic mice are apparently normal, and
do not suffer from any obvious cardiomyopathy, as
has been reported, for instance for  xxxg1243xxx  dominantnegative transgenic mice.52 hence, we expect relatively minor effects on action potential characteristics and heart rates. preliminary experiments
(not shown) indicate that resting potentials and
action potential durations in odc and gy myocytes
are within the same range as control myocytes, but
there is considerable variability in all cell types,
and large sample sizes will be required. we have
previously speculated that dynamic alteration of
polyamine levels via regulation of polyamine synthesis may be an active cellular mechanism for
controlling ion channel activities, and hence cell
excitability.18 both epilepsy and cardiac hypertrophy are each associated with increased polyamine levels and with enhanced excitability16,
17,55–57
and future experiments will examine the
possibility that excitability is altered in intact animals using holter-monitoring techniques, and after
induction of hypertrophy.

acknowledgements
this work was primarily supported by a scientist
development grant from the american heart association (anl), an established investigator grant
from the american heart association (lms) and
also by grants from the nih (gm57892 to anl,
hl54171 to cgn, ca18138 and gm26290 to
aep). we thank dr r. a. meyer, jr of the department of orthopaedic surgery, carolinas medical
center, charlotte for his generous gift of gy mice,
and ms rebecca dunlap for technical assistance.

references
1. k b. les constantes electriques de la membrane
du muscle. arch sci physiol 1949; 2: 285–299.
2. n d. electrical properties of cardiac muscle attributable to inward going (anomalous) rectification.
j cell comp physiol 1965; 66: 127–136.

3. v ca. inward rectification of a potassium
channel in cardiac ventricular cells depends on internal  xxxd2531xxx . proc natl acad sci usa 1987;
84: 2560–2564.
4. f b, b u, b c, g e, k c,
a jp, z hp, r jp. a structural
determinant of differential sensitivity of cloned inward rectifier k+ channels to intracellular  xxxd3234xxx .
febs lett 1994; 356: 199–203.
5. l an, m en, n cg. potassium
channel block by cytoplasmic polyamines as the
mechanism of intrinsic rectification. nature 1994;
372: 366–369.
6. f e, t m, w ba, h cm,
b am.  xxxd3234xxx  and spermidine as gating
molecules for inward rectifier k+ channels. science
1994; 266: 1068–1072.
7. m h, s a, i h. ohmic conductance through the inwardly rectifying k channel
and blocking by internal mg2+. nature 1987; 325:
156–159.
8. f b, b u, g e, w s,
z hp, r jp. strong voltage-dependent inward rectification of inward rectifier k+
channels is caused by intracellular  xxxd3234xxx . cell
1995; 80: 149–154.
9. b u. function of naturally occurring polyamines. new york: academic press, 1973.
10. p ae, mc pp. polyamine metabolism and
function. am j physiol 1982; 243:  xxxd1752xxx –c221.
11. t cw, t h. polyamines. ann rev biochem
1984; 53: 749–790.
12. s n. formation, catabolism and properties of
the natural polyamines. the neuropharmacology of
polyamines. london: academic press, 1994.
13. b l, r ml, t m, l dw,
b am, f e. regulation by  xxxd3234xxx  of
native inward rectifier k+ channels in rbl-1 cells. j
biol chem 1996; 271: 6114–6121.
14. s sl, s q, f t, l an, n
cg. depletion of intracellular polyamines relieves
inward rectification of potassium channels. proc natl
acad sci usa 1996; 93: 12014–12019.
15. s c, s ie. an  xxxg1626xxx -deficient mutant of chinese hamster
ovary cells. j biol chem 1982; 257: 4603–4609.
16. b j, h j, s ta. role of
 xxxg1626xxx  in cardiac growth and
hypertrophy. science 1980; 210: 793–794.
17. c cm, o g, c a, m g.
polyamine and nucleic acid metabolism in myocardial hypertrophy of the overloaded heart. j mol
cell cardiol 1974; 6: 95–103.
18. n cg, m en, p wl, s q,
l an. inward rectification and implications
for cardiac excitability. circ res 1996; 78: 1–7.
19. l b, f f, g k, b a, j
m, s w, s j, l h, m
t, s tm.  xxxd3234xxx  deficiency in gy mice caused
by deletion of the  xxxg2181xxx  gene. human
mol gen 1998; 7: 541–547.
20. m ra, h cm, m mh, m pl,
md ag, m c, p dk. partial deletion
of both the  xxxg2181xxx  gene and the pex
gene in the x-linked hypophosphatemic, gyro (gy)
mouse. genomics 1998; 48: 289–295.

polyamines and inward rectification
21. h b. manipulating the mouse embryo. cold spring
harbor, ny: cold spring harbor laboratory, 1994.
22. s a, j wk, g j, w s,
n j, r j. tissue-specific regulation of
the a-myosin heavy chain gene promoter in transgenic mice. j biol chem 1991; 266: 24613–24620.
23. l l, s b, p ae. identification of residues
in  xxxg1626xxx  essential for enzymatic
activity and for rapid protein turnover. biochem j
1991; 277: 671–675.
24. l mf, s cr, b lr, t hs,
k j, m s. the gy mutation: another
cause of x-linked hypophosphatemia in mouse. proc
natl acad sci usa 1986; 83: 4899–4903.
25. s tm, f f, l b, b a, e
mj, l h, m t. pex gene deletions in
gy and hyp mice provide mouse models for xlinked hypophosphatemia. human mol gen 1997; 6:
165–171.
26. s n, k̈ b. determination of polyamines
and related compounds by reversed-phase high-perfomance liquid chromatography: improved separation systems. j chromatography 1985; 339:
45–57.
27. x h, d je, b dm, t js, m jp,
mk d, n jm. developmental analysis
reveals mismatches in the expression of k+ channel
alpha subunits and  xxxg1244xxx  currents in rat ventricular myocytes. j gen physiol 1996;
108: 405–419.
28. h op, m a, n e, s b, s fj. improved patch-clamp techniques for
high-resolution current recording from cells and cellfree membrane patches. pflüg arch eur j physiol
1981; 391: 85–100.
29. l an, n cg. [k+] dependence of openchannel conductance in cloned inward rectifier
potassium channels (irk1, kir2.1). biophys j 1996;
71: 682–694.
30. z ac, g wr. calcium-activated chloride current in rabbit ventricular myocytes. circ res
1991; 68: 424–437.
31. c ml, l pc, k jl, h jr.
unitary cl− channels activated by cytoplasmic ca2+
in canine ventricular myocytes. circ res 1996; 78:
936–944.
32. v pg, s kr, c e, s rl,
w hj, v ma. repolarizing k+ currents ito1
and iks are larger in right than left canine ventricular
midmyocardium. circulation 99; 1999: 206–210.
33. b sm, s sj, h g. normal regional
distribution of membrane current density in rat
left ventricle is altered in catecholamine-induced
hypertrophy. cardiovasc res 1999; 42: 391–401.
34. f t, k s, f n, b al,
m rj. potassium rectifier currents differ in
myocytes of endocardial and epicardial origin. circ
res 1992; 70: 91–103.
35. x h, g w, n jm. four kinetically distinct
depolarization-activated k+ currents in adult mouse
ventricular myocytes. j gen physiol 1999; 113: 661–
678.
36. g w, x h, l b, n jm. molecular
basis of transient outward k+ current diversity in
mouse ventricular myocytes. j physiol (lond) 1999;
521: 587–599.

2023

37. l an, m en, n cg. the mechanism of inward rectification of potassium channels:
‘‘long-pore plugging’’ by cytoplasmic polyamines. j
gen physiol 1995; 106: 923–955.
38. s pr, d nw, s pa, k ia,
b wj, s nb, c ec. the intrinsic
gating of inward rectifier k+ channels expressed
from the murine irk1 gene depends on voltage, k+
and mg2+. j physiol (lond) 1994; 475: 1–7.
39. n xw, m rw. the effect of polyamines on
katp channels in guinea-pig ventricular myocytes.
j physiol (lond) 1998; 508: 401–411.
40. b mv, c dl, r rl,
m mj, t js, n jm, s
hc. distinct transient outward potassium current
(i-to) phenotypes and distribution of fast-inactivating
 xxxg1232xxx  alpha subunits in ferret left ventricular myocytes. j gen physiol 1999; 113: 581–600.
41. z j, j a, l b, h x, k g. characterization of a slowly inactivating outward current
in adult mouse ventricular myocytes. circ res 1998;
83: 806–814.
42. w l, d hj. developmental changes in transient outward current in mouse ventricle. circ res
1997; 81: 120–127.
43. c ma, h sh, w h, b n,
h t. modulation of  xxxg1232xxx  function
by methionine oxidation and reduction. proc natl
acad sci usa 1997; 94: 9932–9937.
44. w j, a l, k l, h t,
j j, e to. human spermidine synthase:
cloning and primary structure. dna cell biol 1990;
9: 103–110.
45. k vp, h m, k l,
m s, w j, k t, h t,
a l, e t, j j. molecular cloning
of a cdna encoding human  xxxg2181xxx . dna
cell biol 1995; 14: 841–847.
46. h̈ m, s̈ k, j̈ j, a l.
enhanced papilloma formation in response to skin
tumor promotion in transgenic mice overexpressing
the human  xxxg1626xxx  gene. biochem
biophys res comm 1992; 187: 493–497.
47. p s a, g g, m l, g k,
o’b tg. polyamines regulate expression of the
neoplastic phenotype in mouse skin. cancer res
1998; 58: 1654–1659.
48. p m, a l, h m, k p,
j j, p cw. activation of polyamine catabolism profoundly alters tissue polyamine pools and
affects hair growth and female fertility in transgenic
mice overexpressing spermidine/ xxxd3234xxx  n1-acetyltransferase. j biol chem 1997; 272: 18746–
18751.
49. p ae, mg s. decarboxylation of ornithine
and lysine in rat tissues. biochem biophys acta 1979;
568: 416–427.
50. y m, k y.  xxxd3234xxx  gates inwardrectifying muscarinic but not atp-sensitive k+ channels in rabbit atrial myocytes. intracellular substance-mediated mechanism of inward rectification.
j biol chem 1995; 270: 9289–9294.
51. w z, f j, s h, p a, n jm, n
s. potential molecular basis of different physiological
properties of transient outward k+ current in rabbit

2024

a. n. lopatin et al.

and human atrial myocytes. circ res 1999; 84:
551–561.
52. w ad, l p, s r, h q, f
gi, b ph. targeted expression of a dominantnegative k(v)4.2 k(+) channel subunit in the mouse
heart. circ res 1999; 85: 1067–1076.
53. l b, j a, z j, b p, h x,
m gf, k g. long qt and ventricular
arrhythmias in transgenic mice expressing the n
terminus and first transmembrane segment of a
voltage-gated  xxxg1232xxx . proc natl acad sci
usa 1998; 95: 2926–2931.
54. b dm, x h, s rb, n jm.
functional knockout of the transient outward current, long-qt syndrome, and cardiac remodeling in

mice expressing a dominant-negative kv4 alpha
subunit. circ res 1998; 83: 560–567.
55. h y, h y, m a, l yf, h
y. increases in brain polyamine concentrations in
chemical kindling and single convulsion induced by
pentylenetetrazol in rats. neurosci lett 1993; 149:
63–66.
56. l j, t s, g t, l v. polyamine
metabolism in epileptic cortex. epilepsy res 1992;
12: 151–156.
57. m p, c-m c, b l, c
j, j p, s j. effect of one hyperbaric
oxygen-induced convulsion on cortical polyamine
content in two strains of mice. neurosci lett 1993;
160: 1–3.

