ingestive behavior and obesity

a concise review on the therapeutics of obesity
george a. bray, md
from the pennington biomedical research center, louisiana state university,
baton rouge, louisiana, usa
drugs to treat obesity can be divided into three groups: those that reduce food intake; those that alter
metabolism; and those that increase thermogenesis. monoamines acting on noradrenergic receptors,
serotonin receptors, dopamine receptors, and histamine receptors can reduce food intake. a number of
peptides also affect food intake. the noradrenergic drugs phentermine, diethylpropion,  xxxd2546xxx ,  xxxd311xxx , and phendimetrazine are approved only for short-term use. sibutramine, a norepinephrineserotonin reuptake inhibitor, is approved for long-term use.  xxxd2792xxx  inhibits  xxxg1789xxx  and can
block 30% of the triacylglycerol hydrolysis in subjects eating a 30% fat diet. the only thermogenic drug
combination that has been tested is ephedrine and caffeine, but this treatment has not been approved by
regulatory agencies. in clinical trials other drugs that may modulate peptide-feeding systems are being
developed. nutrition 2000;16:953–960. ©elsevier science inc. 2000
key words: sibutramine,  xxxd2792xxx , ephedrine, thermogenic, monoamine, peptides, leptin

introduction
drug treatment for obesity has been tarnished by a number of
unfortunate problems.1 since the first drug was used to treat
obesity in 1893, almost every drug treatment that has been tried in
obese patients has generated undesirable outcomes that have resulted in the drug’s termination. thus, caution must be used in
accepting any new drugs for treatment of obesity, unless the safety
profile would make it acceptable for almost everyone.
an additional serious negative aspect to the use of drug treatment for obesity is the negative reputation spread by the addictive
properties of amphetamine.2 amphetamine stands for alphamethyl-␤-phenethylamine, which is an addictive ␤-phenethylamine that reduces food intake. the addictiveness of amphetamine
is probably related to its effects on dopaminergic neurotransmission. on the other hand, its anorectic effects are probably caused
by its modulation of noradrenergic neurotransmission. because
this ␤-phenethylamine is addictive, other ␤-phenethylamine derivatives were presumed to be addictive. whether actually addictive
or not, they were guilty by association. this has led to restrictions
on the use of this entire class of drugs by the us drug enforcement agency.
drugs such as phentermine, diethylpropion, fenfluramine, sibutramine, and the antidepressant venlafaxine are all ␤-phenethylamines. phentermine and diethylpropion are sympathomimetic
amines, like amphetamine, but differ from amphetamine in having
little or no effect on dopamine release at the synapse. abuse of
either phentermine or diethylpropion is rare. fenfluramine, on the
other hand, has no effect on reuptake or release of either norepinephrine or dopamine in the brain, but increases serotonin release
and partially inhibits serotonin reuptake. sibutramine, likewise,
has no evident abuse potential. thus, derivatives of ␤-phenethylamine have a wide range of pharmacologic effects. however, if
examined uncritically, they could all be lumped with amphetamine
and carry its negative reputation. it is thus misleading to
use “amphetamine-like” in reference to appetite-suppressant
␤-phenethylamine drugs except amphetamine and methamphetamine because of the negative linguistic images.

correspondence to: george a. bray, md, 6400 perkins road, baton
rouge, la 70808, usa. e-mail: brayga@pbrc.edu
date accepted: june 21, 2000.
nutrition 16:953–960, 2000
©elsevier science inc., 2000. printed in the united states. all rights reserved.

a third issue in drug treatment of obesity is the perception that
because patients regain weight when drugs are stopped that the
drugs are ineffective. quite the contrary is true. overweight is a
chronic disease that has many causes. cure, however, is rare, and
treatment is thus aimed at palliation. as clinicians we do not
expect to cure such diseases as hypertension or hypercholesterolemia with medications. rather, we expect to palliate them. when
the medications for any of these diseases are discontinued, we
expect the disease to recur. this means that medications work only
when used. the same arguments apply for medications used to
treat obesity. it is a chronic incurable disease for which drugs work
only when used.
recent reports of valvular heart disease associated with the use
of fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine, and phentermine have provided
the most recent problem for drug treatment of obesity.3 this
problem is an example of the “law of unintended consequences.”
the report of valvulopathy in up to 35% of patients treated with
the combination of fenfluramine and phentermine was totally
unexpected. the finding, however, will add caution to any future
drugs that are marketed to treat obesity and will provide support
for those who believe drug treatment of obesity is inappropriate.

mechanism of drug treatment for obesity
obesity results from an imbalance between energy intake and
energy expenditure. drugs can reduce food intake, alter metabolism, and/or increase energy expenditure. this approach will be
used in discussing the available and potential drug leads for
treatment of obesity.1,4
reduction of food intake
noradrenergic receptors. a number of monoamines
and neuropeptides are known to modulate food intake. both noradrenergic receptors and serotonergic receptors have served as the
site for clinically useful drugs to decrease food intake1,5 (table i).
activation of the ␣1- and ␤2-adrenoceptors decreases food intake.
stimulation of the ␣2-adrenoceptor in experimental animals, on the
other hand, increases food intake. direct agonists and drugs that
release norepinephrine (ne) or block ne reuptake can activate one
or more of these receptors depending on where the ne is released.
phenylpropanolamine is an ␣1-agonist that decreases food intake
0899-9007/00/$20.00
pii s0899-9007(00)00424-x

954

bray

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000
table i.

sympathomimetic drugs approved by the us food and drug
administration (fda) to treat obesity

monoamine mechanisms that reduce food intake
neurotransmitter
system
noradrenergic

serotonergic

dopaminergic
histaminergic

mechanism
of action

examples

␣1 agonist
␤2 agonist
stimulate ne release
block ne reuptake
5-ht1b or 5-ht2c agonists
stimulate 5-ht release
block reuptake
d-1 agonist
h-3 antagonist

phenylpropanolamine
terbutaline
phentermine
 xxxd2546xxx 
quipazine
fenfluramine
fluoxetine⫹fenfluramine
apomorphine
histamine

ne, norepinephrine.

by acting on ␣1-adrenergic receptors in the paraventricular nucleus. the weight gain observed in patients treated for hypertension or prostatic hypertrophy with ␣1-adrenergic antagonists indicates that the ␣1-adrenoceptor is clinically important in regulation
of body weight. stimulation of the ␤2-adrenoceptor by ne or
agonists such as terbutaline, clenbuterol, or salbutamol reduces
food intake. the weight gain in patients treated with some ␤2adrenergic antagonists also indicates that this is a clinically important receptor for regulation of body weight.
serotonergic receptors. the serotonin (5-ht) receptor system consists of seven families of receptors. stimulation of
receptors in the hydroxytryptamine 5-ht1 and 5-ht2 families
have the major effects on feeding. activation of the 5-ht1a
receptor increases food intake but this acute effect is rapidly
down-regulated and is not clinically significant in regulation of
body weight. activation of the 5-ht2c and possibly 5-ht1b
receptor decreases food intake. direct agonists (quipazine) or
drugs that block serotonin reuptake (fluoxetine, sertraline, fenfluramine) will reduce food intake by acting on these receptors or by
providing the serotonin that modulates these receptors.
altered metabolism
excess fat is the visible sign of obesity. metabolic strategies have
been directed to preabsorptive and postabsorptive mechanisms of
modifying fat absorption or metabolism. preabsorptive mechanisms that influence digestion and absorption of macronutrients
have been utilized to develop  xxxd2792xxx  ( xxxd2792xxx ; roche pharmaceuticals, nutley, nj, usa), which inhibits intestinal digestion of fat
and lowers body weight. the second strategy is to affect intermediary metabolism. enhancing lipolysis, inhibiting lipogenesis, and
affecting fat distribution between subcutaneous and visceral sites
are strategies that can be developed.
increased energy expenditure
increased energy expenditure through exercise would be an ideal
approach to treating obesity. drugs that have the same physiologic
consequences as exercise could provide useful pharmaceutical
ways of treating obesity.

drugs that reduce food intake
table ii summarizes the effects of a number of drugs used to treat
obesity.1,4,5 they are discussed in more detail here.

pharmacology. the sympathomimetic drugs are grouped
together because they can increase blood pressure and, in part, act
like ne. drugs in this group work by a variety of mechanisms
including the release of ne from synaptic granules ( xxxd311xxx , phendimetrazine, phentermine, and diethylpropion), blockade of ne reuptake ( xxxd2546xxx ), blockade of reuptake of both ne
and 5-ht (sibutramine), or direct action on adrenoceptors
(phenylpropanolamine).
all of these drugs are absorbed orally and reach peak blood
concentrations within a short time. the half-life in blood is short
for all except the metabolites of sibutramine, which have a long
half-life. both metabolites of sibutramine are active, but this is not
true of the other drugs in this group. liver metabolism inactivates
a large fraction of these drugs before excretion. side effects
include dry mouth, constipation, and insomnia. food intake is
suppressed either by delaying the onset of a meal or by producing
early satiety. sibutramine and  xxxd2546xxx  have both been shown to
increase thermogenesis experimentally.
efficacy. the efficacy of an appetite-suppressing drug can be
established by showing that in double-blind, randomized clinical
trials it produces a significantly greater weight loss than a placebo
drug1,5 and that the weight loss is more than 5% below baseline
weight. clinical trials of sympathomimetic drugs conducted before
1975 were generally short term because it was widely believed that
short-term treatment would “cure obesity.”5 this was unfounded
optimism, but because the trials were of short duration, and often
cross-over in design, they provided little long-term data. in this
discussion i will focus on longer-term trials lasting more than 24
wk and on those trials in which there was an adequate control
group.
a. phentermine and diethylpropion. a 36-wk trial comparing
continuous administration of phentermine with intermittent phentermine and placebo is shown in figure 1.6 both continuous and
intermittent phentermine therapy produced more weight loss than
did the placebo. in the drug-free periods the intermittently treated
patients slowed their weight loss only to lose more rapidly when
the drug was reinstituted. phentermine and diethylpropion are
designated by the drug enforcement agency as schedule iv drugs,
indicating a regulatory classification as having the potential for
abuse, although this potential appears to be very low. phentermine
and diethylpropion are approved for use for only a “few weeks,”
which is widely interpreted as up to 12 wk. weight loss with
phentermine and diethylpropion persists for the duration of treatment, suggesting that tolerance does not develop to these drugs. if
tolerance does develop, the drugs would be expected to lose their
effectiveness or require increased amounts of drug for patients to
maintain weight loss, neither of which seems to occur.
b.  xxxd2546xxx . no long-term, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trials have been reported with  xxxd2546xxx . in a year-long open-label
trial, the weight loss was 9%, which is comparable to weight loss
with other sympathomimetic drugs.
c. sibutramine. in contrast to all of the other sympathomimetic drugs in table ii, sibutramine has been evaluated extensively in several multicenter trials lasting 6 –12 mo. in a clinical
trial lasting 8 wk, sibutramine was found to produce dosedependent weight loss with doses of 5 and 20 mg/d. three clinical
trials are described in the package insert. they were conducted in
men and women aged 18 – 65 y with a body mass index (bmi)
between 27 and 40 kg/m2. in a 1-y trial with 456 patients enrolled,
56% of those who stayed in the trial for 12 mo lost at least 5%, and

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000

therapeutics of obesity

955

table ii.
drugs that reduce food intake

drug group
sympathomimetic drugs
norepinephrine releasers
methamphetamine
amphetamine
 xxxd311xxx 

phendimetrazine

fda
approval

approved
duration of
treatment

yes
few weeks
(warning box)
yes
few weeks
(warning box)
yes
few weeks

yes

few weeks

dea
schedule

5, 10, 15

10 or 15 mg in morning

ii

dexedrine

5, 10, 15

5 mg two or three times daily

iii

 xxxd311xxx 

iii

standard release
bontril pdm
plegine
x-trozine
slow release
bontril pdm
prelu-2
x-trozine
tenuate
tenuate
dospan
standard
 xxxd2913xxx 
 xxxd2913xxx 
obenix
oby-cap
 xxxd2913xxx 
zantryl
slow-release ionamin

few weeks

iv

phentermine

yes

few weeks

iv

serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor
sibutramine

yes

otc

long term

administration

 xxxd163xxx   xxxd2589xxx 

yes

yes

dosage
form (mg)

ii

diethylpropion

noradrenergic agonist
phenylpropanolamine

trade names

iv

dexatrim
accutrim

meridia

25–50

35

105

25
75
37.5
30
37.5
30
30
30

initial dose: 25 mg once daily
maximum dose: 25–50 mg three
times daily
35 mg before meals three times
daily

105 mg 30–60 min before morning
meal

25 mg three times daily
75 mg once daily
37.5 mg/in am
30 mg/d 2 h after
37.5 mg/d 9 am
30 mg/d 2 h after
30 mg/d 2 h after
30 mg/d 2 h after

breakfast
breakfast
breakfast
breakfast

15, 30

15 mg/d before breakfast
30 mg (for less responsive patients)

25, 75

25 mg three times daily

5, 10, 15

initial dose, 10 mg/d
maximum dose 15 mg/d

dea, drug enforcement agency; fda, food and drug administration.

30% of the patients lost 10% of their initial body weight while
taking the 10-mg dose. in a dose-ranging study of 1047 patients
lasting 6 mo, 67% achieved a 5% weight loss and 35% lost 10%
or more. data from the multicenter trial are shown in figure 2.7
there is a clear dose response during treatment for 24 wk and
regain of weight when the drug was stopped, indicating that the
drug remained effective. nearly two-thirds of the patients treated
with sibutramine lost more than 5% of their body weight from
baseline and nearly one-third lost more than 10%. in a third trial in
patients who initially lost weight eating a very-low-calorie diet
before being randomized to sibutramine or placebo, sibutramine
produced additional weight loss, whereas the placebo-treated patients regained weight.8 lipids and  xxxd3472xxx  were reduced across
all trials in relation to the weight loss.
the medication is available in 5-, 10-, and 15-mg doses; 10
mg/d as a single daily dose is the recommended starting level with
titration up or down based on response. doses above 20 mg/d are
not recommended. of the patients who lost 2 kg (4 lb) in the first
4 weeks of treatment, 60% achieved a weight loss of more than
5%, compared with less than 10% of those who did not lose 2 kg

(4 lb) in 4 weeks.7 combining data from the total of 11 studies on
sibutramine showed a weight-related reduction in triacylglycerol,
total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and a
weight loss related rise in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
safety. the side effect profile for sympathomimetic drugs is
similar. they produce insomnia, dry mouth, asthenia, and constipation. the safety of older sympathomimetic appetite-suppressant
drugs has been the subject of considerable controversy because
dextroamphetamine is addictive. the sympathomimetic drugs
phentermine, diethylpropion, and  xxxd2546xxx  have very little abuse
potential as assessed by the low rate of reinforcement when the
drugs are available intravenously to test animals.1 in this same
paradigm, neither phenylpropanolamine nor fenfluramine showed
any reinforcing effects and no clinical data show any abuse potential for either of these drugs. sibutramine, likewise, has no
abuse potential in this paradigm, but it is nonetheless a schedule iv
drug.
sympathomimetic drugs can affect blood pressure. phenylpro-

956

bray

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000

fig. 1. comparison of weight loss with continuous and intermittent therapy with phentermine.6

panolamine is an ␣1-agonist and at doses of 75 mg or more can
increase blood pressure. phenylpropanolamine has been associated
with stroke and it should not be used in doses above 75 mg/d.
phenylpropanolamine has also been reported in association with
cardiomyopathy.
in the placebo-controlled studies, systolic and diastolic blood
pressure increased by 1–3 mmhg and pulse increased by approximately 4 –5 beats per minute.7 caution should be used when
combining sibutramine with other drugs that may increase blood
pressure. sibutramine should not be used in patients with a history
of coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, or stroke. there should be a 2-wk interval between
termination of monoamine oxidase inhibitors and beginning sibutramine and it should not be used with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. because sibutramine is metabolized by the cytochrome p450 enzyme system
(isozyme cyp3a4) it may interfere with metabolism of erythromycin and ketoconazole.

sympathomimetic drugs not approved by the fda to treat
obesity
there are several other sympathomimetic agents that either carry
warning labels (amphetamine and methamphetamine) or have
never been approved (fenproporex, chlobenzorex) by the fda for
treatment of obesity.

serotonergic drugs
serotonergic drugs that act on specific serotonin receptors (5-ht1b
or 5-ht2c) reduce food intake and specifically fat intake. several
drugs that influence serotonin release (fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine) or serotonin reuptake (fluoxetine and sertraline) have
been used in obese partients. the clinical trial data have been
reviewed in detail elsewhere.1 at present, no drug that acts on the
serotonin receptor system either directly or indirectly is approved
for the treatment of obesity.

fig. 2. dose-related weight loss with sibutramine. the regain in weight when the drug was discontinued indicates that it remained effective during
treatment.7

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000

therapeutics of obesity

957

fig. 3. effect of combination treatment with fenfluramine and phentermine. during the 6-wk run-in period both groups were treated with diet, exercise, and
behavior modification. patients were randomized using minimization techniques to assure a close match at the start of the double-blind period. during the
double-blind period the placebo-treated patients lost almost no additional weight, whereas the drug-treated patients plateaued at a significantly lower weight.9

combining serotonergic and noradrenergic drugs
efficacy. drugs that act on either the noradrenergic or the
serotonergic feeding system can reduce body weight. the possibility that combining drugs that act on the serotonergic system
with drugs that act on the noradrenergic system might produce
more weight loss and/or have fewer side effects if submaximal
doses of one drug from each group were combined was the
rationale for a 4-y controlled trial of fenfluramine and phentermine.9 the first year of this clinical trial is shown in figure 3.
during the baseline run-in, patients received an effective program
of behavior therapy, diet, and exercise and they lost weight. when
the patients were randomized with the drug-treated group, they lost
15.9% from baseline compared with the placebo-treated group that
lost only 4.9% from baseline during the first 34 wk. when the
placebo-treated patients began active drug in the open label 2- and
6-mo periods, they lost weight (fig. 3). some patients received
long-term benefit by maintaining their weight at lower levels for
up to 3.5 y, during which time drug-treatment was continued.
safety. following this initial report, the use of the combination of phentermine and fenfluramine spread rapidly. more than 18
million prescriptions were written in 1996 for this combination of
drugs and an estimated 3– 4 million people were treated with them.
in july of 1997, 24 patients with an atypical valvular heart disease
were reported to the medical profession.10 in the 3 patients in
whom histopathology of the heart valves was available, the valvular changes were identical to the changes seen in carcinoid
syndrome. since early reports indicated that valvulopathy might be
present in more than 30% of treated patients, fenfluramine and
dexfenfluramine were withdrawn from the market on september
15, 1997. a series of 233 patients, including 91 with echocardiograms conducted before treatment, have been followed in our
institution.3 figure 4 shows that 8% had preexisting lesions and
16.5% developed new lesions. with continued follow-up, some of
the lesions have improved and a few have disappeared.
the current recommendations are that all symptomatic patients
treated with fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine, alone or in combination with phentermine, have an echocardiogram. because careful clinical examination fails to detect a murmur in more than half

of the patients with documented regurgitant lesions, it would be
prudent to carry out an echocardiogram on any patient who might
need prophylactic antibiotics as recommended by the american
heart association.
peptides that reduce food intake and are in early stages of
drug development
leptin. leptin is a peptide produced exclusively in adipose
tissue. absence of leptin produces massive obesity in mice (ob/ob)
and in humans and treatment with this peptide decreases food
intake in the ob/ob mouse and the leptin-deficient human.11 the
diabetes mouse (db/db) and the fatty rat, which have genetic
defects in the  xxxg1320xxx , are also obese but they do not
respond to leptin. leptin levels in the blood are highly correlated
with body fat levels yet obesity persists, suggesting that there may
be leptin resistance. a preliminary dose–response clinical trial
with leptin has been reported.12 in lean subjects treated for 4 wk
and in obese subjects treated for 24 wk there was a modest loss of
weight with doses ranging from 0.01 to 0.3 mg/kg. the side effects

fig. 4. pennington echo series.

958

bray

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000

fig. 5. effect of  xxxd2792xxx  on weight loss during year 1 and weight maintenance during year 2.14

of local irritation at the site of injection limit the use of this
preparation.
neuropeptide-y. neuropeptide-y (npy) is one of the most
potent stimulators of food intake and appears to act through npy
y-5 and possibly y-1 receptors. antagonists to these receptors
might block npy and thus decrease feeding. both y-1 and y-5
receptors may mediate the effects of npy. several pharmaceutical
companies are attempting to identify antagonists to npy.
cholecystokinin. cholecystokinin (cck) reduces food
intake in human beings and in experimental animals. this effect
does not require an intact hypothalamic feeding control system but
does appear to require an intact vagus nerve. peptide analogs have
been developed and tested experimentally but clinical data have
not yet been published. a second strategy to modify cck activity
is to reduce the degradation of cck. this approach is likewise
under evaluation.
pancreatic hormones.
a. glucagon. pancreatic glucagon produces a dose-related
decrease in food intake. a fragment of glucagon (amino acids
6 –29) called glucagonlike peptide-1 (glp-1) reduced food intake
when given either peripherally or into the brain.13 exendin, an
analog of glp-1, has been used in humans because infusion of
glp-1 in humans reduces food intake.
b. insulin. circulating insulin levels are directly correlated
with body fat and the level of insulin in the cerebrospinal fluid has
been proposed as a feedback signal to reduce food intake. infusion
of insulin into the brain’s ventricular system lowers body weight.
a drug that reduces insulin secretion has been found to reduce
body weight.

drugs that alter metabolism
drugs approved by the fda
 xxxd2792xxx  is the only drug approved by the fda to treat obesity that
directly alters metabolism.

pharmacology.  xxxd2792xxx  is a potent selective inhibitor of
 xxxg1789xxx  and reduces intestinal digestion of fat. the drug
has a dose-dependent effect on fecal fat loss, increasing fecal fat
loss to about 30% on a diet that has 30% of energy as fat.  xxxd2792xxx 
has little effect in subjects eating a low-fat diet as might be
anticipated from the mechanism by which this drug works.1
efficacy. a number of long-term clinical trials with  xxxd2792xxx 
lasting 1–2 y have been published. the results of one 2-y trial are
shown in figure 5.14 the trial consisted of two parts. in the first
year patients received a hypocaloric diet calculated to be 500
kcal/d below the patient’s requirements. during the second year
the diet was calculated to maintain weight. by the end of year 1 the
placebo-treated patients lost 6.5% of their initial body weight and
the drug-treated patients lost nearly 10%. the patients were rerandomized at the end of year 1. patients receiving placebo in year 1
and  xxxd2792xxx  in year 2 lost weight. those switched from  xxxd2792xxx  to
placebo gained weight. drug-treated patients regained less weight
in year 2 than those receiving placebo. an analysis of quality of
life in patients treated with  xxxd2792xxx  showed improvements over the
placebo group despite the concerns about gastrointestinal symptoms. in addition,  xxxd2792xxx -treated patients showed a significant
decrease in serum cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol.
safety.  xxxd2792xxx  is not absorbed to any significant degree and
its side effects are thus related to the blockade of triacylglycerol
digestion in the intestine. fecal fat loss and related gastrointestinal
symptoms are common initially, but subside as patients learn to
use the drug. some patients also need supplementation with fatsoluble vitamins that can be lost in the stools. because it is
impossible to tell a priori which patients need vitamins, we routinely provide a multivitamin with instructions to take it before
bedtime. absorption of other drugs does not seem to be significantly affected by  xxxd2792xxx .
drugs approved by the fda for an indication other than
obesity
androgens and androgen antagonists are approved by the fda for
an indication other than obesity but have been tested as treatments
for obesity.

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000

therapeutics of obesity

959

fig. 6. effect of ephedrine (e) and caffeine (c) on weight loss and weight maintenance for 1 y.15

dehydroepiandrosterone. dehydroepiandrosterone is
a weak androgen that induces weight loss in several animal species. clinical trials in humans have shown no effect.1
etiocholandione. etiocholandione is a derivative of dehydroepiandrosterone, which produced weight loss in one preliminary clinical trial. no additional trials have been published.1
testosterone. in men, testosterone and the anabolic steroid,  xxxd2806xxx , have been reported to reduce visceral fat. a trial
of an antiandrogen and nandrolone in women did not show any
effects on visceral fat.1

drugs that increase energy expenditure

raises concerns and it cannot be recommended until controlled
clinical trials have been published.

␤3-adrenergic receptor agonists in early stages of drug
development
the sympathetic nervous system has a tonic role in maintaining
energy expenditure and blood pressure. blockade of the thermogenic part of this system will reduce the thermic response to a
meal. ne, the neurotransmitter of the sympathetic nervous system,
may also decrease food intake by acting on ␤2- or ␤3-adrenergic
receptors. several synthetic ␤3-agonists have been developed
against rodent ␤3-receptors, but the clinical responses have been
disappointing. after cloning of the human ␤3-receptor, a new
round of compounds are being synthesized that will be tried in
obese human subjects.

drugs approved by the fda for an indication other than
obesity
the only thermogenic drug combination that has been widely
tested is ephedrine and caffeine. ephedrine and caffeine each have
fda approval, but not for the treatment of obesity.
pharmacology. ephedrine is a derivative of phenylpropanolamine and is used to relax bronchial smooth muscle in patients
with asthma. it also stimulates thermogenesis in human subjects.
caffeine is a xanthine that inhibits adenosine receptors and phosphodiesterase. in experimental animals the combination of ephedrine and caffeine reduces body weight, probably through a stimulation of thermogenesis and a reduction in food intake.
efficacy. one long-term, placebo-controlled clinical trial
treated 180 patients with ephedrine, caffeine, or the combination of
ephedrine and caffeine. patients treated with the combination lost
more weight than did patients treated with ephedrine alone15 (fig.
6). no other long-term data are available.
safety. although caffeine and ephedrine have a long record of
clinical use separately, neither drug alone nor the combination is
approved for treatment of obesity. recent reports of problems
associated with the use of ma huang, a natural source of ephedrine,

patient selection for drug treatment
those patients who have a bmi above 30 are potential candidates
for drug therapy. the presence of comorbidities such as dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance,
symptomatic osteoarthritis, or sleep apnea lowers the acceptable
bmi to ⬎27. the currently available sympathomimetic drugs can
reduce body weight but only sibutramine is approved for long-term
use. this drug should not be used in patients with stroke, congestive failure, or myocardial infarction. the approval of  xxxd2792xxx  has
expanded the therapeutic armamentarium of the physician.
weight loss of 10% to 15% can decrease health risks. however,
failure to lose weight or failure to improve comorbid conditions
indicates either non-compliance with the drug or that the patient is
not responding to the drug. either setting requires reevaluation of
therapy and addition of other medications or other modalities of
treatment. as a guideline, patients being treated with drugs should
lose more than 2 kg (4 lb) in the first month and achieve more than
a 5% weight loss by 6 mo. as long as weight loss is more than 5%
and/or the patient’s comorbidities have responded, the drug may be
continued. the data with phentermine suggest that intermittent use
of some drugs may be beneficial.
at least two groups of patients merit consideration for longterm drug therapy. the first are patients who are considered for

960

bray

surgical treatment of their obesity. individuals with a bmi above
35 should first be treated with antiobesity drugs. if they respond
with more than a 15% weight loss, drugs should be continued as
long as they respond and their comorbidities improve. the second
group of patients who deserve vigorous treatment are individuals
with sleep apnea. a modest weight loss is often sufficient to
alleviate their sleep apnea.

references
1. bray ga, greenway fl. current and potential drugs for treatment of obesity
(review). endocr rev 1999;20:805
2. bray ga. use and abuse of appetite suppressant drugs in the treatment of obesity.
ann intern med 1993;119:707
3. ryan dh, bray ga, helmcke f, et al. serial echocardiographic and clinical
evaluation of valvular regurgitation before, during, and after treatment with
fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine and  xxxd2546xxx  or phentermine. obes res 1999;
7:313
4. bray ga. evaluation of drugs for treating obesity (review). obes res 1995;
3(suppl 4):425s
5. national on the task force prevention, and treatment of obesity. long-term
pharmacotherapy in the management of obesity. jama 1996;276:9107

nutrition volume 16, number 10, 2000
6. munro jf, maccuish ac, wilson em, et al. comparison of continuous and
intermittent anorectic therapy in obesity. br med j 1968;1:352
7. bray ga, blackburn gl, ferguson jm, et al. sibutramine produces dose-related
weight loss. obes res 1999;7:189
8. apfelbaum m, vague p, ziegler o, et al. long-term maintenance of weight loss
after a very-low-calorie diet: a randomized blinded trial of the efficacy and
tolerability of sibutramine. am j med 1999;106:179
9. weintraub m. long term weight control: the national heart, lung, and blood
institute funded multimodal intervention study. clin pharmacol ther 1992;51:
581
10. connolly hm, crary jl, mcgoon md, et al. valvular heart disease associated
with fenfluramine-phentermine. n engl j med 1997;337:581
11. farooqi is, jebb sa, langmack g, et al. effects of recombinant leptin therapy in
a child with congenital leptin deficiency. n engl j med 1999;341:879
12. heymsfield sb, greenberg as, fujioka k, et al. recombinant leptin for weight
loss in obese and lean adults: a randomized, controlled, dose-escalation trial.
jama 1999;282:1568
13. flint a, raben a, astrup a, holst jj.  xxxg873xxx  promotes satiety
and suppresses energy intake in humans. j clin invest 1998;101:515
14. sjostrom l, rissanen a, andersen t, et al. randomised placebo-controlled trial
of  xxxd2792xxx  for weight loss and prevention of weight regain in obese patients.
european multicentre  xxxd2792xxx  study group. lancet 1998;352:167
15. astrup a, breum l, toubro s, et al. the effect and satiety of an ephedrine/
caffeine compound compared to ephedrine, caffeine and placebo in obese subjects on an energy restricted diet. a double blind trial. int j obes relat metab
disord 1992;16:269

