critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences, 37(5):431–502 (2000)

biochemistry of cyclooxygenase
(cox)-2 inhibitors and molecular
pathology of cox-2 in neoplasia
egil fosslien*
department of pathology, college of medicine, university of illinois at chicago,
chicago, illinois
key words: cyclooxygenase, cox-1, cox-2, nsaids, prostaglandin, carcinogenesis
referee: peter c. isakson, g. d. searle/monsanto, usa
*

corresponding author: egil fosslien, md, professor of pathology, department of pathology (m/c847), college of medicine,
university of illinois at chicago, chicago, il 606 12. phone: (312)-996-7323 - fax: (312)-996-7586 - e-mail: efosslie@uic.edu

abstract: several types of human tumors overexpress cyclooxygenase (cox) -2 but not cox-1, and
gene knockout transfection experiments demonstrate a central role of cox-2 in experimental tumorigenesis. cox-2 produces prostaglandins that inhibit apoptosis and stimulate angiogenesis and invasiveness.
selective cox-2 inhibitors reduce prostaglandin synthesis, restore apoptosis, and inhibit cancer cell
proliferation. in animal studies they limit carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis. in contrast, aspirin-like
nonselective nsaids such as  xxxd3259xxx  and indomethacin inhibit not only the enzymatic action of the
highly inducible, proinflammatory cox-2 but the constitutively expressed, cytoprotective cox-1 as well.
consequently, nonselective nsaids can cause platelet dysfunction, gastrointestinal ulceration, and
kidney damage. for that reason, selective inhibition of cox-2 to treat neoplastic proliferation is preferable
to nonselective inhibition. selective cox-2 inhibitors, such as  xxxd2561xxx , celecoxib ( xxxd457xxx ), and
rofecoxib ( xxxd3139xxx ), are nsaids that have been modified chemically to preferentially inhibit cox-2
but not cox-1. for instance,  xxxd2561xxx  inhibits the growth of cultured colon cancer cells (hca-7 and
moser-s) that express cox-2 but has no effect on hct-116 tumor cells that do not express cox-2. ns398 induces apoptosis in cox-2 expressing lncap prostate cancer cells and, surprisingly, in colon cancer
s/ks cells that does not express cox-2. this effect may due to induction of apoptosis through uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation and down-regulation of bcl-2, as has been demonstrated for some nonselective nsaids, for instance,  xxxd2141xxx . cox-2 mrna and cox-2 protein is constitutively expressed in
the kidney, brain, spinal cord, and ductus deferens, and in the uterus during implantation. in addition,
cox-2 is constitutively and dominantly expressed in the pancreatic islet cells. these findings might
somewhat limit the use of presently available selective cox-2 inhibitors in cancer prevention but will
probably not deter their successful application for the treatment of human cancers.

i. introduction
there is substantial epidemiological, experimental, and clinical evidence that
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) possess antineoplastic properties.1
1040-8363/00/$.50
© 2000 by crc press llc

431

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

these simple compounds inhibit cyclooxygenase (cox),2,3 the rate-limiting enzyme that synthesizes short-lived intermediaries that are converted by synthases to
the cyclic prostanoids4 prostacyclins, thromboxanes, and prostaglandins. prostaglandins are 20-carbon lipid molecules also known as eicosanoids. there are two
isoforms of cyclooxygenase, cox-1 and cox-2. the first isoform synthesizes
prostaglandins that are involved in, for instance, gastrointestinal cytoprotection.5
the second isoform is induced at sites of inflammation. moreover, it is involved
in other functions such as the immune response and immune tolerance mechanisms
during blastocyst implantation. cox-2 is also expressed in neoplasia.6 in the
tumors prostaglandins synthesized by cox-2 signal via receptors to stimulate
cancer cell proliferation, inhibit apoptosis, and enhance cancer-induced angiogenesis7 and invasiveness.8 for instance,  xxxd1903xxx  (pge2) has at least four
different subtypes of receptors with different mechanisms of action and metabolic
consequences.9
however, most nsaids inhibit both cox-1 and cox-2. for that reason such
nsaids are classified as nonselective nsaids (nsnsaids). hence, a principal
objective in the development of newer nsaids is to achieve better gastric tolerability and in reducing the incidence of renal and platelet dysfunction. nonselective nsaids differ in their selectivity of inhibition of the cox isoforms, but most
of them significantly inhibit cox-1. however, chemical modifications of the
molecular structure of nonselective nsaids have produced a number of compounds that selectively inhibit cox-2.10
this article compares the structure, function, and antineoplastic effects of
selective cox-2 inhibitors with nonselective nsaids. it focuses on the molecular
pathology of cox-2 expression in neoplasia, and on how selective cox-2 inhibitors restore apoptosis, inhibit tumor angiogenesis, and reduce cancer growth.

ii.  xxxd208xxx  metabolism
a. biosynthesis of prostanoids
eicosanoids are synthesized from membrane phospholipids that are converted
to  xxxd208xxx  by cytosolic phospholipase-2 (cpla2) and by soluble pla2
( xxxg1760xxx ) (figure 1).  xxxd208xxx  is a substrate for three enzymatic pathways.
it is a substrate for lipoxygenases that synthesize leukotrienes. second, it is a
substrate for the two isoforms, cox-1 and cox-2 of cyclooxygenase, the ratelimiting enzyme in the prostanoid synthesis pathway. third, it can be converted
through the  xxxd208xxx  monooxygenase pathway that produces cytochrome p450derived eicosanoids that are involved in, for instance, the control of vascular
reactivity and systemic blood pressure.11
in the prostanoid pathway, the  xxxd208xxx  is converted to prostaglandin
h synthase (pghs) by the enzyme prostaglandin endoperoxidase, better known as

432

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

figure 1. eicosanoid metabolism: membrane phospholipids are converted to arachidonic
acid by soluble phospholipase (spla) -2 () and cytosolic pla2 (cpla2) (). the  xxxd208xxx  is converted to leukotrienes by lipoxygenases () and by the cyclooxygenase
isoforms (cox) -1 () and cox-2 () to prostaglandin h (pgh). pgh is converted by
specific synthases to the prostanoids prostacyclin (), thromboxane (), and prostaglandin
(). prostaglandins are 20-carbon, lipid molecules. cox-1 and cox-2 have separate
physiological functions. however, there is some overlap in pathological conditions, for
example, during genetically induced overexpression. cox-2 provides among others the
important prostaglandin pge-2 that signals through four different surface receptors ep1,
 xxxg1873xxx , ep3, and  xxxg1875xxx . their functions are listed in table 1. in contrast to the mainly
constitutively expressed cox-1, the highly inducible cox-2 contains a much larger regulatory region. examples of inducers of cox-2 are interleukin-1alpha (il-1alpha), epidermal growth
factor (egf), transforming growth factor beta (tgf-beta),  xxxg2296xxx -alpha (tnf-alpha),
and  xxxd2738xxx  produced by  xxxg1578xxx  (inos). in cancer cells the
oncogenes ras and scr can induce cox-2. in skin cancer ultraviolet light b (uvb) induces
cox-2. benzo[a]pyrene (b[a]p) in tobacco smoke and high-fat corn oil (hfco) induces
cox-2. high-fat fish oil (hffo) has the opposite effect. cox-1 is inducible by estrogen and
inos, cox-2 by androgen. inhibitors of cox-2 induction are tumor suppressor protein p53,
estrogen, and antioxidants such as trolox ( n -acetylcysteine, 6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid), pdtc, and u75006. cytosolic phospholipase-2
(cpla2) maps to the same chromosome region as cox-2, suggesting that it is co-regulated
with cox-2. (for more detail see text.)

433

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

cyclooxygenase. it is an essential, rate-limiting enzyme in the production of
 xxxd1903xxx  and other prostanoids.4 interestingly, cyclooxygenase is irreversibly self-deactivating during the oxygenation of its substrate,12 and therefore must
be replaced to sustain prostanoid production.13
the conversion of  xxxd208xxx  to prostaglandin h (pgh2) by cox-2 is
a two-step cyclo-oxygenation and peroxidation process.14,15 during the first step
 xxxd208xxx  is converted to prostaglandin g2, which is then converted by a
peroxidase site of the enzyme to prostaglandin h2. the pgh2 intermediary is
converted by specific synthases to three groups of cyclic prostanoids: prostacyclins,
thromboxanes, and prostaglandins. the two enzyme isoforms, cox-1 and cox2, are coded by the cox-1 gene and the cox-2 gene, respectively. the prostanoids
synthesized via the cox-1 and cox-2 pathways have mostly separate but sometimes similar functions.16 cox-2 is induced in ulcers, wounds, granulomas, osteoclasts, proliferative phase endometrium, ovulation and parturition, and in colon
carcinomas.17

iii. cyclooxygenase
a. the genes
the human cox-1 and cox-2 genes, also known as  xxxg1883xxx  and  xxxg1884xxx ,
respectively, exhibit 61% homology.18 cox-1 is located on chromosome regions
9q32–q33.3 and cox-2 maps to 1q25.2–q25.3.19 the product of the cox-1 gene,
originally referred to as prostaglandin (pg) h synthase-1 (ec 1.14.99.1), is now
better known as  xxxg1883xxx  (cox-1). the cox-1 gene was cloned in 1988
from the sheep vesicular gland.20-22 then 3 years later, a rous-sarcoma virus
oncogene (scr) product-inducible form of cyclooxygenase was found in the chicken
embryo fibroblast.23,24 the corresponding 4.1 kilobase (kb) mrna encoded a 603
amino acid protein. the mrna was low in abundance in nonproliferating chicken
embryo fibroblasts but relatively high in abundance in src-transformed cells. in the
nonproliferating fibroblasts the majority of the scr-inducible mrna was nonfunctional. it contained an unspliced intron that separated the signal peptide from the
remainder of the protein. however, after stimulation of the fibroblasts with mitogen the intron was removed and fully spliced mrna was formed, which translated
into a functional protein.
shortly thereafter another research group retrieved a highly cell type-restricted
mrna, inducible by  xxxd2925xxx  (12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol-13 acetate), encoding a 604 amino acid long protein coded by a gene then referred to as tis10.25
the protein showed sequence similarity with murine, sheep, and human cox-1.
this was followed by the discovery of a 4-kb cox-2 mrna with sequence
similarity to the 2.8-kb cox-1 cdna.26 in c127 mouse fibroblasts this larger,
cox-2 mrna was transcriptionally upregulated by serum and down-regulated by

434

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

glucocorticoids. the new mrna encoded a protein that was specifically immunoprecipitated by anticyclooxygenase antibody.
in contrast to the cox-1 gene, the cox-2 gene harbors an extensive region
that regulates the translation to its mrna. different induction of the various
enhancers and promoters and inhibitors of this region explains how cox-2 can be
expressed via different signaling pathways in different kinds of cells. for instance,
cox-2 can be induced by physical and chemical factors during inflammation and
cell injury. tumor promoters, proinflammatory cytokines, lipopolysaccharide (lps),
and growth factors can regulate the expression of cox-2 at the transcriptional and
posttranscriptional level.27
up-regulation of the cox-2 expression by proinflammatory cytokines
leads to increased synthesis of prostaglandins in inflammation. the epidermal
growth factor (egf) and the transforming growth factor-beta (tgf-beta) induce
cox-2. the rous-sarcoma virus, inos, benzo[a]pyrene (b[a]p), and androgen stimulate expression of the cox-2 gene. most importantly, egf, tgf-beta,
and their receptors as well as inos emerge as significant cox-2-inducers in
carcinogenesis.
the promoter region of cox-2, the gene coding for cox-2, contains binding sites for nuclear factor-kappab ( xxxg1559xxx ),  xxxd1773xxx  response element
(cre) motifs, tgf-beta-response elements, and nuclear factor-il-6 motifs.28 in the
jwf2 mouse skin carcinoma cell line, an e-box and a nuclear factor il-6 site of
the cox-2 promoter region are positive regulators of the cox-2 expression.29
in the nr8383 rat alveolar macrophage two  xxxg1559xxx  sites in the 5'-flanking region
of the rat cox-2 gene have been identified.30 the sequence and location of one
of the motifs, –400 ggggattcc –395 is conserved in humans, rats, and mice.
however, a second motif, –91 ggggaaagcc –82, is not conserved in humans.
the 5'-flanking region of cox-2 also contains a tata box, a ccaat/
enhancer-binding protein (c/ebp). furthermore, there are transcription regulatory
sequences for the activator binding protein-2 (ap-2), and the ubiquitous dna
binding transcription factor sp1.31,32
the nuclear transcription factor kappa b ( xxxg1559xxx ) is a pleotropic factor.33 it
was first detected in cells that transcribe immunoglobulin light chain genes. it
interacts with a specific site in the light-chain enhancer.34 in addition to immune
system genes,  xxxg1559xxx  regulates the expression of many cellular genes involved
in the response to stress, apoptosis, and viral replication.35 it consists of dimers
formed from five subunits that after activation transfers from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus where it  xxxd3249xxx .35 ikappab (ikappab) is an inhibitor protein that
binds  xxxg1559xxx  p65 precursors.36 degradations of ikappab releases  xxxg1559xxx  which is
transferred to the nucleus and binds to the  xxxg1559xxx  binding sites. typically,
induction of  xxxg1559xxx  occurs during cell cycle transition from g0 to g1. however,
cell cycle-independent activation of the transcription factor after stimulation by
 xxxg2296xxx  alpha (tnf-alpha) was observed in serum-deprived 3t3 fibro-

435

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

blasts as well as in the ft210 temperature-sensitive g2-phase-mutant carcinoma
cell line.33
bacterial lps-induces  xxxg1559xxx  in pre-b-cells.34 involvement of  xxxg1559xxx  in the
regulation of cox-2 expression was first demonstrated in the lps-stimulated
macrophage.37 supplementation with lps of the cultured macrophages increased
cox-2 levels and the synthesis of both 6-keto-pgf1alpha and pge2. two specific
inhibitors of  xxxg1559xxx  activation, ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (apdc)
and n-alpha-p-tosyl-l-lysine chloromethylketone (tlck), were then separately
added to the culture media and resulted in a dose-dependent suppression of the
enzyme production and of prostaglandin synthesis.
the promoter region of the cox-2 gene also harbors human adenovirus e4
promoter binding protein (e4bp4) type elements, inducible by dexamethasone,
which explains a possible mechanism of action for the glucocorticoid repression of
the gene.38 as an example, dexamethasone inhibits induction of cox-2 by interleukin1 alpha (il-1alpha) or induced by  xxxg2296xxx .39 importantly, e4bp4 motifs are also present
in the genes for  xxxg1578xxx  (inos), and cpla2,39 suggesting that
the expression of these genes may be coordinated with cox-2 expression.
while cox-2 is highly inducible by proinflammatory cytokines such as il-1,40,41
cox-1 is not. for example, mesenchym-derived inflammatory cells display elevated levels of cox-2 transcripts.18 in cell models il-1beta42 induce cox-2 expression by way of nuclear factor-kappa b ( xxxg1559xxx ) p65 and matching binding sites in
the cox-2 promoter region.
in cultured human vascular endothelial cells, hypoxia induces cox-2 mrna
expression.43,36 in these cells expression of the  xxxg1559xxx  p65 transcription factor is
necessary but not sufficient for induction of cox-2. cytoplasmic  xxxg1559xxx  p65 and
ikb are not changed by hypoxia. however, hypoxia increases expression of the
high mobility group (hmg) i(y) proteins that are associated with  xxxg1559xxx -mediated transactivation. hmg i(y) proteins interact with  xxxg1559xxx  p65 to induce the
cox-2 promoter activity. this was demonstrated in a series of experiments in
which sense and antisense hmg i(y) were used to stimulate or reduce the activity
of the cox-2 promoter.36
in the nr8383 rat alveolar macrophage cell line silica induces cox-2 transcription via kappab sites in the 5'-flanking region of the rat cox-2 gene.30 interestingly, a negative feedback-loop involving pge2, a product of cox-2 enzymatic
activity, was detected in these cells. pge2 inhibited the degradation of ikappab,
thereby reducing the effect of silica on cox-2 expression.
cultured mucosa cells from human fallopian tubes express receptors for  xxxd2228xxx  (hcg) and luteinizing hormone (lh). either hormone
more than doubles the time of stability of cox-2 mrna transcripts in such cells,
but neither hormone has any effect on the transcription rate of the cox-2 gene.44
the  xxxd2559xxx  melatonin inhibits in a dose-dependent manner prostaglandin
and no synthesis and reverses intracerebroventricular-injected lps-induced hyperthermia in rats.45

436

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

b. cox proteins
the 599 amino acid long cyclooxygenase (cox)-1 was initially purified
from the bovine vesicular gland.46 the cox-2 protein with 604 amino acids is
very similar to the cox-1 protein. the two proteins show structural and
enzymatic similarities, both having a molecular weight of approximately 70
kda. their x-ray crystal structures are almost identical.47,48 the two isoforms
each consists of subunits comprising a catalytic domain that is connected by a
membrane-binding domain to an  xxxg681xxx  domain. each catalytic domain harbors a cyclooxygenase active site, and separated from it by a
heme prosthetic group, a peroxidase active site.15 an area termed the lobby
permits access to the cyclooxygenase active site. this lobby is bordered on
three sides by a membrane-binding domain. for example, at the base of the
active site of cox-2 is a constriction having an h-bonding network comprising amino acids arg-120, tyr-355, and glu-542. at the base of the site lies a
catalytically important tyr-385 residue.15 cyclooxygenase is associated with
the inner leaflet of lipid membranes, so hydrophobic lipid substrates derived
from the membrane gain access to the active site of cyclooxygenase without
leaving the membrane.14
small differences between the active sites of the two isoforms explain the
dissimilar effects of various inhibitors of the enzymes, for instance, the dissimilar
effects of aspirin.49 the peroxidase active site on the opposite side of the prosthetic
heme group is accessible through a wide opening in the molecule.15
while the cyclooxygenase isoforms show very similar structures, they nevertheless normally serve distinct functions.50 the constitutively expressed cox-1 is
found in many human tissues, for example, the stomach, platelets, kidneys, and the
central nervous system.51 the type 2 cyclooxygenase isoform is highly inducible.
it is involved in inflammation, the regulation of cell growth,19,50 angiogenesis,7
apoptosis,52,53 and blastocyst implantation.54

c. role of cox-2 in inflammation

1. cytokines and growth factors
the  xxxd208xxx  metabolism is of fundamental importance in inflammation. primary inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-alpha, il-1alpha, and  xxxg1170xxx  induce the
cox-2 gene to produce cox-2 enzyme, which synthesizes proinflammatory
prostaglandin.55 cox-2 is highly inducible by the pro-inflammatory cytokines and
by growth factors at the site of inflammation where the enzyme synthesizes
proinflammatory prostaglandins involved in inflammation, fever, and pain. bacterial lipopolysaccharide (lps) and proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin1 (il-1) induce cox-2 mrna at sites of inflammation, which is translated into the

437

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

enzyme. the gene for cpla2 and the gene for cox-2 are both located on region
1q25, suggesting coordinated expression (figure 2).
 xxxd2374xxx  has been detected along with cox-2 in the base of
healing gastric ulcers in the rat.56 the  xxxg1170xxx  and cox-2 were present at the
ulcer base but not in the adjacent intact tissue. the cox-2 expression in
cultured cell from the ulcer base was reduced by blockade of  xxxg1170xxx , indicating
that it induces cox-2 in the healing ulcer. in pulmonary type ii a549 cells
 xxxg1170xxx  first activates  xxxg1559xxx  and shortly thereafter produces a 10-fold induction
of cox-2 mrna.57 exposure of the cell to  xxxg1170xxx  caused  xxxg1559xxx  p50/p65
heterodimers to interact with two promoter motifs of cox-2 located at –447/
–438 and —224/-214 of the cox-2 gene, respectively. likewise,  xxxg1170xxx  added
to cultures of synoviocytes from rheumatoid arthritis patients rapidly stimulates the translocation of the p65 and p50  xxxg1559xxx  subunits from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus where they induce cox-2 expression.42
supplementation of the a549 bronchial epithelial cell line with the proteintyrosine phosphatase inhibitor phenylarsine oxide (pao) abolished the il-1betainduced activation of  xxxg1559xxx  and the induction of cox-2 mrna. studies on  xxxg1170xxx  induction of such cells and also in vivo in lps-treated rats revealed the
formation of multiple cox-2 mrna isoforms, suggesting a role for posttranscriptional regulation, including alternate polyadenylation, in the regulation of
cox-2.58 supplementation of human endometrial stromal cells with 1ng/ml of  xxxg1170xxx  induced cox-2 mrna after 30 min and reached a maximum after 4 h.41 the
conversion of exogenous  xxxd208xxx  increased more than eightfold. the
addition of the selective cox-2 inhibitor ns-398 completely blocked the conversion.
another proinflammatory cytokine, the tnf-alpha, participates with cox-2 in
the healing of gastric ulcers in the rat model.56 the tnf-alpha and the cox-2
enzyme were present at the ulcer base but not in the adjacent intact tissue. the
cox-2 level in cell culture of the ulcer base was reduced by blockade of
tnf-alpha, suggesting that tnf-alpha induces cox-2 as part of the healing of the
ulcer. tnf-alpha induces a dose-dependent increase in cox-2 expression in
amnion-epithelium-derived wish cells supplemented with 0.1 ng/ml to 100
ng/ml of the cytokine.59 tnf-alpha supplementation did not influence cox-1
mrna expression and protein levels. in experimental alcoholic liver disease,
cox-2 mrna levels in the liver, mainly in the kupfer cells was associated
with increased levels of tnf-alpha mrna, lipid peroxidation, endotoxin, and
thromboxane levels.60
transforming growth factor  xxxg836xxx  ( xxxg2269xxx ) participates with cox-2 in the
healing of gastric ulcers in rats.56 the  xxxg2269xxx  and the enzyme were detected in the
ulcer base but not in the adjacent intact tissue. cox-2 mrna expression and
pge2 synthesis in culture of cells from the ulcer base was enhanced by blockade
of  xxxg2269xxx , suggeting that it inhibits expression of cox-2.

438

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

figure 2. normally, cox-1 provides cytoprotective gastrointestinal prostaglandins and
cox-2 synthesizes proinflammatory prostaglandins involved in inflammation, fever, and
pain. the gene for cpla2 and the cox-2 gene (phgs2) are both located on chromosome
1 region 1q25, suggesting coordinated expression during inflammation. for example, both
genes are induced by the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta ( xxxg1170xxx ). bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (lps) and proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (il-1) induce
phgs2 mrna, which is translated into cox-2 at sites of inflammation and in neoplasms
such as colorectal adenoma and carcinoma. in neoplasia,  xxxd1903xxx (pge2) increases the level of the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2, which reduces tumor cell apoptosis by
closing mitochondrial pores. pge2 can induce il-6 and haptoglobin, important regulators of
angiogenesis. e2 (pge2) can also temporarily induce the expression of  xxxg1884xxx . the
effects of nonselective, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) are indicated by
shaded arrows. nonselective nsaids inhibit cox-2,1 which reduces inflammation, pain,
and fever. however, such nsaids also inhibit cox-12 and reduce the production of
cytoprotective prostaglandins in the gastrointestinal tract resulting in hemorrhage and
ulceration and sometimes perforation and death. selective inhibition of cox-23 reduces the
synthesis of proinflammatory prostaglandins, reduces fever, inflammation, and pain, but
spares the cytoprotective function of cox-1. inhibition by nsaids of either one of the
cyclooxygenase isoform leads to the accumulation of  xxxd208xxx . this increase in the
substrate enhances the rate of enzymatic conversion in the noninhibited pathways.

1. prostaglandins
cox-2 synthesizes many significant prostaglandins, for example, the important  xxxd1903xxx  (figure 1). pge-2 signals through the four different surface
receptors ep1,  xxxg1873xxx , ep3, and  xxxg1875xxx . the various functions of these receptors have

439

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

been established by targeted gene disruption (table 1). pge2 induces il-6 and
haptoglobin, which are both important regulators of angiogenesis.
pge2 exerts various effects on the immune system. for example, pge2 can
modulate cytokine secretion by human t cells. it does so by elevating camp, the
intracellular second messenger that transmits inhibitory signals for t cell activation61 or by camp-independent signaling pathways.62 an investigation into the
temporal expression during the differentiation of human monocytes into macrophages revealed that the genes with the highest expression during differentiation were
the genes involved in the lipid metabolism.63 for example, the granulocyte-macrophage  xxxg526xxx  (gm-csf) induced prostaglandin d synthase in
the macrophages.
antigen-presenting cells are important in t-cell activation. for example, in the
non-obese diabetic mouse defects in antigen-presenting cells results in low levels
of t-cell activation. there was poor il-2 production and deficient activation of
regulatory t-cells. recent experiments with human antigen-presenting cells detected aberrant expression of cox-2 in such cells from patients with insulindependent diabetes mellitus  xxxg1193xxx . in contrast, normally prostaglandin synthesis
is highly regulated and nonactivated macrophages and monocytes produce very
low levels of prostaglandins. however, when activated in vitro, for example, by
lps, such macrophages and monocytes produce large quantities of prostaglandins.64-66 the constitutive expression of cox-2 even in nonactivated antigenpresenting cells of patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus ( xxxg1193xxx ) suggests an association of the disease with the presence of an antigen-presenting cell
defect.67 the aberrant constitutive expression of cox-2 observed in patients with
 xxxg170xxx  (apc) was also observed in patients with islet autoantibodies and at increased risk of developing  xxxg1193xxx . based on these findings, it has
been suggested that cox-2 expression in nonactivated monocytes may serve as a
risk marker for  xxxg1193xxx .67
there is significant evidence that pge2 mediates the pain at the sites of
inflammation. as an example, it plays a major role in the rat footpad model of acute
inflammation and hyperalgesia. in this model carrageenan is injected into the rat
footpad and causes rapid formation of edema accompanied by hyperalgesia. the
latter is measured by withdrawal from a thermal stimulus. administration of a
monoclonal anti-pge2 antibody fully reverses the hyperalgesia response.68

c. role of  xxxg1884xxx  in neoplasia
cox-2 mrna but not cox-1 mrna is overexpressed and cox-2 but not
cox-1 protein levels are elevated in several types of human neoplastic tissues. the
significant overexpression of cox-2 mrna and increased cox-2 protein levels
in several types of cancer tissues strongly sustains the notion that this cyclooxygenase
isoform plays a significant role in the process of carcinogenesis. however, the

440

441

note: top: effect of gene knockout of three major enzymes of eicosanoid metabolism: cox-1, cox-2,
cpla2. lower part: effect of gene knockout of genes coding for the prostaglandin receptors ep1- xxxg1875xxx  (315).
the table illustrates some of the different functions of  xxxd1903xxx  (pge2). the ep1 and  xxxg1873xxx  receptors
are involved in vascular relaxation. pge2 induces fever via the  xxxg1874xxx . the lack of the  xxxg1875xxx 
causes lack of closure of the ductus arteriosus.

table 1
targeted gene disruption

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

levels of cox-2 vary within tumor tissues and in different types of tumors. the
cox-2 mrna expression and cox-2 protein levels have been investigated most
extensively in benign and malignant tumors of the colon and rectum.69

1. colorectal neoplasms: adenomatous polyposis and cancer
dubois and smalley70 have emphasized the need for more effective screening
and treatment regimens for colorectal carcinoma, the second leading cause of death
from cancer in this country. it is responsible for approximately 57,000 deaths per
year in the u.s. alone.71 many factors, for instance, diet, lack of physical activity,
family history, mutations, and polymorphisms contribute to the risk of colorectal
cancer.72 remarkably, nsaids can induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of colon
cancer cell lines, and a number of nsaids have been shown to be anticarcinogenic
in chemical carcinogenesis and xenograft experiments.
many findings clearly show that major anticarcinogenic effects occur through
inhibition of cox-2. the detection of elevated cox-2 expression in neoplasia of
the colon therefore is most interesting.73 significantly, cox-2 but not cox-1
mrna and protein are elevated in human colorectal neoplasms.74,75 for instance,
cox-2 is upregulated by 2- to 50-fold in 85 to 90% of colorectal adenocarcinoma.76 larger colon carcinomas produce significantly more cox-2 than smaller
tumors. furthermore, deep tumor invasion but not metastases are associated with
high expression levels of cox-2.77
clinically, adenomas are precursors of colorectal cancer and genetically their
development to colorectal carcinoma is probably a multistep process.78,79 the
cox-2 mrna level is elevated in premalignant adenomatous polyps and colon
cancer, but not in hyperplastic colorectal polyps.80 in a series of 50 patients with
colorectal cancers, the cox-2 mrna levels in the tumor tissues were higher that
in the normal mucosa from 46 of the patients.80 the level of cox-2 protein is
elevated in colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis (fap) and colorectal
carcinomas. patients with fap carry germ-line mutations in the apc gene leading
to overexpression of cox-2. if not treated, fap patients develop hundreds to
thousands of pre-cancerous adenomatous colorectal polyps.
strong experimental evidence for a central role of cox-2 in carcinogenesis is
provided by gene knockout of cox-2 in the apc delta 716 knockout mouse model
of fap. a case in point, disrupting the cox-2 gene that codes for the cox-2
protein isoform in such mice results in drastic reduction in the polyp number.81 a
similar effect was achieved by the administration of a cox-2-selective inhibitorto
apc delta 716 knockout mice with intact cox-2 also significantly reduced the
development of intestinal polyposis.
immunohistochemical staining of cox-2 in 85 adenomas and 53 colorectal
carcinomas and 34 hyperplastic lesions next to adenomas or carcinomas showed
that increased expression of cox-2 occurs early during colorectal carcinogen-

442

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

esis.82 when compared to paired normal mucosa cox-2 was found in approximately 60, 90, and 83% of hyperplastic lesion, adenomas, and carcinomas, respectively. when the proliferation-associated antigen ki-67 was stained with an antibody and in situ end labeling was utilized to observe apoptotic bodies as a measure
of apoptosis, there was no correlation between cox-2 immunostaining and proliferative index or apoptotic index. compared with paired histologically normal
colonic mucosa, the cox-2 mrna level was significantly increased in the adenomas and carcinomas; however, there was no apparent difference between the
adenomas and the carcinomas. no correlation was found between cox-2 levels in
the tumors and the degree of tumor dysplasia, size, differentiation, duke stage, or
lymph node infiltration.
on the other hand, a study of 76 patients with colorectal carcinomas found that
greater cox-2 expression correlated with larger tumor size and more advanced
duke stage.83 moreover, cox-2 expression was particularly evident in tumors
with lymph node extension. cox-2 was detected using a rabbit polyclonal antibody raised against human  xxxg1884xxx . staining for the enzyme was positive in tumor epithelial cells, inflammatory cells, vascular endothelium, and fibroblasts. cox-2 staining in the tumors was markedly heterogeneous. grossly and
histologically normal tissue adjacent to tumors stained weakly positive. however,
control samples consisting of biopsies from 14 normal colons were negative for
cox-2. very recent findings indicate that there is a significant difference in the
cox-2 levels in tumors removed from different part of the colorectum.84 in the
study, cox-2 was elevated in 18 of 20 cases of carcinomas of the rectum. in
contrast, cox-2 was elevated in only 3 out of 19 colonic carcinomas. it is also
noteworthy that in this study there was no correlation between duke’s stages and
the level of cox-2 in the tumors.

a. alternate views
two other reports question a relationship between cox-2 overexpression, cell
proliferation, and degree of malignancy in colorectal cancers. the first report
consisted of an investigation of the immunostaining intensity and distribution of
cox-2 protein, ki-67 as an indicator of cell proliferation, and the tumor-suppressor protein p53 as a marker of malignancy in colorectal cancer tissues from 21
patients.85 nine tumors were well differentiated, 11 moderately well differentiated,
and one tumor poorly differentiated. cox-2 protein and the tumor suppressor
protein p53 stained positive in 38% and ki-67 in 48% of the cases. there was no
relationship between cox-2 expression and the expression of the markers for cell
proliferation or the grade of malignancy. in the second study, chromatography–
mass spectrometry was used to determine the levels of  xxxd14xxx , e2, f2alpha,
6-keto-f1alpha, and thromboxane b2 in biopsy specimens from four familial
adenomatous polyposis (fap) patients treated with  xxxd3259xxx .86 the study revealed

443

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

that the levels varied widely, ranging from an increase of 19% to a decrease of
89%. the report stated that the findings indicate an uncoupling of tissue prostaglandin levels and the process of carcinogenesis.
however, these discordant findings must be carefully interpreted. for instance,
one should consider five obvious and one tentative variable. foremost, colorectal
tumor tissue levels might not accurately reflect the tumor cell levels. next in order,
it is doubtful that all the cells in the biopsy material were tumor cells. also, the
distribution of cox-2 overexpression in human cancer cells may vary depending
on their state of regional differentiation and growth. as an example, cox-2
distribution in colon carcinoma cells is heterogeneous.87 in addition, intermittent
induction and expression of cox-2 could contribute significantly to sampling
errors, especially if there is a significant time lag between cox-2 protein expression and prostaglandin synthesis. last but not least, the effect of a possible third
form of cyclooxygenase should also be considered. there is recent evidence of the
existence of a variant and differently regulated cox-2 protein, inducible by
apoptosis-inducing concentrations of  xxxd1873xxx .88 acetaminophen but not aspirin inhibits the variant enzyme. it is also less sensitive to inhibition by potent cox1 and cox-2 inhibitors such as  xxxd2141xxx  or tolfenamic acid.

2. breast cancer
in vitro, the expression of cox-2 is high in the highly invasive, metastatic
mda-mb-231 breast cancer cell line. in contrast, it is much lower in the less
invasive estrogen-dependent mcf-7 breast cancer cell-line.89 the cox-1 enzyme
was also elevated in tissuesof 30 of 44 breast cancer patients when compared with
normal breast tissues from 14 patients. immunohistochemistry revealed that cox1 was located in the stromal cells adjacent to the tumor cells rather than in the
tumor cells.90 such findings imply that breast cancer cells that overexpress cox2 synthesize and release substances that induce cox-1 expression in the adjoining
stromal cells. as an example, cox-1 expression can be modulated by estrogen91,92
and progesterone.92

3. lung cancer
cox-2 mrna is expressed in carcinoma of the lung, more so in adenocarcinomas than in squamous cell carcinomas.93 furthermore, well-differentiated adenocarcinomas showed higher mrna levels than poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas. immunostaining for cox-2 was positive in 19 of 21 adenocarcinomas
and less strongly positive in all of 11 squamous carcinomas investigated. four
small cell lung cancers showed only weak immunostaining for cox-2. importantly, cox-2 was detected in atypical alveolar epithelium that is considered a

444

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

precursor of lung malignancies. the findings suggest that cox-2 might be involved very early in the development of these tumors.
likewise, in another study of 59 human lung cancers cox-2 was found by
immunohistochemistry in one-third of cases of atypical adenomatous hyperplasia
and in situ carcinoma.94 significantly, increased levels of cox-2 was seen in over
two-thirds of the invasive adenocarcinoma cases. surprisingly, the relative number
of cox-2-positive tumor cells was much greater in lymph node metastases than
in the matching primary tumor. in contrast, cox-2 in small cell lung cancer was
barely detectable by immunostaining. these findings seem to suggest that an
increase in  xxxg1884xxx  might be related to the development of adenocarcinomas in the lung and with the emergence of an invasive and metastatic tumor-cell
phenotype.94

4. hepatocellular carcinoma
cox-2 expression in primary liver cancer may be related to the differentiation
of the tumor. for instance, in a study of 29 hepatocellular carcinomas, all but one
of the tumors exhibited a positive staining.95,96 the intensity of immune staining of
cox-2 was higher in cancer tissues than in corresponding non-cancerous tissues.
this was observed in 7 of 10 well-differentiated, in 3 of 10 moderately differentiated, and in 3 of 9 poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas, respectively.

5. skin carcinoma
immunostaining of biopsies from squamous cell carcinoma of the skin shows
strongly increased staining for cox-2 protein compared with skin not exposed to
the sun.97

6. gastric cancer
several investigators have reported finding elevated cox-2 levels in gastric
carcinomas. for instance, an increase in cox-2 levels was found in 19 of 23
gastric adenocarcinomas compared with the levels in matching gastric mucosa
without tumor.98 however, there was no correlation between cox-2 expression
and tumor histology. in the tumors that stained positive for cox-2, there was
diffuse staining in the cytoplasm of the malignant cells, but no cox-2 was
observed in fibroblasts and mononuclear cells in the tumor stroma.
in contrast to colorectal carcinomas and hepatocellular carcinomas,95 ,96 in the
patients with gastric carcinoma, cox-2 overexpression correlates with lymphatic
but not venous vessel invasion and with metastasis and a poor prognosis. for

445

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

instance, in the mucosa of 10 of 15 gastric carcinomas, cox-2 but not cox-1
levels were higher than matching noncancerous tissue samples.99 the samples
were obtained from surgically resected specimens. cox protein levels were evaluated using western blotting and densitometric scanning. there was a significant
correlation of tumor cox-2 levels with tumor invasion into the lymphatic vessels
in the gastric wall and in metastasis to the lymph nodes. tumor cox-2 levels
significantly correlated with stage grouping in the tnm classification but not with
histopathological grading.

7. cox-2 expression in other neoplasms
cox-2 but not cox-1 expression is elevated in human esophageal carcinomas.100 an immunohistochemical study of carcinomas of the esophagus revealed
that 156 of 172 cases of squamous cell carcinoma and 21 of 27 cases of adenocarcinoma stained positive for cox-2.100 an osc-2 esophageal cancer cell line
expressing cox-2, but no cox-1 was found to synthesize 600 times as much
pge2 compared with another esophageal cancer cell line (osc-1) expressing
cox-1 but only very small amounts of cox-2.100
in pancreatic adenocarcinomas, the level of cox-2 mrna was increased by
more than 60-fold compared with the tumor-free pancreatic tissue.101 cox-2 was
undetectable in tissue samples from areas that were free of tumor. however, cox2 was detected in nine of ten tumors.
in a group of 15 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck,
the mean cox-2 mrna level was increased almost 150-fold compared with
normal oral mucosa of 15 volunteers.102 remarkably, grossly normal epithelium
next to the carcinoma exhibited a 50-fold increase in cox-2 mrna. immunoblotting
for cox-2 was positive in all of six tumors examined.
recent findings of elevated cox-2 mrna and protein levels in human
prostate cancer tissue ex vivo suggest that cox-2 inhibitors might be effective for
prevention or therapy of this type of tumor.103 the mean levels of mrna were
340% higher in the malignant tissue (n = 12) compared with the paired benign
tissue. immunochemical analysis determined that tumor tissue cox-2 protein was
overexpressed in 10 of the samples examined compared with the benign tissues.

iv. antiinflammatory drugs
a. steroids
dexamethasone represses  xxxg1170xxx -induced transcription of cox-2 in human
pulmonary type ii a549 cells.104 cox-2 protein and activity and pge2 synthesis
is completely repressed.  xxxd1800xxx  repressed cox-2 protein and activity and

446

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

pge2 synthesis when given within the first hour after  xxxg1170xxx  stimulation. however,
dexamethasone was effective when added up to 10 h later. it shortened the average
length of cox-2 mrna poly(a) tails, suggesting a major role for posttranscriptional regulation of cox-2 expression by dexamathasone.

b. nonselective, nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs
cox-2 messenger ribonucleic acid (mrna) and cox-2 protein levels are
high at inflammatory sites. the main antiinflammatory effects of an nsaid are
due to its inhibition of cox-2.105 inhibition of the cox-2 enzyme occurs when the
nsaid blocks the active site of the enzyme. nsaids that inhibit both
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase are called dual inhibitors.
aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) are widely
appreciated for their excellent analgesic and antiphlogistic properties.106 aspirin,
ibuprofen, indomethacin, and similar nsaids block cyclooxygenase conversion
by binding in different ways to the enzyme and blocking its active site.107 importantly, most regular nsaids are nonselective and block both cox-1 and cox-2.
however, only the inhibition of the latter is desirable for therapeutic purposes.
nsaids can be categorized into four distinct groups based on their kinetic
behavior.108 for instance, ibuprofen is a competitive inhibitor. in contrast, aspirin
exhibits covalent binding. oxicams and naproxen are weak binding, time-dependent inhibitors, while indomethacin is a tight-binding, time-independent inhibitor.
nsaids exhibit different kinetic behavior for cox-1 and cox-2.108 in all probability, when, for instance, indomethacin, diclofenac, or meclofenamate bind to
cox-1 they cause the enzyme to experience a subtle shift to a conformation that
binds the compounds more tightly.109
there is evidence that aspirin is antiinflammatory in three different ways. it
inhibits cox-1 and cox-2. secondly, it inhibits  xxxg1559xxx  translocation to the
nucleus. thirdly, aspirin promotes the accumulation of adenosine, a potent antiinflammatory autocoid.110 this is in contrast to the antiinflammatory effect of methotrexate in inflammatory bowel disease, where a role for adenosine could not be
established.111 aspirin was no less antiphlogistic in double knockout mice, with
disrupted cox-2 and  xxxg1559xxx , than in control mice with intact cox-2 and  xxxg1559xxx 
genes. however, when adenosine was removed by the addition of adenosine
deaminase, the antiinflammatory effect of aspirin was lacking.

c. cytokine-suppressing antiinflammatory drugs
cytokine-suppressing antiinflammatory drugs (csaids) inhibit cytokines such
as il-1 and tnf. for instance, il-10 may be beneficial for the inhibition of
inflammatory cytokine production in a variety of diseases.55 the effect may depend

447

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

upon the cell type involved. as an example, when the csaid  xxxd3177xxx  was
investigated regarding its antiinflammatory actions on lps-stimulated bovine
chondrocytes and murine macrophages, the responses differed in the two cell
types.112  xxxd3177xxx  at concentrations of 1 µm inhibited the production of nitric
oxide and cox-2 in the chondrocytes but not in the macrophages.

v. antineoplastic effects on nonselective nsaids
a. epidemiology
several epidemiological studies indicate that regular use aspirin76 or other
nonselective nsaids.99,113 reduces the risk of developing colorectal cancer (figures 3 and 4). as an example, smalley and dubois.76 found a 40 to 50% reduction
in the risk of colorectal carcinoma among patients who regularly ingested aspirin.
non-aspirin nsaids were effective as well. similarly, another study showed that
regular use of non-aspirin nsaids significantly reduces the risk of colon cancer.113
the group that was evaluated consisted of 104,217 members who were enrolled in
the tennessee medicaid program. the study focused on the effect on the risk of
colon cancer among the members who regularly used non-aspirin, nonselective
nsaids. all members of the program had been enrolled for over 5 years and were
over 65 years old. members who were regular nsaids users for 48 months or
more exhibited a relative risk of 0.49 for colon cancer compared with control
subjects who did not use nsaids. surprisingly, the effect of low or high doses of
nsaids appeared to be similar, and no particular nsaid provided a unique
protective effect. a prior study involved 862 patients who had been treated for
several years with nsaids for rheumatoid arthritis and who had a low rate of colon
cancer.114 follow-up for up to 35 years revealed that patients who regularly used
non-aspirin nsaids for at least 48 months developed colorectal cancer in only half
the expected number.
on the other hand, two other epidemiological studies of nsaid users failed
to shown a significant reduction in colorectal cancer risk. one of the studies, the
u. s. prospective physicians health study involved 22,071 male physicians who
were 40 to 84 years of age.115 the study detected no protective effect of ingestion
of 325-mg aspirin every other day over 5 years on the incidence of colorectal
cancer. the other study reported no reduction in risk with regular use of aspirin but
a reduction in risk with other nsaids.116
several findings indicate that the different nonselective nsaids affect the risk
of developing cancer differently and that the amount of protection depends on the
type of cancer. for instance, regular aspirin use was found to lower the risk of
colorectal but not of prostate cancer in a hospital-based case-control study investigating a possible association between cancer and a prior history of coronary heart
disease.117 the same nonselective nsaids may reduce the risk of some cancers but

448

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

figure 3. epidemiological and clinical findings provide evidence that regular use of aspirin
(except one non-aspirin study by reeves et al.314) reduces the risk of colorectal cancer or
colorectal polyps (marked with one asterisk). bar graph shows relative risk (x-axis). thin
lines indicate 95% confidence interval (ci). data from references listed on the left side of
the diagram. only the first author is listed if more than one authored the publication. relative
risks above 1 are marked with shaded area. of the 17 studies illustrated here, 15 reported
a reduction in the relative risk of colorectal cancer in regular users of aspirin. however, the
study by sturmer et al.115 reported a slight increase in risk. the study by gann et al.116
reported no reduction in risk with regular use of aspirin but a reduction in risk with other
nsaids. however, there are more studies that are not included in the figure that corroborate
the majority findings illustrated here.

449

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

figure 4. the effects of regular aspirin use on various disease risks compared with the
risk of adverse side effects. bar graph shows relative risk (x-axis). thin lines indicate 95%
confidence interval (ci). an increase in the risk is marked with shaded area. data from
references listed are on the left side of the diagram. only the first author is listed if more than
one authored the publication. relative risks above 1 are marked with shaded area. patients
with rheumatoid arthritis show an overall increase in the risk of developing neoplasia,
however, a lower risk of lung cancer and colon cancer (see figure 3). two studies on the
risk of renal cancer gave divergent results. there was no improvement in the risk of breast
cancer. for comparison the effects of regular aspirin use on the risk of alzheimer’s disease,
stroke, and gastrointestinal ulcers are also shown.

not of others. as an example, one population-based case-control study showed that
aspirin and other nsaids significantly reduce the risk of squamous cell carcinoma
and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, and the risk of gastric non-cardia but not
gastric cardia adenocarcinoma.118 another study showed different results with
different nonselective nsaids: there was a significant inverse correlation between
ovarian cancer and paracetamol use,119 but regular aspirin use produced only in a
modest reduction of the ovarian cancer rate. similarly, regular use of ibuprofen
failed to lower the risk of ovarian cancer.

450

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

however, it is encouraging that a case-control study of 511 breast cancer
patients compared with 1534 population control subjects revealed that regular use
of aspirin or ibuprofen significantly reduced the risk of breast cancer, producing
odds ratios of 0.69 and 0.57, respectively.120 the greatest risk reduction was
associated with the highest level of use of daily intake of aspirin over 5 years. a
5-year prospective cohort study of breast cancer in 32,505 women in ohio showed
that regular use of aspirin or ibuprofen decreased breast cancer rates by about 40
and 50%, respectively. there were 323 breast cancers among non-users and 183
breast cancers among heavy ibuprofen or heavy aspirin users.121 a different study
involving 341 women with invasive carcinoma of the breast suggests that ingestion
of nsaids may affect the rate of spread of breast cancer. there was an inverse
association with the size of the primary tumor and the status and number of
involved axillary lymph nodes.122
the interpretation of epidemiological findings is complicated and requires
careful analysis of possible123 inherent biases, such as lifestyle factors, incomplete
information of dose, and incomplete data of the duration of nsaids use.124 for
example, that fact that many nonselective nsaids are available as over-thecounter analgesics and may not be considered prescription drugs by their users, and
therefore their forgotten use may contribute to an imprecise recollection of total
nsaids use. furthermore, nsaid-induced bleeding may lead to earlier diagnosis
and treatment than usual. for example, an adenomatous polyp of the colon may be
removed before it develops into a cancer. however, for the most part, epidemiological studies suggest that the regular use of nonselective nsaids can significantly lower the risk of several types of human cancer.

2. in vitro growth inhibition
there is significant in vitro experimental evidence in support of the opinion
that nsaids possess anti-cancer properties (table 2). as examples, the nonselective nsaids aspirin, indomethacin, and ibuprofen decrease the proliferation of
cultured pulmonary non-small-cell cancer cells125 and indomethacin restores
apoptosis in cultured colo320 and thrc colon carcinoma cells.126
it has been demonstrated that major in vitro antiinflammatory and anti-cancer
effect of nonselective nsaids is attributable to their inhibition of cox-2 enzymatic activity. however, a number of alternate pathways of nonselective nsaid
effects have been discovered in cultured normal and neoplastic cells. for example,
in vitro experiments indicate that aspirin and salicylate may exert antiinflammatory
action in part by suppressing cox-2 induction. at therapeutic concentrations
either of the two nonselective nsaids can block  xxxg1170xxx  and phorbol 12- xxxd2681xxx 
13-acetate (pma) induction of the cox-2 gene and expression of the cox-2
protein in human foreskin fibroblasts or umbilical vein endothelial cells.127

451

452

note: the selective inhibitor of cox-1, valerylsalicyclic acid (vsa), has no effect on tumor cell dna
synthesis of cells that express cox-2. in contrast, selective cox-2 inhibition by  xxxd2561xxx  or sc58125 in cox-2 expressing cancer cells inhibits dna synthesis and induces apoptosis in vitro.

table 2
in vitro effects of inhibition of cyclooxygenase on cancer cell lines

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

experimental findings further indicate that some nonselective nsaids may
inhibit the growth rate of cancer cell lines independent of their ability to inhibit
cox-2-induced synthesis of prostaglandins. studies on the effect of  xxxd3259xxx  and
its metabolites on colon cancer cells in vitro have provided some significant
observations relevant to a possible additional mechanism of cancer inhibition by
nsaids. as a case in point,  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide, a nonselective nsaid, inhibits
growth of ht-29 human colon-carcinoma cell line by markedly increasing programmed cell death.128 the ht-29 cells produce cox-2. the results support the
common explanation that the inhibition of the cell growth is that  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide
inhibits cox-2. however, surprisingly,  xxxd3259xxx  sulfone, a metabolite of  xxxd3259xxx 
sulfide, strongly induces the apoptosis of the cells as well. remarkably, this
metabolite essentially lacks inhibitory effects on cox-1 and cox-2.
this suggests an alternate, prostaglandin-independent growth inhibitory pathway. evidence in support of this view was obtained through further in vitro studies
using hct-116 colon cancer cells, which do not produce prostaglandins, whereas
ht-29 cells produce pge2, pgf2alpha, and pgi2.129 the two cell lines were treated
with 200 µm  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide or 900 µm  xxxd2969xxx  and then supplemented with
any of the three prostaglandins. remarkably, the nsaid-induced decrease in the
rate of cell proliferation, the increased apoptosis, and the alteration in cell cycle
distribution were unaffected by prostaglandin supplementation. these results argue that the nsaid-induced inhibition was mediated independent of their ability
to affect prostaglandin synthesis.129 other experiments corroborate the idea that the
effect of  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide on cultured cells is not dependent on prostaglandin
synthesis, but rather points to a more general effect on cell proliferation and
apoptosis. most significantly, the ht-29 but not the hct-15 cell line expresses
cyclooxygenase. when cultured ht-29 and hct-15 colon cancer cells were
supplemented with  xxxd3259xxx , it was found that cell proliferation, as determined by
the expression of the proliferation markers pcna and ki-67, was reduced by about
half at 72 h after  xxxd3259xxx  exposure.130 about two-thirds of the  xxxd3259xxx -induced
reduction in cell number was due to inhibition of proliferation. about one-third
was due to  xxxd3259xxx -induced apoptosis. similar results were observed using
noncolonic cells. flow cytometry analysis of ht-29 cells treated with  xxxd3259xxx 
sulfide demonstrated that it alters the expression of several cyclins during the cell
cycle. cyclins b and e are decreased and cyclins d1, d2, and d3 are elevated
especially during the g1 phase of the cell cycle.131
as another example, indomethacin restores apoptosis in s/sk colon carcinoma
cells, which have been reported to lack cox-2.126 likewise, the cox-1-selective
nsaid flurbiprofen132 inhibits in vitro tumor cell growth enhanced by exogenous
pge2. moreover, addition of 5 µm of  xxxd2141xxx  to cultured pc-3 human
prostate carcinoma cells supplemented with pge2 inhibits the up-regulation of
cox-2 mrna and cell growth.133 one explanation might be that inhibition of
cox-1 represses the in vitro growth of the tumor cells.

453

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

however, the use of  xxxd2141xxx  in the above experiment complicates interpretation of the role of cyclooxygenase and pge2 in cell proliferation.  xxxd2141xxx 
contains a carboxyl group that can decouple mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos).5 bjarnason and hayllar demonstrated that all of 15 common
acidic nsaids can uncouple oxidative phosphorylation.134 they reported that r
 xxxd2141xxx  is a selective oxidative phosphorylation uncoupler and that s
 xxxd2141xxx  is an effective cox inhibitor as well. they proposed that concurrent
inhibition of cox-1 and uncoupling is essential to cause intestinal ulceration.
uncoupling in vitro occurred at micromolar concentrations of 0.02 to 2.7 µm.135
diclofenac and nsaids with similar skeleton structures have been shown to
uncouple oxphos in mitochondria from rat liver.136 in another study, liver
mitochondria isolated from rats that had received oral  xxxd234xxx  in
concentrations of 50 mg/kg and 150 mg/kg per day for 7 days showed uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation.137
a recent study of oxidative phosphorylation of heart mitochondria by several
nsaids revealed that most of the drugs tested were uncouplers.138 not only
indomethacin and  xxxd1873xxx , but also  xxxd2727xxx ,  xxxd2561xxx , and  xxxd2969xxx 
behaved as mitochondrial uncouplers. interestingly,  xxxd1873xxx  additionally affected the mitochondrial adenine nucleotide transferase and the oxphos complex v (f0f1-atpase).
the decoupling of oxidative phosphorylation lowers atp generation and
reduces cell proliferation. in addition, the decoupling generates h2o2 that induces
bax, which complexes with bcl-2. as a result, mitochondrial pores open,  xxxg569xxx  escapes into the cytoplasm, and apoptosis is enhanced. this effect
represent an additional pathway in which  xxxd2141xxx  and similar acidic-nsaids
inhibit cancer growth in vitro.
indomethacin significantly suppresses the growth of three cell lines, colon 26,
fm3a mouse mammary carcinoma, and meth-a sarcoma compared with untreated controls.139 the  xxxd1903xxx  content in the tumors was also significantly reduced by indomethacin. furthermore, indomethacin significantly reduced
the telomerase activity of the colon 26 and fm3a tumor cell lines; however,
telomerase in met-a cells were lowered by only 10% compared with controls. in
addition, it has been demonstrated that indomethacin can cause uncoupling of
oxidative phosphorylation.140 in a rat model, indomethacin  xxxd1891xxx  mg/kg provoked
uncoupling of oxphos in up to 70% of enterocytes, as evidenced by mitochondrial changes observed by electron microscopy.141
in contrast, a group of researchers in australia reported that neither indomethacin
nor the selective cox-2 inhibitors ns-398 or l-745337 inhibited the growth of
colorectal carcinoma cell lines in vitro. indomethacin and the two cox-2-selective
inhibitors were employed at concentrations of 30 mm and 100 mm, respectively.142
the group suggested that such nsaids do not inhibit in vitro cancer cell growth by
inhibition of cyclooxygenase. however, they observed that several nsaids can
inhibit oxidation of the long chain fatty acid palmitate in human colon cancer cell

454

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

lines.143 the nsaids bound to the alpha-subunit of the trifunctional protein of the
long chain fatty acid oxidation pathway.144 for instance, ibuprofen and diclofenac
inhibited the 3- xxxg1013xxx  activity intrinsic to the alpha-subunit.
interestingly, the in vitro inhibitory effects of nsaids on colorectal carcinoma cell
growth correlated well with their affinities for the subunit.
there may be other modes of action of nsaids as well. results of rat model
experiments suggest that nsaids use may prevent colon carcinogenesis by inducing enzymes that help detoxify potential carcinogens. for example, when indomethacin was incorporated into the diet of male wistar rats the gastric glutathione-s-transferase ( xxxg998xxx -2) level was 1.5-fold enhanced.145 the colonic
 xxxg997xxx -1 level was also increased. similar results were obtained with  xxxd2969xxx ,
acetyl  xxxd3159xxx ,  xxxd3259xxx , and ibuprofen.

3. animal experiments
there is evidence in animal models that salicylate may exert antiinflammatory
effects not only through inhibition of cox-2 enzymatic activity but also in part by
suppressing the induction of the cox-2 gene.127 administration of aspirin (10 and
30 mg/kg) to mice prior to a challenge with lps markedly reduced cox-2 mrna
expression in the murine peritoneal macrophages. the synthesis of proinflammatory
prostaglandins was correspondingly reduced.
aspirin reduces the incidence of colon tumors and can suppress overall aominduced tumor burden in the f344 rat.146 the apc min mouse is an animal model
for familial adenomatosis of the colon. in such rodents 200 ppm of  xxxd2969xxx 
causes more that a 90% reduction in multiplicity of tumors after 1 week of
treatment147 (table 3). the protective effect of nsaids can be demonstrated even
if it is given 14 weeks after administration of the carcinogen.148 interestingly, a
mouse-strain-related effect on chemosuppression was discovered suggesting the
existence of additional genetic elements that affect the nsaid chemosensitivity.147
furthermore, the effectiveness of nsaids in impeding apc-related tumor development depends on the type of mutation that is present in the apc gene.149
these in vitro findings (vide supra) that  xxxd3259xxx  sulfone retains the antineoplastic properties of  xxxd3259xxx  despite a lack of inhibitory effects on cox-1 and
cox-2 is supported by the results of xenografting.  xxxd3259xxx  sulfoxide as well as
 xxxd3259xxx  sulfone can inhibit angiogenesis induced by cells derived from human
lung tumors that were grafted intradermally in balb/c mice.150
taken together, these findings illustrate that the cancer cell culture studies and
experimental carcinogenesis studies have provided further evidence in support of
an important role of the cox-2 isoform in the molecular pathology of cancer.
however, there are indications that other mechanisms are at work as well. most
surprisingly, some nsaids are effective growth inhibitors in some colon carcinoma cell lines lacking detectable amounts of the type 2 isoform of cyclooxygenase.72

455

456

note: even  xxxd2969xxx , which is a selective cox-1 inhibitor, repressed colon carcinoma
development in the min mouse, an animal model for familial adenomatous polyposis
(fap). however, some of the repressor effects of  xxxd2969xxx  might be due to its
uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

table 3
effects of nonselective and selective cox-2- inhibitors on experimental
carcinogenesis

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

4. clinical studies
aberrant crypt-foci (acf) of the colon are considered precursors of adenoma
and cancer of the colon. in a clinical study the effect of  xxxd3259xxx , a nonselective
nsaid, on the development of aberrant crypt-foci was followed using magnifying
endoscopy. therapy with  xxxd3259xxx  significantly reduced the number of aberrant
foci.151 moreover, patients who were treated with nsaids experienced a regression of the intestinal adenomas.152 treatment with nsaids even induced regression of adenomas that were already present before initiation of therapy.148,152,153

c. adverse effects of nonselective nsaids
while therapy with nonselective nsaids can inhibit cancer growth, they may
cause a variety of serious side effects.154 for example, inhibition of cox-1 by
nonselective nsaids may suppress hemostasis through inhibition of platelet
aggregation. other side effects may occur in patients with heart failure and cirrhosis, and complications may arise when such nsaids are used in combination with
diuretics or beta blockers. however, most importantly, nonselective nsaids
significantly inhibit cox-1 in the gastrointestinal mucosa. this inhibition reduces
the synthesis of prostaglandins that protect the mucosa. the lack of cytoprotective
prostaglandins may cause ulceration, bleeding, and perforation of the gastrointestinal tract.5,155 the risk of developing gastrointestinal problems during nonselective
nsaid therapy increases with the concurrent administration of anticoagulants or
corticosteroids.156 minor adverse gastrointestinal effects such as small reductions
in hemoglobin levels have been reported in the elderly even at low doses (100 mg
daily).157 endoscopic examination of 1826 patient with rheumatoid arthritis or
osteoarthritis revealed a substantial rate of gastrointestinal problems. the study
group consisted of patients who had used nsaids for 6 months or more and
patients who because of adverse gastrointestinal symptoms had been unable to
tolerate continuous nsaid use.158 the prevalence of gastrointestinal ulcers in the
patients varied with the length of nsaids use ranging from 13.8% (less than 1
year) to 25.9% (1 to 15 years).
moreover, cox-1 is important in renal and platelet functions. for instance, in
the kidney inhibition of cox-1 may lead to the dysfunction of the renal regulation
of blood pressure during therapy with  xxxg36xxx  (ace)
inhibitors, beta blockers, and diuretics.159 in platelets, the inhibition of cox-1
blocks the synthesis of the platelet-activating prostanoid thromboxane a2, causing
a prolonged bleeding time and a mild, systemic hemostatic defect.160,161
some nsaid users suffer adverse reactions of the skin and respiratory tract.
for instance, among 15,800 patients referred over a period of 7 years to a clinic for
allergic disorders, the incidence of adverse reactions to nsaids was 11.4%.162 the
most frequently used nsaids were salicylics, paracetamol, pyrazolones, and

457

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

arylpropionics. approximately 90% of the adverse reactions were skin complains,
followed by asthma or rhinitis, or more rarely general symptoms such as shock,
hypotension, and lipothymia.

viii. cox-2 selective inhibitors
there is powerful evidence that major antiinflammatory and antineoplastic
actions of nonselective nsaids are caused by inhibition of cox-2, while the
adverse effects are caused by the inhibition of cox-1.3 the realization of this fact
has been the major reason for the desire to develop selective cox-2 inhibitors
(table 4).14 however, several obstacles in accomplishing this goal are evident.
first of all, substantiating the selectivity of a particular nsaids is complicated. lipsky163 proposed a classification of cox-2 selectivity composed of three
categories. the first category consists of the biochemical cox-2 selectivity and is
defined after initial screening in vitro. the second category comprises a biologic
and pharmacological definition and can be established using, for instance, an ex
vivo whole blood assay. the third category and the most difficult but yet most
important to establish is the clinical definition of cox-2 selectivity.
clinical trials have demonstrated that some cox-2 selective inhibitors may be
as effective analgesic and antiphlogistic agents as nonselective nsaids. for
example,  xxxd2561xxx  and celecoxib are as effective antiinflammatory agents as
currently available nonselective nsaids. moreover, they have an improved gastrointestinal tolerability profile.164 however, at a given dose of an inhibitor in vitro
data alone rarely predicts the level of inhibition of cox-1 and cox-2 in vivo.165
other factors, such as the pharmacokinetic properties of the inhibitor, plasma
levels, inhibitor distribution, and its binding to plasma proteins, must be taken into
account. to be classified as a specific cox-2 inhibitor an agent must show
therapeutic benefits at least as good as that of regular, nonselective nsaids. in
addition, there should be only insignificant inhibition of cox-1. in clinical trials
there should be no significant detrimental effect on the gastric mucosa and no
significant inhibition of cox-1-mediated platelet function.163 accordingly, only
large-scale clinical trials can render the definite proof of the therapeutic relevance
of any new selective cox-2 inhibitor.
the fist in vitro test systems to investigate the cox-2 selectivity of nsaids
used animal enzymes, animal cells, or cell lines. then tests systems using human
recombinant enzymes, human cell lines, or human blood cells such as platelets and
monocytes followed. recent model systems use human gastric mucosa cells,
chondrocytes, and synoviocytes as target cells for the antiinflammatory and adverse effects of cyclooxygenase inhibitors.165
different measurement conditions generally result in divergent results. a few
examples are illustrated in figure 5. to cite an instance, the values obtained for the
selectivity of indomethacin vary greatly depending on the method used. the ic50 of

458

459

table 4
list of selective cox-2 inhibitors

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

figure 5. in vitro and ex vivo inhibition values (ic50) of cyclooxygenase (cox)-1 and -2
vary for different nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) and, as shown, for instance,
for indomethacin depends on the assay method used. diagram ranks nonselective and
cox-2 selective nsaids (right side of diagram) according to data from the five sources
indicated above. laufer et al.167 used a whole blood, mononuclear cell assay with lipopolysaccharide (lps) as the cox-2 inducer. in several cases only limited data have been
published. for instance, for  xxxd2561xxx , celecoxib, and rofecoxib, only data from a single
source is available.  xxxd2969xxx  is a strong cox-1 inhibitor. in contrast, flosulide, sc-58125,
and sc-5766 inhibit cox-2 the most. however, only clinical trials can establish proof of the
therapeutic significance of a selective cox-2 inhibitor. (for further detail see text.)

460

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

indomethacin for cox-1 in non-stimulated and for cox-2 in interleukin 1
(il-1) stimulated human chondrocytes were 0.063 µm and 0.48 µm, respectively.166
in contrast, quite different values were obtained when mononuclear cells isolated
from human whole blood were used to establish cox-2 selectivity. in this assay,
indomethacin inhibited cox-1 (ic50: 0.002 µm) about 200-fold stronger than
cox-2 (ic50: 0.43 µm).167 however, in a human whole blood assay the selectivity
ratio for the inhibition of cox-1 over cox-2 for indomethacin was 0.4.168 in
comparison, the in vitro ratios for the more cox-2 selective nsaids  xxxd2561xxx ,
diclofenac, celecoxib, and rofecoxib were 2, 3, 6.6, and 36, respectively.
cryer and feldman132 measured to what extent nsaids inhibit cox-1 and
cox-2 in human blood of 16 healthy volunteers and compared the results with the
ex vivo prostaglandin synthesis in the mucosa of gastric biopsies from the same
individuals (figure 6). the ex vivo whole blood assay for cox-1 activity measured
the generation of thromboxane b2, and the assay for cox-2 activity measured the
lps-stimulated  xxxd1903xxx  synthesis. the measurements revealed that in
blood the inhibitory selectivity for the cox isoforms varied greatly. for instance,
 xxxd2141xxx  and  xxxd2423xxx  were cox-1 selective, ibuprofen and naproxen nonselective, and diclofenac and  xxxd2556xxx  acid were cox-2 selective. notably, the
cox-1 selectivity (p < 0.001) and the cox-1 inhibitory potency (p < 0.01) in the
blood assay agreed well with the cox-1 selectivity in the gastric biopsies from the
same volunteers. however, nsaids that were selective for cox-2 in the blood
assay still had sufficient cox-1 activity to potently inhibit the gastric  xxxd1903xxx  synthesis at concentrations observed in vivo.
giuliano and warner169 administered nsaids intravenously to male wistar
rats and evaluated the selectivity of the drugs using the rat plasma of blood drawn
from the rats 6 h after administration of the drugs. to measure the amount of
inhibition of cox-2 activity in the plasma, they used an ex vivo system that was
based on the ability of plasma from the rats to inhibit prostanoid formation in  xxxg1170xxx  treated pulmonary a549 cells. the amount of inhibition of cox-1 was
determined in a similar ex vivo assay by measuring the inhibition of prostanoid
formation in human platelets, which as mentioned only express the cox-1 isoform.
the direct in vitro selectivity of the drugs was established by adding the same
compound directly to the assay system.
due to rapid in vivo metabolism of aspirin the plasma from aspirin-treated rats
was without effect on cyclooxygenase activity.169 however, when added directly to
the assay system, aspirin, like the other nsaids tested, inhibited both cox-1 and
cox-2.  xxxd1873xxx  was a slightly cox-2 preferential inhibitor ex vivo, but
nonselective in the in vitro assay.  xxxd2727xxx  was a cox-2 preferential inhibitor
and the compound l-745337 was a selective cox-2 inhibitor both ex vivo and in
vitro.
the affinity of various nsaids for the two cyclooxygenase isoforms depends
on the  xxxd208xxx  concentration.170 for example, the affinity for cox-1

461

462

figure 6. histogram comparing ic50 values for rofecoxib as inhibitor of cyclooxygenase (cox)-1 and cox-2 isoforms. cox-1 inhibition was
assayed in vitro using blood platelets, which express only cox-1 (whole blood assay), using purified cox-1 enzyme, or u937 cells or chinese
hamster ovary cells made to express cox-1. the effect of  xxxd3139xxx  on cox-2 enzymatic activity was observed in blood monocytes, or a purified
enzyme system, or in chinese hamster ovary cell modified to express cox-2. apparent inhibition of cox-2 by rofecoxib varies depending on
the assay system used. (data from chan et al. [168].)

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

decreases in parallel to the activation by  xxxd208xxx , resulting in a remarkable
difference in cox-2 selectivity at different  xxxd208xxx  concentrations.
during inhibition of cox-2 by an nsaid, the enzyme may accumulate.171
therefore, upon cessation of treatment a transient period follows that is characterized by overproduction of prostaglandins. the clinical relevance of the in vitro and
ex vivo measurements of the relative inhibitory activities of nonselective and
selective nsaids must be carefully examined. variables such the shape of the
dose-response curve, the pharmacokinetic properties of the nsaid, the drug level
in the blood plasma, and the distribution and binding to the plasma protein must
be taken into account.165

1. celecoxib
celecoxib was the first of a family of nsaids that selectively inhibits
cyclooxygenase 2172,173 (table 1). the chemical composition of this compound is
4-[5-(4-methylphenyl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)- xxxd3045xxx -1-yl]benzene sulfonamide.
celecoxib belongs to the 1,5-diarylpyrazole class of  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors
and is also known as  xxxd457xxx  and celebrex. it is an analog of sc-236, which was
an early structural lead that exhibited an unacceptably long plasma half-life.172
celecoxib displays classic competitive kinetics on cox-1 and an initial competitive interaction with cox-2.108 however, this is later followed by inactivation of
cox-2 (ic50=0.003-0.006 µm).
in the carrageenan rat footpad model of acute inflammation celecoxib was as
efficacious as ketorolac in reversing the hyperalgesia response and returning the
paw edema to normal.68 in the phase iii clinical trials celecoxib demonstrated
efficacy as an antiinflammatory agent. celecoxib effectively alleviates the signs
and symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. the oral therapeutic use
of the drug was associated with a considerably lower rate of gastroduodenal injury
than is seen commonly with nonselective nsaids.174 other studies reported similar findings. a case in point, in a 1-week endoscopic study of the effect of
celecoxib on the gastrointestinal mucosa no ulcers were observed in subjects
receiving celecoxib or placebo. in comparison, 19% of subjects receiving naproxen
developed gastric ulcers.175 the effects of celexocib on platelets were investigated
in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis efficacy trials, lasting 2 and 4 weeks,
respectively. these trials brought to light that naproxen but not celecoxib caused
a significant reduction in platelet aggregation and a significant increase in bleeding
time. in addition, a 10-day double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study
conducted in 24 healthy adults verified that celecoxib (600 mg bid) did not
interfere with normal mechanisms of platelet aggregation and hemostasis.176
another favorable finding is that animal experiments suggest that celecoxib
may not interfere with human wound healing. in a murine model of wound
collagen deposition 10 mg/kg of naproxen but not of celexocib significantly

463

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

decreased collagen deposition at the wound site.177 furthermore, celecoxib had no
significant effect on wound fluid pge2 levels.
celecoxib is effective in inhibiting carcinogeneses in animal experiments. it
reduces the incidence of colon tumors and suppresses overall azoxymethane (aom)induced tumor burden in f344 rats.178 celecoxib inhibited aom-induced colon
tumorigenesis when it was administered continuously before, during, or after
carcinogen treatment.179 as another example, uv-exposure in hairless nude mice
increased cox-2 levels and induced tumors of the skin. when such mice were fed
500 ppm or 150 ppm of celecoxib there was a dose-dependent reduction of 89%
and 60%, respectively, in the tumor yield. in comparison, 4 ppm of indomethacin
reduced the tumor yield by 78%.180
in four phase ii trials, celecoxib (then known as  xxxd457xxx ) was well tolerated,
with a safety profile similar to that of placebo.181 the first two trials consisted of
a 2-week osteoarthritis efficacy trial and a 4-week rheumatoid arthritis efficacy
trial. they established celecoxib dosage levels that were consistently effective in
treating the signs and symptoms of arthritis and were distinguished from placebo
on standard arthritis scales. in a 1-week endoscopic study of the effects on the
gastrointestinal mucosa, no ulcers occurred in subjects receiving celecoxib or
placebo. in comparison, 6 of 32 subjects receiving the nonselective nsaid naproxen
developed gastric ulcers. finally, a 1-week study of effects on platelet effects
revealed no meaningful effect of celecoxib on platelet aggregation or thromboxane
b2 levels. in comparison, aspirin caused significant decreases in platelet aggregation and thromboxane b2 levels.
celecoxib has been approved by the food and drug administration (fda) for
the treatment of and rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis182 and for the treatment
of familial adenomatous polyposis.

2.  xxxd2561xxx 
 xxxd2561xxx  is a selective cox-2 inhibitor3 of the enol-carboxamide class.183
results from a randomized crossover study of 14 healthy female volunteers showed
that  xxxd2561xxx  7.5-mg per day is cox-1 sparing in vivo.184 in the study, the effects
of  xxxd2561xxx  were compared with the effects of indomethacin. the volunteers
were given indomethacin 25 mg three times per day for 3 days or  xxxd2561xxx  7.5
mg per day for 6 days. there was a 5-day washout period. recorded parameters
were obtained on the day before treatment and on the last day of each treatment
period. indomethacin but not  xxxd2561xxx  significantly inhibited the maximum platelet aggregation. thromboxane b2 (txb2) formation in response to 1.0 mm/l
 xxxd208xxx  in vitro was significantly inhibited.  xxxd2561xxx  caused no significant alteration in urinary pge2 excretion. however, there was a 22%
(p < 0.05) reduction in the index metabolites of 24-h renal and total body pge2
synthesis, as measured by gas chromatography combined with tandem mass spec-

464

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

trometry. in contrast, indomethacin induced a significant 43% percent reduction of
urinary pge2. it caused a significant 36% reduction of the index metabolites pgem (7 alpha-hydroxy-5,11-diketo-tetranor-prosta-1, 16-dionic acid).184
 xxxd2561xxx  significantly inhibits colony growth of hca-7 and moser-s colon cancer
cells in vitro. both of these cell lines express cox-2. however,  xxxd2561xxx  exerts no effect
on hct-116 colon cancer cells, which as noted do not express cox-2.185 selective cox-2
inhibitors not only reduce in vitro cancer cell proliferation but can also inhibit the growth of
cancer cells xenografted into animals. for example, when hca-7 cells and hct-116 cells
were xenografted into nude mice,  xxxd2561xxx  suppressed tumor formation by the cox-2positive hca-7 cells by up to 90% (table 5). however, tumor growth induced by the cox2-negative hct-116 cells was not affected by the cox-2 inhibitor.186 the fact the hct-116
cells were not affected by  xxxd2561xxx  is an unexpected observation, because others have
shown that  xxxd2561xxx  can behave as an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation.138
in experimental arthritis, long-term  xxxd2561xxx  treatment ameliorated the severity of freund’s adjuvant-induced arthritis without inducing any apparent lesion
of the gastric mucosa.187 european clinical data for  xxxd2561xxx  suggest that cox2 can provide an advantage over nonselective nsaids in terms of gastrointestinal
tolerability.188  xxxd2561xxx  is presently undergoing phase iii clinical trials for the
treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.182

3. rofecoxib
rofecoxib is also known as vioxx or  xxxd3139xxx . the chemical composition of
this compound is 4-(4'-methylsulfonylphenyl)-3-phenyl-2-(5h)-furanone. the in
vitro selectivity of rofecoxib has been characterized using chinese hamster ovary
(cho) cell lines that express either human cox-1 or cox-2.189 in the in vitro
assay rofecoxib showed more that an 800-fold cox-2 selectivity compared with
cox-1.
to estimate the clinical analgesic effects of rofecoxib, the compound was
administered to patients with dental pain. the study was a double-blind, parallelgroup study comparing the effects of rofecoxib with ibuprofen and placebo in a
group of 102 patients.189 all treatment cases experienced significantly greater pain
relief than placebo. the total pain relief during the 6 h after the administration of
the nsaids was comparable for rofecoxib (50 mg and 500 mg) and ibuprofen
(400 mg).
the in vivo effect of rofecoxib was then measured by comparing the effects of
single oral doses of the selective inhibitor with single oral doses of indomethacin
in human subjects. ex vivo cox-isoform specific assays were employed. they
consisted of serum thromboxane b2 (txb2) measurements and lipopolysaccharide-induced whole blood  xxxd1903xxx  measurements for cox-1 or cox-2
activity, respectively.189 the measurements showed that rofecoxib at oral doses of up
to 1000 mg inhibited cox-2 without causing a perceptible inhibition of cox-1.

465

466

table 5
effect of the selective cox-2 inhibitors sc-58125 and  xxxd2561xxx  on tumor formation by cox-2-positive and cox2-negative cancer cell xenografted into nude mice

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

rofecoxib and indomethacin caused a dose- and concentration-dependent inhibition of lps-stimulated pge2 synthesis, showing concentrations estimated to
produce 50% inhibition (ic50) of 0.77 µm/l and 0.33 µm/l, respectively. indomethacin inhibited thromboxane b2 formation with an ic50 of 0.14 µm/l;
however, even at doses up to 1000 mg of rofecoxib no inhibition of txb2 was
observed.189
rofecoxib have been approved by the fda for the treatment of osteoarthritis.182

5. ns-398
ns-398 is reported to be highly specific for cox-2.190 in an in vitro comparison study between the nonselective nsaid indomethacin and the cox-2 selective
inhibitor ns-398, both showed antiproliferative effects on the mkn45 gastric and
the caco-2 colon cancer cell lines that express high levels of cox-2.191,192 however, neither drug exerted a significant effect on the proliferation on two other
cancer cell lines, katoiii and mkn28, that expressed low levels of cox-2. the
three cell lines express similar levels of cox-1 mrna. cell proliferation was
measured using cell counting and 3h-thymidine uptake. the protein levels of
cox-2 in the three cell lines was measured by western blot analysis, and the
mrna levels of the two enzyme isoforms examined by northern blot analysis.
ns-398 reduces the incidence of colon tumors and can suppress overall
azoxymethane-induced tumor burden in the f344 rat.193 ns-398 enhances apoptosis
in lncap prostate carcinoma cells. it down-regulates the expression of the
antiapoptotic protein bcl-2194 and increases apoptosis of colon carcinoma cells
such as colo320, thrc, and s/sk cells,195 and ht29 cells.195 selective inhibition
of cox-2 with ns-398 increases apoptosis of thrc and colo320 cells up to ninefold compared with nonsupplemented cells.126 remarkably, despite the fact that the
s/sk cells do not express detectable levels of cox-2, the ns-398 inhibitor induces
apoptosis in such cells as well.195
one possible explanation for the ns-398-induced apoptosis in cox-2-negative cells could be that some selective cox-2 inhibitors might bring about apoptosis
through other pathways that differ from the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of
cox-2.72 as an example, such an effects has been reported for the nonselective
nsaids ibuprofen, which inhibits oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos).5 this
nsaid harbors a carboxyl group, which interferes with oxphos at micromolar
concentrations in vitro.196 the carboxylic group acts as a proton translocator,
reduces the mitochondrial internal membrane potential, and reduces adenosine
triphosphate (atp) generation.135 yet another possibility is suggested by very
recent findings on the effect of aspirin. in this new pathway aspirin blocks the
nuclear transcription factor kappab ( xxxg1559xxx ) that regulates the expression of a
number of genes, including cox-2.

467

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

ns-398 concentration dependently suppresses pge2 synthesis and proliferation in
an osc-2 esophageal carcinoma cell line, which expresses cox-2 but not cox-1.100
interleukin-1beta-induces cox-2 expression and pge2 synthesis, which inhibits
insulin secretion in pancreatic beta-cells. the pge2 binds to the prostaglandin
receptor ep3 subtype whose post-receptor effect is to reduce  xxxg67xxx 
activity and, accordingly, insulin secretion.197 the role of cox-2 in this process
was demonstrated by the use of ns-398 to selectively inhibit cox-2 and observing
an increase in insulin secretion as the pge2 level in the pancreatic cells was
reduced.

6.  xxxd2688xxx 
a study in male sprague-dawley rats on 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced colon
cancer detected no inhibitory effect of  xxxd2688xxx  on cancer initiation.198 the
carcinogen-induced development of aberrant crypt foci was used as a surrogate
biomarker of carcinogenesis. similarly, neither  xxxd3219xxx  nor indomethacin or 16,16-dimethyl-prostaglandin affected cancer initiation by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine. however, aspirin significantly, although reversibly, suppressed the development of aberrant crypt foci.
in contrast, oral administration of  xxxd2688xxx  significantly reduces n-methyln-nitrosourea (mnu)-induced mammary carcinogenesis in female sprague-dawley
rats.199 at 50 days of age the rats were given mnu by subcutaneous injection. from
age 8 weeks to 25 weeks the diet was supplemented with 0.03%  xxxd2688xxx . at
necropsy, both the incidence and multiplicity of tumors in the treated group were
significantly smaller than in a control group of rats given the same diet but without
 xxxd2688xxx . furthermore,  xxxd2688xxx  treatment of c3h/hej mice bearing squamous cell carcinoma caused a significant inhibition of tumor growth and final
tumor weight.200 at necropsy, inflammatory cell infiltrates in tumor tissue, and the
level of pge2 in tumor tissue homogenates was significantly elevated.  xxxd2688xxx 
has shown improved tolerability in clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance.201

7.  xxxd2065xxx 
the use of gastroduodenal endoscopy showed that the administration of  xxxd2065xxx ,
or placebo, to healthy dogs produced significantly fewer gastroduodenal lesions than
in dogs receiving  xxxd234xxx .202 to investigated the efficacy of the analgesic
effects of  xxxd2065xxx  a single 1200 mg dose of extended release  xxxd2065xxx  was given
once a day to relieve pain in patients following oral surgery.  xxxd2065xxx  provided
substantial efficacy for 13 hours after dose and modest effect through 24 hours after
dose.203 moreover, compared with nonselective nsaids the cox-2-selective  xxxd2065xxx 
showed improved tolerability in clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance.201

468

8. flosulide

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

flosulide in a concentration-dependent manner suppresses pge2 synthesis
and proliferation in an osc-2 esophageal carcinoma cell line, which expresses
cox-2 but not cox-1.100

9. sc-58125
sc-58125 exhibits a high degree of selectivity of cox-2 over cox-1. this
compound causes time-dependent, irreversible inhibition of cox-2. it reversibly
inhibits cox-1. the reasons for this selectivity was established using site-directed
mutagenesis of the active site of cox-2.204 it was established that a single amino
acid substitution of valin with isoleucin at position 509 is sufficient to confer cox2 selectivity for sc-58125, sc-236, and ns-398. in contrast, the substitution at
position 509 at the active site of cox-2 had no effect on the nonselective nsaid
indomethacin. in the animal model of acute inflammation carrageenan was injected
into the footpad of the rats and produced edema accompanied by marked accumulation of cox-2 mrna and thromboxane.205
sc-58125 inhibited serum-stimulated cell proliferation and inhibited pge2 formation in the iec-18 continuously proliferating rat small intestinal cell line and the wb2054 mouse colon cancer cell line.206 however, the reduction in pge2 production by the
cultured cells did not correlate with the inhibition of proliferation caused by the addition
of the selective cox-2 inhibitor, indicating that the two processes were unrelated in these
experiments.206 sc-58125 inhibits cox-2, reduces pge2 synthesis, down-regulates bcl-2,
and induces apoptosis of prostate carcinoma lncap cells in vitro.194

10.  xxxd2727xxx 
the use of three-dimensional models and docking studies revealed that the
cox-2 selectivity of  xxxd2727xxx  is due to an enlarged binding site around the
amino acid isoleucine at position 523 in cox-2. in comparison, cox-1 possesses
the amino acid valine at the same position.207 the larger biding site permits
 xxxd2727xxx  to establish a number of favorable contacts with the enzyme that leads
to selective inhibition of cox-2.207,208
in vivo observations show that  xxxd2727xxx  provides antiinflammatory efficacy
similar to that of naproxen while causing significantly less gastrointestinal injury.209 naproxen but not  xxxd2727xxx  suppressed arachidonic-acid-mediated platelet aggregation.  xxxd2727xxx  and naproxen reduced serum thromboxane b2 by 29
and 98%, respectively. during the treatment period naproxen and  xxxd2727xxx 
reduced the levels of prostanoids (pge2 and 6-keto-pgf1a) of the gastric mucosa
by 80 and 20%, respectively. in a rat model,  xxxd2727xxx  at 15 mg/kg, a dose

469

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

approximately equipotent to the indomethacin dose, caused no sign of uncoupling
of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.141 in comparison, others have reported
that  xxxd2727xxx  can uncouple oxidative phosphorylation.138,210 in the chemical
carcinogenesis model, nimesulfide suppressed azoxymethane (aom)-induced colon
tumor formation.211

11. jte-522
jte-522 (4-(4-cyclohexyl-2-methyloxazol-5-yl)-2-fluorobenzenesulfonamide)
is a selective, irreversible inhibitor of human  xxxg1884xxx .212 in the washed
human platelet assay for cox-1 inhibition, the ic50 value was 6210 nm. in the
human peripheral blood mononuclear cell assay for cox-2 inhibition, the ic50
value was 15.1 nm.
in the animal model jte-522 reduces the tumor load induced by injection of
cancer cell expressing high levels of cox-2.213 two different murine colon cancer
cell lines were injected into the tail of balb/c mice. one cell line constitutively
expressed high (h cells) and the other cell line low (l cells) cox-2 protein levels.
treatment of the mice with the jte-522 compound significantly reduced the
number of lung metastatic nodules in the mice receiving h-cells but not in the
group of animals receiving l-cells.

12. miscellaneous
several analogs of  xxxd2141xxx  have been developed that have up to 78-fold
selectivity for cox-2 over cox-1.214 during the development, computer modeling of the x-ray crystal structures of cyclooxygenase isoforms revealed a small
alcove in the active cox-2 site. the difference is produced by different position
of the leu384 side chain between the two isoforms.
some data indicate that depression in glomerular filtration rate (gfr) induced
by nonselective nsaids is due to inhibition of cox-1, but that acute sodium
retention by nsaids in elderly patients is mediated by the inhibition of cox-2.215
for instance, the inhibition of cox-2 by  xxxd3139xxx  (rofecoxib) that selectively
inhibits the type-2 isoform caused a clinically insignificant retention of sodium.
however, the effect was transient and the gfr was not affected. in contrast,
indomethacin caused a decline if gfr.

vi. molecular pathology
the up-regulation of cox-2 expression in neoplasia is characterized by a variety
of abnormalities of cox-2 induction, lack of proper inhibition, and aberrations in

470

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

regulatory feedback loops.6 abnormalities of chromosome region 1q21-32 have been
associated with neoplasia.216 for instance, trisomy for band 1q25 was detected in all of
35 patients with hematological malignancies, either acute leukemia, polycytemia vera,
or myelofibrosis.217 chromosome 1 trisomy might hypothetically cause overexpression
of cox-2; however, no experimental evidence of any trisomy causing cox-2
overexpression has been reported. moreover, there is presently no evidence of any
mutation at 1q25 causing elevated cox-2 expression in cancer. nevertheless, when the
human ht29 cl.19a adenocarcinoma cell line was investigated in tissue culture, cox2 was expressed even in the absence of classic exogenous stimulators such as fetal
bovine serum or  xxxg1170xxx . however, genetic studies failed to detect any mutation of the
cox-2 promoter in this adenocarcinoma cell-line.218 therefore, the up-regulated inducer of cox-2 in this tumor line remains to be identified.
no mutation of the cox-2 gene was detected in the attenuated (a) form of
apc (aapc).219 such patients have fewer colorectal polyps and their colorectal
cancers occur later in life than in regular apc patients. the numbers of polyps vary
significantly among patients carrying identical aapc mutations. it has been
proposed that a loss of function of cox-2 might result in a decreased tumor burden
in the aapc patients who develop only very few colorectal polyps.219 however,
because no mutation of the cox-2 gene was detected, it is apparent that alleles of
another gene modify the expression of the apc disease phenotype.

a. transfection experiments
gene transfection experiments provide compelling evidence that the expression
of cox-2 plays an important role in carcinogenesis, particularly of colorectal cancer.
several transfection experiments have demonstrated a role for cyclooxygenase in
both cell proliferation and in apoptosis and have demonstrated the induction of
growth factors and receptors. as an example of the effect on cell proliferation,
transfection of the colo 320dm human colon carcinoma cell line by either a cox1 or a cox-2 eukaryotic expression vector very nearly doubles the growth rate
compared with mock transfected cells.220 remarkably, either expression vector considerably increases egf receptor (egfr) levels in the transfected cells. as an
example of the effect of expression of the cox-2 gene and cox protein on
apoptosis, experimental overexpression of cox-2 in permanently transfected rat
intestinal epithelial (rie) cells led to phenotypical alterations typical of malignant
cells.52 in the experiment, a cox-2 expression vector oriented in the sense direction
was introduced into rie cells. introduction of the vector elevated the levels of cox2 mrna and cox-2 protein in the cells. the cellular level of the antiapoptotic
protein bcl-2 was also elevated. programmed cell death was reduced and the cells
resisted butyrate-induced apoptosis.  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide, as well as one of its metabolites,  xxxd3259xxx  sulfone, inhibits such transfected rie cell growth by markedly increasing apoptosis (128). however, as noted above,  xxxd3259xxx  sulfone essentially lacks

471

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

prostaglandin synthesis inhibitory activity. nevertheless it strongly induces apoptosis
of the cells pointing to an alternate mechanism not dependent upon cox-2 inhibition.128 in addition, in the transfected rie cells the level of the  xxxg2272xxx 
(tgf-betarii) decreased and the level of e-cadherin, a principal protein in cell adhesion, became undetectable. the loss of cadherin might be important, because it has
been demonstrated that loss of cadherin function in a neoplasm results in rapid
progression of adenoma to invasive, metastatic carcinoma.221
it is quintessential to distinguish that some findings demonstrate that there is overlap
between cox-1- and cox-2-induced pathophysiologies when either of them is
overexpressed by transfection of immortalized cells. this is in contrast to the findings
in normal cells where the isoforms of cyclooxygenase appear to have separate locations
and functions.50 for example, in human endothelial cells cox-1 functions predominantly
in the endoplasmic reticulum (er), while cox-2 in addition functions in the nuclear
envelope. similar findings have been reported for bovine endothelial cells and murine
3t3 adipocytes.65 in contrast, in immortalized endothelial cells transfected with cox-1
high levels of cox-1 protein were observed in both the endoplasmic reticulum and the
nucleus.222 such cells proliferate aggressively and form tumors when xenografted to
athymic nude mice, and indomethacin does not inhibit the growth of the cox-1-induced
tumors. these observations suggest that the cox-1 protein may have a nonprostanoid,
nuclear function in the tumor cells.222 it is not known what function cyclooxygenase
isoforms might serve in the nucleus. however, the isoforms contain egf domains that
could hypothetically induce genes involved in cell proliferation.
further similarities between cox-1- and cox-2 overexpression have been
observed. for instance, as another interesting observation, and resembling the
results of transfection with either a cox-1 or a cox-2 vector,223 the egfr levels
were increased in tgf-alpha-stimulated cells and the mitogenesis was enhanced.
in this context it is also interesting to note that  xxxg147xxx , another
 xxxd208xxx  metabolizing enzyme, has been detected in the nucleus as well.224
it suggests that enzyme molecules might contain domains that interact with regulatory regions of the nuclear dna. however, it has also be reported that the
subcellular localization of  xxxg147xxx  is cell type dependent.225 it is found in
the nucleus of rat basophilic leukemia cells, but in resting rat peripheral neutrophils
the enzyme is located in the cytoplasm. regardless of initial location, after activation, the enzyme locates to the nuclear envelope and the enzymatic activity of 5lipoxygenase appears to take place in the nuclear envelope. cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  (cpla2) liberates  xxxd208xxx  from the nuclear membrane lipids,
which is then converted to leukotrienes by  xxxg147xxx .226

b. gene knockout models
cox-2 null mice develop renal anomalies and suffer from progressive deterioration of kidney function with age and a reduced life span. surprisingly, while cox-2

472

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

is considered of central importance in inflammation, cox-2-null mice show no innate
gastrointestinal pathology and are able to mount an inflammatory response.227 however, they are susceptible to peritonitis and they develop severe nephropathy. it has
been argued that gene disruption during the development in utero is probably different
from cox-2 inhibition in an adult patient with fully developed tissues.228 nevertheless,
these findings in cox-2 gene knockout mice have raised significant questions of
potential adverse renal effects of long-term cox-2 inhibition in humans.
surprisingly, immortalized, nontransformed cells derived from wild-type cox-2deficient mice increased their pge2 synthesis in response to stimulation with il-1alpha,
tnf-alpha,  xxxg786xxx , and phorbol  xxxd2681xxx  acetate (pma).229 in such
cells, il-1alpha upregulated the expression of cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  (cpla2) that
mobilizes the substrate for cox-2. it has been suggested that compensatory mechanism
that increases the expression of cox-1 in the cox-2 null cells overcomes defects in the
cox-2-regulated prostaglandin synthesis pathways.229 an alternative interpretation could
be that a third form of cyclooxygenase is present, as suggested by simmons et al.230 the
findings that some cox-2 selective inhibitors can inhibit growth of cells lacking detectable cox-2 might also point to an alternate form of cyclooxygenase
cox-2 is essential for successful ovulation and uterine implantation.231 a fundamental role for cox-2 in these reproductive functions in mice was found by disruption
of the cox-2 gene, which rendered the mice infertile.232 cox-2(-/-) mice fail to
ovulate, and if left untreated, they are sterile. however, treatment of cox-2-null mice
with gonadotropin supplemented either with pge2 or  xxxg1170xxx  restores ovulation comparable to that in cox-2(+/+) (wild-type) mice.233 aside from pge2, some findings
point to prostacyclin pgi2 as the primary prostanoid that is essential for blastocyst
implantation and decidualization.234 the effect of pgi2 is most likely mediated through
interaction with the peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor (ppar).
a study of the periimplantation mouse uterus revealed that ovarian steroids
regulate the cox-1 gene. however, the implanting blastocyst regulates expression
of cox-2.92 in addition, it was established that  xxxd2228xxx 
stabilizes cox-2 transcripts during differentiation of human endometrial stromal
cells into decidua.235 furthermore, cox-2 has been detected in the vas deferens
where it is induced by androgen. such involvement of cox-2 in the male reproductive function is an important finding, because the prostaglandins produced may
play a role in erection.236 however, if selective cox-2 inhibition causes impotence
is not yet known.
surprisingly, mice homogeneous for cox-1 deficiency survive well and without
gastric pathology.237 despite the lack of measurable amounts of cox-1 in the gastric
mucosa such mice showed no increase in gastroduodenal ulcer development. remarkably, they developed less indomethacin-induced gastric ulceration when compared with mice with intact cox-1 genes, even though their gastric  xxxd1903xxx 
levels are only about 1% of the wild type. it has been proposed that these results in
cox-1 null mice question the concept of ‘cytoprotective’ prostaglandins and a role
for nsaid-induced cox-1 inhibition in the pathogenesis of gastric injury.238,239

473

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

in normal mice, the cox-1-derived prostaglandin level is maximal on day
four of pregnancy.240 in a study on implantation in cox-1 knockout mice (-/
-) the uterine prostaglandin concentration and vascular permeability were
reduced, but by less than the expected amount. further investigation revealed
that cox-1-null uteri expressed cox-2 on the morning of day four, when this
isoform is normally absent. the data suggest that a compensatory mechanism
exist to induce cox-2 and cox-2 expression in the cox-1(-/-) mice. such a
mechanism could replace the missing prostaglandin synthesis caused by the
absence of cox-1.240 the cox-1-null mice are fertile but have decreased pup
viability.233

c. apoptosis
cox-2 expression induces resistance to apoptosis in many different cell
types, 241,242 for example, in breast cancer, and cancer of the colon (figure 7).
as pointed out by sheng et al., 243 several findings argue for an important role
of cox-2 in regulating apoptosis in colorectal cancer. first, as shown above,
the forced expression of cox-2 leads to the inhibition of apoptosis of
intestinal epithelial cells in vitro. second, the growth of xenografted hca7 human colon cancer cells that express cox-2 is inhibited by selective
cox-2 inhibitors. however, cox-2-negative hct-166 cells are not inhibited in vitro and form tumors when xenografted into nude mice. third,
supplementation of the cultured colon cancer cells with pge2 increases
clonogenicity of hca-7 but not of hct-166 cells. fourth, the cox-2 inhibitor sc-58125 decreases hca-7 cell colony formation in monolayer cultures.
however, the inhibition is reversed by pge2 supplementation. fifth, in
monolayer culture of the hca-7 cell line supplementation with pge2 induces the antiapoptotic bcl-2 expression. however, the expression of the
proapoptotic proteins  xxxg251xxx  or bax is not affected.243
 xxxd3259xxx  derivatives were found to cause growth inhibition and to induce
apoptosis of malignant prostate cell lines.244 remarkably, the effect occurred
irrespective of increased expression of bcl-2 or of androgen sensitivity. when it
was tested in an in vitro enzyme assay, one of the compounds, cp248, did not
inhibit either of the cyclooxygenase isoforms even at concentrations of up to 10
nm. marked inhibition of prostate cancer cell growth was observed at an ic50
for this compound of 64 nm. in contrast, normal human prostate epithelial cell
lines were resistant to induction of apoptosis by cp248 at concentrations up
to750 nm.
some findings found an association between elevations of cox-2 and apoptosis.
as examples, cox-2 but not cox-1 mrna expression was elevated after hippocampal colchicine injection in rats.245 cox-2 expression preceded the development
of morphological features of apoptosis, which exhibited a similar anatomical

474

475

figure 7. the major effects of overexpression of cox-2 in neoplasia are (1) inhibition of apoptosis by  xxxd1903xxx  (pge2), (2) increased
cell proliferation, and (3) pge2 induces il-6 that induces haptoglobin. pge2 increases the amount of antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 causing
mitochondrial pores to close, thereby reducing apoptosis. the combined effect of increased cell proliferation and reduced apoptosis causes
tumor growth. il-6 and haptoglobin are associated with tumor invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. selective and specific cox-2 inhibitors
reverse all the effects shown on the figure. cox-2 inhibition reduces pge2 synthesis, which reduces bcl-2 levels. lack of bcl-2 opens
mitochondrial pores and restores apoptosis that reduces tumor growth. some selective cox-2 inhibitors may effect apoptosis and cell
proliferation in additional ways. (for further detail see text.)

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

distribution. similarly, apoptosis in serum-deprived mouse p19 embryonal carcinoma cells followed cox-2 induction by 12 h. in contrast, cox-2 expression in
neoplastic cells results in enhanced proliferation and increased resistance to
apoptosis,241 for instance, in transformed mammary epithelial cells,242 and in colon
cancer cells.126 in vitro, indomethacin induces apoptosis of colo320, thrc, and
s/sk colon carcinoma cells.
the role of the  xxxg2296xxx  alpha in tumor cell apoptosis by regulating cox-2 expression may be cell specific. for instance, tnf-alpha induces the
nuclear factor (nf)-kappab ( xxxg1559xxx ) transcription factor and cox-2 both in the
ht-29 colonic epithelial cell line246 and in rat aortic smooth muscle cells.28 in the
ht-29 cells, induction of cox-2 by tnf-alpha could be prevented by the introduction
of an adenoviral vector harboring the  xxxg1559xxx  super-repressor ad5ikb.246 in contrast, the induction of  xxxg1559xxx  in the aortic smooth muscle cells could be blocked
by the  xxxg344xxx  i, a strong  xxxg1559xxx  inhibitor.28 however, in these cells
transcription of the cox-2 gene was not inhibited by the inhibition of  xxxg1559xxx ,
indicating that tnf-alpha-induced transcriptional regulation of cox-2 expression in
the smooth muscle cell does not depend on  xxxg1559xxx .

d. angiogenesis
new blood vessel formation provides the blood supply required for the
growth of many tumors. the new angiogenic endothelial cells in the tumors
synthesize cox-2. in contrast, normal blood vessels express the cox-1 enzyme. this difference was exploited using the selective cox-2 inhibitor sc236 to inhibit new vessel formation in a mouse corneal angiogenesis model.247
implanting a hydron pellet containing  xxxg787xxx  induced
corneal angiogenesis. sc-236 was antiangiogenic at doses of 1 to 6 mg/kg/d.
in contrast, sc-560, a cox-1-selective inhibitor, was ineffective at doses up
to 10 mg/kg/d.
synthesis by cox-2 of the precursor for the formation of prostanoid thromboxane a2 (txa2) is essential for experimental fibroblast growth factor (fgf)induced corneal angiogenesis.248 the angiogenesis is inhibited not only by cox2-selective inhibition, but also by the  xxxg2253xxx  antagonist sq29548.
furthermore, in the presence of a cox-2-selective inhibitor, the txa2 agonist
u46619 restores angiogenesis.
a model system of rat sponge implants was used to investigate the role of
cox-2 in angiogenesis as determined from the concentration of hemoglobin in the
sponge granuloma tissues. angiogenesis gradually increased over a 2-week experimental period.249 treatment for 4 days with topical injections of human recombinant,  xxxg787xxx  (100 or 1000 ng/sponge/d), enhanced angiogenesis. similar effects were obtained using human recombinant epidermal growth
factor. immunostaining for cox-2 was enhanced by the treatment and mainly

476

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

observed in the endothelial cells of the newly formed capillaries and in the
fibroblasts of the granuloma capsule. inhibition of cox-2 by either a specific
cox-2 inhibitor ns-398 or the nonselective inhibitor indomethacin reduced the
angiogenesis to the levels observed without growth factor supplementation.249
these examples of the antiangiogenic activity a cox-2 inhibitor demonstrate
the therapeutic potential for inhibition of human cancers through inhibition of
tumor-induced neovascularization.

e. effects of pge2 synthesis in neoplasia

1. pge2 is immunosuppressive
pge2 itself is immunosuppressive and can assist cancer cells in subverting
the immune system of the host. as an example, such escape from
immunosurveillance has been demonstrated in mice bearing syngeneic tumors.
the mice become increasingly immunodepressed during growth of the tumor.
they become defective on both cellular and humoral immunity and immunologically unresponsive to the sheep erythrocyte.250 there was suppression of
the response of spleen cells to stimulation by tumor cells. an in vitro test
system comprising cultures of spleen cells and sheep erythrocytes was used to
investigate the mechanism of immunosuppression. adding syngeneic tumor
cells to the cultures resulted in suppression of the antibody response. indomethacin and aspirin retarded tumor cell growth in vitro and blocked the in
vivo immunosuppression. several different cell lines were tested with this in
vitro system, and all were found to subvert the immune response.251 for
example, mc16 tumor cells were induced by methycholanthrene (mct) in
c57bl/6j mice, and it was established that the tumor cells contained and
secreted pge2.252 as the mct-induced tumor grew the mice became unresponsive to sheep red blood cells. however, when mice with such tumors were
treated with indomethacin, they responded normally with production of antibodies to the sheep  xxxd187xxx .
it has been suggested that the tumor synthesis of pge2 represents a
response of the tumor to challenge by effector lymphocytes.253 this opinion
was based on findings of the effect of lymphocytes on cell lines derived from
carcinogen-induced bladder and breast cancer, and from embryo fibroblasts in
fisher rats. the cells were exposed to splenic or peripheral blood lymphocytes
with or without supplementation with indomethacin at a concentration of
10-7 m. analysis by radioimmunoassay of the culture supernatant showed that
pge2 production peaked at 8 h. it was dependent on the number of lymphocytes and was partially inhibited by indomethacin. the contribution to pge2
levels in the supernatant by the lymphocytes was minimal as established by
preincubation studies.253

477

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

2. immunization against pge2
further findings in support for a role of pge2 in tumor cell escape from
immunosurveillance was obtained using immunization against pge2.254 the mitogenic response of spleen cells from c57b1/6 mice immunized against pge2 and
bearing lewis lung carcinoma was observed in vitro and compared with the response
of normal spleen cells. supplementation by pge2 suppressed the mitogenic response
to  xxxd2620xxx  (con a) of both type of cells. the assay revealed that the
mitogenic response of the immunized mice was only partially suppressed. in a
second assay the random migration in the presence of pge2 of normal macrophages
and macrophages from the immunized mice were observed. macrophages from the
immunized mice supplemented with pge2 behaved the same as that of normal
macrophages cultured in the absence of pge2. in contrast, the random migration of
macrophages from the immunized mice cultured in the absence of pge2 was
enhanced. tumor growth in immunized lewis lung carcinoma (lcc)-bearing mice
was reduced compared to llc-bearing mice administered a placebo.255
in another study of lcc cells from immunized tumor-bearing c57bl/6 mice,
it was observed that indomethacin only partially reduced the tumor immunosuppressive effect of the tumor cells.256 it was concluded that prostaglandin may
possibly only be one of several variables that determines the immunosuppression
exerted by the tumor cells. one possibility is perceptible from a study of the role
of macrophages in the tumor. for instance, syngenic-tumor-activated host macrophages that infiltrate tumors may augment the level of immunosuppression in the
host by producing large amounts of pge,257 an important activator of suppressor
t lymphocytes.

3. pge2 and growth
the in vitro growth of llc cells correlates with the pge2 concentration in the
supernatant.258 importantly, in the c57bl/6 mice with implanted lcc cells the
administration of exogenous pge2 or oral indomethacin have opposite effects on
the frequency of tumor establishment, growth, and metastasis. pge2 enhances and
indomethacin reduced the malignant behavior. without any medication in vivo, the
systemic level of pge2 increases as the tumor grows.258

4. pge2 and interaction between cancer cells and stromal cells
recent experiments point out significant, prostaglandin mediated interactions
between mmt mouse mammary tumor cells and the adjacent stroma.259 when
conditioned medium from mmt cells were added to cultures of human fibroblasts
derived from skin and breast tissues, it stimulated the production of hepatocyte

478

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

growth factor that strongly enhanced  xxxg1767xxx  activity
and invasion of mmt cells through matrigel (figure 8). the purified active factor
in the conditioned medium that induced the synthesis of the  xxxg1044xxx 
proved to be  xxxd1903xxx  (pge2). therefore, as expected, treatment of mmt
cells with indomethacin abolished the stimulatory effect by the conditioned medium
on the synthesis of the  xxxg1044xxx  by the stromal fibroblasts. during
co-cultivation with fibroblast in the lower and mmt cell in the upper matrigel
chamber, the  xxxg1044xxx  level was higher than in cultures with stromal
cells alone. correspondingly, the co-cultivation with the fibroblast enhanced the
invasion of the mmt cells. these effects were abolished when indomethacin or an
anti-pge2 antibody was added to the culture system. this positive feedback system
formed by tumor cells and stromal cells might be crucial to tumor growth.

4. tumor cell migration
a causative role for pge2 in tumor migration and dissemination was observed
in murine el4 leukemia cells.260 el4 cells contain and secrete pge2 into the culture
media in vitro and into plasma when grown in the peritoneum of inbred c57bl/6
mice. the migration of tumor cells out of a glass capillary tube into the surrounding
medium was employed as an in vitro model of tumor spread in the mouse. supplementation of the cultured cells with pge2 enhanced the extent of cell migration.
however, indomethacin reduced migration. similar results were obtained when el4
cells were implanted into c57bl/6 mice. indomethacin-treated mice showed reduced pge2 in the tumor and a reduced ability of the tumor to disseminate.

5. macrophages
the role of macrophages in tumor metastasis was investigated using a similar
in vitro model migration assay.261 as above, the rate of migration of the tumor cells
out of the glass capillary tube was used to estimate the effects of cell migration by
macrophages harvested from different sources. macrophages obtained either from
llc tumors of c57bl/6 mice increased tumor cell migration corresponded to their
secretion of pge2, and the effect could be inhibited by indomethacin. these
findings verify prior suggestions,257 that macrophages can amplify tumor-induced
prostanoid-mediated immunosuppression of the host.

6. tumor aggressiveness
there is evidence that the responsiveness to pge2 by tumors is involved in the
regulation of the degree of tumor aggressiveness in vivo.262 the basis for this

479

480

figure 8. molecular pathology of cyclooxygenase (cox) -2 in neoplasia. illustration of some in vitro and ex vivo findings. in the neoplastic
cell, membrane phospholipid (mpl) is converted by phospholipase (pla) -2 to  xxxd208xxx  (aa) that is converted by cox-2 to prostaglandin
(pg) e2. the latter induces stromal fibroblasts to produce  xxxg1044xxx  (hgf), which induces the cox-2 and pla-2 genes located
on chromosome region 1q25 of the neoplastic cell. in vitro inhibition of cox-2 or addition of anti-pge2 antibody abolishes fibroblast hgf
production in co-cultures of neoplastic cells and fibroblasts.  xxxg681xxx  (egf) is a strong induced of cox-2 and pla2 via its
receptor (egfr) that maps to 7q12. egfr is inducible by the lmp1 protein of the epstein-barr virus (ebv) and significantly amplified in some
tumors. transforming growth factor beta (tgf-b) -1 is overexpressed in several types of neoplasms. it can induce cox-2 via its type ii receptor
(tgfbrii) (rii) and inhibit growth via its type i receptor (tgfbri) (ri). disruption (asterisk) of the rii gene reduces in vitro invasiveness of
cells from human nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (hnpcc). the human papilloma virus (hpv) can disrupt (asterisk) the ri gene located at
9q22 and abolish growth inhibition. many tumors exhibit loss of heterozygosity (loh) of 9q22. ultraviolet light (uvb) can disrupt (asterisk)
the gene for the tumor suppressor protein p53, which reduces inhibition of cox-2 expression.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

opinion was the finding that metastatic llc cells were more responsive to pge2
than nonmetastatic llc cells. the cancer cell responsiveness to pge2 was measured as the cell in vitro migration through a membrane.

7. pge2 and esophageal cancer
epidemiological studies have indicated an association between the consumption of maize and cancer of the esophagus. an analysis using gas-liquid chromatography of food prepared from maize meal revealed from 49 to 363 mg of
nonesterified linoleic acid per 100-g sample.263 the suggestion was made that the
high level of linoleic acid in the food might cause intragastric production of
pge2, alter the normal ph, and create a predisposition to esophageal carcinogenesis.
altered glycosaminoglycan composition in the microenvironment of a
solid tumor might influence the pge2 synthesis of antigen-presenting cells.
for instance, heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans can activate macrophages
and lead to profound alterations in t cell responses. as an example, when
murine antigen-presenting cells were exposed to heparan sulfate and other
glycosaminoglycans,  xxxd1903xxx  was induced.264 moreover, several
cytokines and growth factors such as il-1, il-6 tnf, il-12, and tgf-beta were
also induced.
of particular interest to the part that cox-2 plays in carcinogenesis are reports
of alterations in the cox-2 inducers in neoplastic cells compared with the corresponding normal cells. as an example, during mouse skin carcinogenesis the
expression of c/ebp isoforms is altered.265
surprisingly, pge2 can temporarily induce cox-2 in vitro, indicating the
presence of a positive feedback loop. for instance, in the pc-3 human prostate
carcinoma cell line exogenous dimethylprostaglandin e2 (dmpge2) increased
cox-2 mrna steady-state levels266 (figure 4). furthermore, cell proliferation,
total dna content, and endogenous pge2 concentration were elevated, suggesting
that pge2 has a distinct role in the maintenance of cancer growth. similarly, pge2
induction of cox-2 was observed in mda-mb-134 human breast cancer cells,
androgen-dependent lncap prostate carcinoma cells, and difi colon carcinoma
cells.266

8.  xxxg681xxx  (egf)
in endometrial cells isolated from uteri of the ovariectomized rat egf at a
concentration of 40 ng/ml increased steady-state levels of cox-1 and cox-2
mrna and protein.267 the cells had been sensitized for the decidual reaction.
dexamethasone inhibited cox-2 but not cox-1 induction.

481

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

others report that egf induces cox-2 messenger ribonucleic acid (mrna)
and cox-2 protein; however, it has no effect on the expression of
cox-1.268 for instance, transient egf transfection of human oral squamous carcinoma cells doubles the activity of the cox-2 promoter.269 retinoids suppress the
cox-2 induction.269 egfr expression remains unaffected. egf can stimulate
pge2 production in various cell lines, for example, in the a341 human squamous
carcinoma cell line.270 it increases the release of  xxxd208xxx  from membrane
lipids by increasing the expression of cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  (cpla2). in
addition, it increases the synthesis of prostaglandins by inducing cox-2 and
elevating the levels of cox-2 protein (figure 8).
the  xxxg1044xxx  (hgf) is an even better stimulator of pge2
production than egf, for example, in human gastric carcinoma tmk-1 cells.271 it
increases the release of  xxxd208xxx  from membrane lipids by increasing the
expression of cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  (cpla2) and increases the synthesis of
prostaglandins by inducing cox-2 transcription and elevating the levels of cox2 enzyme. hgf increased the  xxxd208xxx  release from the cells. the release
was completely suppressed by the addition of  xxxg1759xxx  (pla2) inhibitors.
the egf receptor expression in a series of 97 fresh and 74 formalin-fixed bladder
cancer tissues was strongly associated with 5-bromodeoxyuridine (brdu) labeling
index, grade, and stage.272 in hepatocellular carcinoma, the ability to produce metastases directly correlates with elevated levels of egf receptor mrna and protein.273
the epstein-barr virus (ebv) can induce the egf receptor (figure 8). the
virus is associated with human leiomyomas in various organs of immune-compromised patients. this smooth muscle cell tumor has been found in children274-276 and
adults277,278 with aids or immune-suppressed adult patients.279 the virus produces
latent membrane proteins (lmp-1, lmp-2a and lmp-2b) in the tumor cells.280,281
these 54-kda (lmp-1) and 40-kda (lmp-2) proteins are encoded by different
viral genes.282 expression of lmp-1 induces egfr and inhibits cell death through
induction of antiapoptotic proteins, for instance, the zinc-finger protein a20 in the
c33a human epithelial cell283 and bcl-2 in the ebv-immortalized b cell line.284
lmp-1 activates the  xxxg1559xxx  transcription factor that regulates expression of a20,284
cox-2, and bcl-2
the gene for the  xxxg682xxx  maps to chromosome region
7p12,285 and expression of the egfr in cancer cells is associated with an increased
copy number of chromosome 7 (figure 8).273 for instance, the receptor gene is
amplified 20- to 30-fold in the a431 breast cancer cell line.286 another study
demonstrated that 4 of 7 squamous cell carcinoma cell lines harbored egfr genes
in amounts more that 20 times that of control cells.287 the importance of the egf
receptor in carcinogenesis is confirmed by the effect of overexpression of this
receptor in colon cancer cells in vitro. as an example, addition of antisense egfr
rna to cultured moser human colon cancer cells downregulates the expression of
the receptor and the antisense molecules, thereby blocking the ability of exogenous
egf to enhance malignant cell behavior.288

482

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

9. tgf-b
a key step in the development of intestinal tumors involves modification of the
normal cellular response to transforming growth factor beta (tgf-beta) -1, a
potent regulator of cox-2 expression.289 there is evidence that the deregulation of
 xxxg2269xxx  expression is an early event in colorectal carcinogenesis.290 a similar
distribution of expression of cox-2 and tgf-beta in colon adenocarcinomas indicate
that they cooperate in the process of carcinogenesis.291 both are abundant in the
cancer cells,291 and their expression is more elevated in primary than in metastatic
tumors. in the corresponding normal mucosa,  xxxg2269xxx  was low or undetectable. a
prior study found by immunostaining that 8 of 10 adenomas and 46 of 48 carcinomas expressed  xxxg2269xxx  in the tumor cells.292 in 52 of 58 samples that showed tgfbeta1 protein in epithelial cells of the normal colonic mucosa, the upper parts of crypts
showed more immunostaining compared with lower the proliferative compartmen.292
based on their findings, the investigators suggested that tgf-beta exert a growth
inhibitory function of the upper parts of the crypts.
results of immunohistochemical and cell culture studies indicate that tgf-beta
is involved in the growth and spread of cancer, and tgf-beta expression in colorectal
tumors may have prognostic significance (figure 8). for instance, primary colon
carcinomas expressing elevated  xxxg2269xxx  levels have an 18-fold rate of recurrence
as distant metastases compared with primary colon cancers with low levels of
 xxxg2269xxx .293 likewise, results from a series of samples from 47 colorectal tumors
reinforce the belief that the expression of tgf-beta in colorectal neoplasms is
important in their genesis and that the level of expression is of prognostic value.290
of 47 tumors,  xxxg2269xxx  was detected in nine of 13 adenomas and 30 of 34
carcinomas.290  xxxg2269xxx  levels increased with increasing malignancy. they were
low in adenomas without dysplasia, higher in tubular adenomas with dysplasia, and
highest in carcinomas. epithelial cells as well as stromal cells were positive for
 xxxg2269xxx  in both the dysplastic lesions and in the carcinomas. however, epithelial
cells of the corresponding normal mucosa were  xxxg2269xxx  negative. interestingly,
normal tissue endothelial cells occasionally stained positive for  xxxg2269xxx .

10. inos
besides tgf-beta overexpression, tumors of the human colon can express  xxxg1578xxx  (inos) that can induce cox-2. in the animal model of
carcinogenesis azoxymethane (aom)-induced colon tumors in rats overexpress.294
evidence for a role for inos in the induction of cox-2 was obtained in a study
of aberrant crypt formation in aom-treated f344 rats. rodents administered the
specific inos inhibitor s,s′-1,4-phenylene-bis(1,2-ethanediyl)bis-isothiourea
(pbit) exhibited a reduction of aom-induced aberrant crypt formation of 58%
compared with the animals that did not receive the inos inhibitor

483

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

11. bile acids
bile acids exhibit tumor-promoting effects. for example, the bile acids  xxxd1660xxx 
(cd) and  xxxd1835xxx  induce transcription of cox-2.295 these bile acids activate protein
kinase c (pkc) and the activator protein (ap-1) transcriptions factor that induces cox-2.
inhibitors of pkc activity, such as calphostin c and  xxxd3241xxx , block cox-2 induction
by the bile acids. in the sk-gt-4, scc450, iec-18, and hca-7 gastrointestinal cell lines
the chemopreventive agent curcumin inhibits cd-mediated induction of cox-2 mrna
expression.296 interestingly, in addition to inhibition of cox-2 transcription, curcumin also
inhibited the activity of the cox-2 enzyme.

12. apoptosis and proliferation
an alternate apoptotic mechanism has been proposed that is associated with
the accumulation of  xxxd208xxx . this pathway for the regulation of apoptosis
in colorectal carcinogenesis produces ceramide, a known mediator of apoptosis.297
the proponents of this hypothesis based it on the observation that inhibition of
cyclooxygenase in colon tumor cells by nsaids markedly increases arachidonic
acid, which in turn stimulates the conversion of sphingomyelin to ceramide.
chinery et al.298 established a cell culture model system using transfected cells
to investigate the effect of various prostaglandins on cell growth. first, an antisense
cox-2 cdna construct was developed that was under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter. then the construct was introduced into a human coloncarcinoma cell line (hca-7) that expresses cox-2 and produces cox-2 and
prostaglandins. when the construct was induced by supplementing the cells with
tetracycline, the transfected cells showed a 60% reduction in dna replication,
were depleted of cox-2, and the prostaglandin production was reduced over 99%
compared with control cells. two types of control cells were used, one consisting
of uninduced transfectant cells and the other of parental hca-7 cells.
when various prostaglandins were added to the cox-2-depleted cells, it was found
that the j-series cyclopentenone prostaglandins induced proliferation of the cells at
nanomolar concentrations. pgj2 and 15-deoxy-delta12,14-pgj2 were particularly effective in stimulating cell growth in collagen gels. analysis using chromatography and mass
spectrometry revealed pgj2 in conditioned medium from parental hca-7 cells. lipid
extracts from the medium enhanced mitogenesis in cox-2-depleted hca-7 cell. likewise, the growth of the hct-15 cell, which does not express cox-2, was also stimulated.

13.  xxxg1438xxx 
the matrix metalloproteinase (mmp)  xxxg1438xxx  is often expressed in premalignant lesions and is also involved in cancer invasion and metastases.299 an

484

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

immunohistochemical study of human colon carcinomas revealed that 80% of the
specimens overexpressed both cox-2 and  xxxg1438xxx  in the neoplastic epithelium.300 cox-2 immunostaining was strongest in well-differentiated tumor regions. in contrast,  xxxg1438xxx  expression was strongest in the more dysplastic and
invasive areas of the tumors. in addition, the regional distribution of cox-2 and
 xxxg1438xxx  differed. the lack of coordinated expression provides cogent evidence
that cox-2 and  xxxg1438xxx  involvement in colorectal carcinogenesis are not closely
interconnected.

14. benzo[a]pyrene
tobacco smoke contains the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon benzo[a]pyrene
(b[a]p) that may be important in smoking-induced lung cancer. b[a]p induces
transcription of cox-2 but not cox-1 in normal and transformed oral epithelial
cells.301 the amount of cox-2 protein and the synthesis of pge2 were also
increased.
antioxidants can reduce cox-2 expression, but the regulation of expression
is cells specific. a case in point, the addition of the oxidant-scavenger pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate (pdtc) to colorectal cancer cells in vitro decreases cox-2
expression at the transcriptional level.302
for instance, the hca-7 colon cancer cell line expresses both cyclooxygenase
isoforms and produces large amounts of prostaglandin.303 antioxidants significantly reduce prostaglandin synthesis and induce apoptosis and g1 cell cycle arrest
in this cell line.302 other antioxidants, including u74006,  xxxd68xxx , and 6hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (trolox), lower cox-2 transcription in the colon cancer cells. in comparison, in rat mesangial cells, pdtc
inhibits  xxxg1170xxx -induced cox-2 expression at the posttranscriptional level.304

15. lipoxygenase
in addition to cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase (lox) may also have a role in
carcinogenesis. for instance, in a comparison of 21 matched pairs of human colorectal
tumors and adjacent normal tissue, 15-lox-1 was found to be highly expressed in the
cancer cells.305 the presence of lipoxygenase was examined by immunoblot analysis
using specific antibodies for human 15-lox-1. in the female sprague-dawley rat the
administration of esculetin (6,7-dihydroxycoumarin), a lipoxygenase inhibitor, significantly reduced  xxxd2685xxx  (mnu)-induced mammary carcinogenesis.199
at 50 d of age the rats were given mnu by subcutaneous injection. from age 8 weeks
to 25 weeks the diet was supplemented with 0.03% esculetin. at necropsy, both the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors in the treated group were significantly smaller than
in a control group of rats given the same diet but without esculetin.

485

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

viii. discussion
there is significant evidence that non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs inhibit
in vitro and in vivo tumor growth by reducing tumor cell proliferation and restoring
apoptosis. nsaids are beneficial in other human diseases as well. for instance, in
addition to the findings that regular aspirin use reduces the risk of colon cancer,
there are reports that it reduces the risk of other human diseases such as alzheimer’s
disease.306,307 furthermore, aspirin is useful in the treatment of atherosclerosis, a
disease with a strong inflammatory component. for example, aspirin treatment is
beneficial in heart disease, and prophylactic aspirin use significantly attenuates the
risk of myocardial infarction.308,309
however, aspirin and other nonselective nsaids significantly inhibit
cyclooxygenase (cox) -1 in the gastric mucosa, in platelets, and in the kidney. in
contrast, the selective inhibitors of cox-2 appear to possess the analgesic, antiphlogistic, and antineoplastic properties of nonselective nsaids while at the
same time sparing cox-1. in addition to their present use in chronic inflammatory
disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, these drugs may find application in other
diseases with an inflammatory component. as a case in point, very recent findings
of cox-2 expression in atherosclerotic lesions but not in the normal artery310
suggests that treating atherosclerosis with selective cox-2 inhibitors might provide the beneficial antiinflammatory effects of aspirin treatment but without the
risk of the adverse side effects of aspirin use.
another intriguing aspect of the effect of some of the selective cox-2 inhibitors on colon cancer cells line proliferation in vitro is the fact that they can inhibit
growth of cells that do not express measurable amounts of cox-2.186 such alternate inhibitory effects might be due to the presence of alternate forms of
cyclooxygenase or to the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation.

ix. conclusion
 xxxg1884xxx  selective inhibitors are safer options than nonselective
nsaids because they spare the cox-1 enzyme and its physiological functions.311
clinical trials over the last 5 years312 have demonstrated that such cox-2-selective
inhibitors retain the analgesic and antiphlogistic properties of nonselective nsaids.
most importantly, they show fewer of the more serious side effects that can affect
regular users of nonselective nsaids.174 a number of selective cox-2 inhibitors
are in phase iii trials. a few have received fda approval and are already in clinical
use for chronic inflammatory conditions, for instance, rheumatoid arthritis and
osteoarthritis.
because the selective cox-2 inhibitors are tolerated better than the nonselective nsaids, in all probability these selective inhibitors can be useful in treating
other human diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases and, importantly, pre-

486

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

malignant lesions and cancer.10 for the treatment of cancer, it appears probable that
the best results might be obtainable using a combination of agents. for example,
present evidence would argue in favor of specific inhibition of cox-2 combined
with antioxidant treatment and concurrent treatment to inhibit lipoxygenase.
it has been suggested that large-scale clinical testing of selective cox-2
inhibitors as chemopreventive agents for colorectal cancer should now be undertaken.313 because cox-2 is expressed in the brain, kidney, ovary, and vas deferens
concerns have been raised about possible side effects of selective cox-2 inhibitors
during long-term treatment. studies so far claim good tolerance for cox-2 selective inhibitors. consequently, for instance, celecoxib has been approved by the
fda for the treatment of patients who are afflicted with familial adenomatous
polyposis. moreover, it is to be expected that a few selective cox-2 inhibitors will
soon be shown effective in clinical trials for the treatment of some colorectal and
possibly other types of human cancer. on the other hand, at this point in time the
benefit to risk ratio of a wider use of selective cox-2 inhibitors for long-term
prevention of cancer is still an open question.

references
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

dubois rn. cox-2 in large bowel cancer: a one-sided story. gut 1999; 45(5): 636–7.
vane jr. inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a mechanism of action for aspirin-like drugs.
nature new biol 1971; 231: 232–5.
vane jr, botting rm. mechanism of action of aspirin-like drugs. semin arthritis rheum
1997; 26(6 suppl 1): 2–10.
hamberg m, samuelsson b. on the mechanism of the biosynthesis of prostaglandins e-1 and
f-1-alpha. j biol chem 1967; 242(22): 5336–43.
fosslien e. adverse effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs on the gastrointestinal
system. ann clin lab sci 1998; 28(2): 67–81.
fosslien e. molecular pathology of  xxxg1884xxx  in neoplasia. ann clin lab sci 2000;
30(1): 3–21.
tsujii m, kawano s, tsuji s, sawaoka h, et al. cyclooxygenase regulates angiogenesis
induced by colon cancer cells. cell 1998; 93(5): 705–16.
tsujii m, kawano s dubois rn.  xxxg1884xxx  expression in human colon cancer cells
increases metastatic potential. proc natl acad sci usa 1997; 94(7): 3336–40.
robertson rp. dominance of  xxxg1884xxx  in the regulation of pancreatic islet prostaglandin synthesis. diabetes 1998; 47(9): 1379–83.
ledro cano d, gomez rodriguez bj, torres dominguez y, et al. non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs and  xxxg1884xxx  selectivity in gastroenterology. rev esp enferm dig
1999; 91(4): 305–9.
capdevila jh, falck jr, harris rc. cytochrome p450 and  xxxd208xxx  bioactivation.
molecular and functional properties of the  xxxd208xxx  monooxygenase. j lipid res 2000;
41(2): 163–181.
egan rw, paxton j kuehl fa jr. mechanism for irreversible self-deactivation of prostaglandin synthetase. j biol chem 1976; 251(23): 7329–35.
bany bm, kennedy tg. role of interleukin 1 in the regulation of cyclooxygenase gene
expression in rat endometrial stromal cells. j reprod fertil 1999; 115(1): 125–31.

487

14.
15.
16.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.

needleman p, isakson pc. selective inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx . sci med 1998; 26–35.
marnett lj, rowlinson sw, goodwin dc, et al.  xxxd208xxx  oxygenation by cox-1 and
cox-2. mechanisms of catalysis and inhibition. j biol chem 1999; 274(33): 22903–6.
langenbach r, loftin c, lee c, et al. cyclooxygenase knockout mice: models for elucidating
isoform-specific functions. biochem pharmacol 1999; 58(8): 1237–46.
katori m, majima m. multiple roles of inducible  xxxg1884xxx  and its selective inhibitors.
nippon yakurigaku zasshi 1997; 109(6): 247–58.
hla t, neilson k. human  xxxg1884xxx  cdna. proc natl acad sci usa 1992; 89(16):
7384–8.
vane jr, bakhle ys botting rm. cyclooxygenases 1 and 2. ann rev pharmacol toxicol
1998; 38: 97–120.
dewitt dl, smith wl. primary structure of prostaglandin g/h synthase from sheep vesicular
gland determined from the complementary dna sequence. proc natl acad sci usa 1988;
85(5): 1412–6.
yokoyama c, takai t, tanabe t. primary structure of sheep prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthase deduced from cdna sequence. febs lett 1988; 231(2): 347–51.
merlie jp, fagan d, mudd j, et al. isolation and characterization of the complementary dna
for sheep seminal vesicle prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase (cyclooxygenase). j biol chem
1988; 263(8): 3550–3.
simmons dl, levy db, yannoni y, et al. identification of a  xxxd2925xxx -repressible v-srcinducible gene. proc natl acad sci usa 1989; 86(4): 1178–82.
xie wl, chipman jg, robertson dl, et al. expression of a mitogen-responsive gene encoding
prostaglandin synthase is regulated by mrna splicing. proc natl acad sci usa 1991; 88(7):
2692–6.
kujubu da, fletcher bs, varnum bc, et al. tis10, a  xxxd2925xxx  tumor promoter-inducible
mrna from swiss 3t3 cells, encodes a novel prostaglandin synthase/cyclooxygenase homologue. j biol chem 1991; 15(20): 12866–72.
o’banion mk, sadowski hb, winn v, et al. a serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated 4kilobase mrna encodes a cyclooxygenase-related protein. j biol chem 1991; 266(34):
23261–7.
hla t, bishop-bailey d, liu ch, et al.  xxxg1883xxx  and -2 isoenzymes. int j biochem
cell biol 1999; 31: 551–7.
chen g, wood eg, wang sh, et al. expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in rat vascular smooth
muscle cells is unrelated to nuclear factor-kappab activation. life sci 1999; 64(14): 1231–42.
kim y, fischer sm. transcriptional regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  in mouse skin carcinoma
cells. regulatory role of ccaat/enhancer-binding proteins in the differential expression of
 xxxg1884xxx  in normal and neoplastic tissues. j biol chem 1998; 273(42): 27686–94.
chen f, sun s, kuhn dc, et al. involvement of  xxxg1559xxx  in silica-induced cyclooxygenase
ii gene expression in rat alveolar macrophages. am j physiol 1997; 272(4 pt 1): l779–86.
appleby sb, ristimaki a, neilson k, et al. structure of the human cyclo-oxygenase-2 gene.
biochem j 1994; 302(pt 3): 723–7.
hla t. molecular characterization of the 5.2 kb isoform of the human  xxxg1883xxx 
transcript. prostaglandins 1996; 51(1): 81–4.
duckett cs, perkins nd, leung k, et al. cytokine induction of nuclear factor kappa b in
cycling and growth-arrested cells. evidence for cell cycle-independent activation. j biol chem
1995; 270(32): 18836–40.
sen r, baltimore d. inducibility of kappa immunoglobulin enhancer-binding protein nfkappa b by a posttranslational mechanism. cell 1986; 47(6): 921–8.
perkins nd. achieving transcriptional specificity with nf-kappa b. int j biochem cell biol
1997; 29(12): 1433–48.

488

36.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.
47.
48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

54.

ji ys, xu q, schmedtje jf jr. hypoxia induces high-mobility-group  xxxg165xxx (y) and transcription of the  xxxg1884xxx  gene in human vascular endothelium. circ res 1998; 83(3):
295–304.
d’acquisto f, iuvone t, rombola l, et al. involvement of  xxxg1559xxx  in the regulation of
 xxxg1884xxx  protein expression in lps-stimulated j774 macrophages. febs lett
1997; 418(1–2): 175–8.
wallace ad, wheeler tt young da. inducibility of e4bp4 suggests a novel mechanism of
negative gene regulation by glucocorticoids. biochem biophys res commun 1997; 232(2):
403–6.
morisset s, patry c, lora m, et al. regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  expression in bovine
chondrocytes in culture by interleukin 1alpha,  xxxg2296xxx -alpha, glucocorticoids,
and 17beta-estradiol. j rheumatol 1998; 25(6): 1146–53.
ristimaki a, garfinkel s, wessendorf j, et al. induction of  xxxg1884xxx  by interleukin1 alpha. evidence for post-transcriptional regulation. j biol chem 1994; 269(16): 11769–75.
huang jc, liu dy, yadollahi s, et al.  xxxg1170xxx  induces  xxxg1884xxx  gene
expression in cultured endometrial stromal cells. j clin endocrinol metab 1998; 83(2): 538–
41.
crofford lj, tan b, mccarthy cj, et al. involvement of nuclear factor kappa b in the
regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  expression by interleukin-1 in rheumatoid synoviocytes.
arthritis rheum 1997; 40(2): 226–36.
schmedtje jf jr, ji ys, liu wl, et al. hypoxia induces  xxxg1884xxx  via the  xxxg1559xxx 
p65 transcription factor in human vascular endothelial cells. j biol chem 1997; 272(1): 601–
8.
han sw, lei zm, rao cv. up-regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  gene expression by chorionic
gonadotropin in mucosal cells from human fallopian tubes. endocrinology 1996; 137(7):
2929–37.
raghavendra v, agrewala jn kulkarni sk. role of centrally administered melatonin and
inhibitors of cox and nos in lps-induced hyperthermia and adipsia. prostaglandins leukot
essent  xxxd2154xxx  1999; (4): 249–53.
miyamoto t, ogino n, yamamoto s, et al. purification of prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthetase from bovine vesicular gland microsomes. j biol chem 1976; 251(9): 2629–36.
picot d, loll pj garavito rm. the x-ray crystal structure of the membrane protein prostaglandin h2 synthase-1. nature 1994; 367(6460): 243–9.
kurumbail rg, stevens am, gierse jk, et al. structural basis for selective inhibition of
 xxxg1884xxx  by antiinflammatory agents. nature 1996; 384: 644-8. published erratum
appears in nature 1997; 385(6616): 555.
loll pj, picot d garavito rm. the structural basis of aspirin activity inferred from the crystal
structure of inactivated prostaglandin h2 synthase. nat struct biol 1995; 2(8): 637–43.
williams cs, dubois rn. prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase: why two isoforms? am j
physiol 1996; 270(3 pt 1):  xxxg393xxx –400.
o’neill gp, ford-hutchinson aw. expression of mrna for  xxxg1883xxx  and
 xxxg1884xxx  in human tissues. febs lett 1993; 330(2): 156–60.
tsujii m, dubois rn. alterations in cellular adhesion and apoptosis in epithelial cells
overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2. cell 1995; 83(3): 493–501.
lu x, xie w, reed d, et al. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs cause apoptosis and induce
cyclooxygenases in chicken embryo fibroblasts. proc natl acad sci usa 1995; 92(17): 7961–
5.
charpigny g, reinaud p, tamby jp, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  unlike  xxxg1883xxx  is
highly expressed in ovine embryos during the implantation period. biol reprod 1997; 57(5):
1032–40.

489

55.
56.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

57.

58.

59.
60.
61.

62.

63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

68.

69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

75.

dinarello ca. controlling the production of interleukin-1 and  xxxg2296xxx  in disease.
nutrition 1995; 11(5 suppl): 695–7.
takahashi s, shigeta j, inoue h, et al. localization of  xxxg1884xxx  and regulation of its
mrna expression in gastric ulcers in rats. am j physiol 1998; 275(5 pt 1):  xxxg1137xxx –45.
newton r, kuitert lm, bergmann m, et al. evidence for involvement of  xxxg1559xxx  in the
transcriptional control of cox-2 gene expression by  xxxg1170xxx . biochem biophys res commun
1997; 237(1): 28–32.
newton r, seybold j, liu sf, et al. alternate cox-2 transcripts are differentially regulated:
implications for post-transcriptional control. biochem biophys res commun 1997; 234(1):
85–9.
perkins dj, kniss da.  xxxg2296xxx -alpha promotes sustained  xxxg1884xxx 
expression: attenuation by dexamethasone and nsaids. prostaglandins 1997; 54(4): 727–43.
nanji aa, miao l, thomas p, et al. enhanced  xxxg1884xxx  gene expression in alcoholic
liver disease in the rat. gastroenterology 1997; 112(3): 943–51.
anastassiou ed, paliogianni f, balow jp, et al.  xxxd1903xxx  and other cyclic ampelevating agents modulate il-2 and  xxxg1175xxx  alpha gene expression at multiple levels. j immunol
1992; 148(9): 2845–52.
snijdewint fg, kalinski p, wierenga ea, et al.  xxxd1903xxx  differentially modulates
cytokine secretion profiles of human t helper lymphocytes. j immunol 1993; 150(12): 5321–
9.
hashimoto s, suzuki t, dong hy, et al. serial analysis of gene expression in human
monocytes and macrophages. blood 1999; 94(3): 837–44.
sweet mj, hume da. endotoxin signal transduction in macrophages. j leukoc biol 1996;
60(1); 8–26.
morita i, schindler m, regier mk, et al. different intracellular locations for prostaglandin
endoperoxide h synthase-1 and -2. j biol chem 1995; 270(18): 10902–8.
philllips ta, kujubu da, mackay rj, et al. the mouse macrophage activation-associated
marker protein, p71/73, is an inducible prostaglandin endoperoxidase synthase (cyclooxygenase).
j leukoc biol 1993; 53(4): 411–9.
litherland sa, xie xt, hutson ad, et al. aberrant prostaglandin synthase 2 expression
defines an antigen-presenting cell defect for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. j clin invest
1999; 104(4): 515–23.
zhang y, shaffer a, portanova j, et al. inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx  rapidly reverses
inflammatory hyperalgesia and  xxxd1903xxx  production. j pharmacol exp ther 1997;
283(3): 1069–75.
williams cs, mann m, dubois rn. the role of cyclooxygenases in inflammation, cancer, and
development. oncogene 1999; 18(55): 7908–16.
dubois rn, smalley we. cyclooxygenase, nsaids, and colorectal cancer. j gastroenterol
1996; 31(6): 898–906.
garay ca, engstrom pf. chemoprevention of colorectal cancer: dietary and pharmacologic
approaches. oncology (huntingt) 1999; 13(1): 89–98.
ahnen dj. colon cancer prevention by nsaids: what is the mechanism of action? eur j surg
suppl 1998; (582): 111–4.
williams c, shattuck-brandt rl dubois rn. the role of cox-2 in intestinal cancer. ann ny
acad sci 1999; 889: 72–83.
eberhart ce, coffey rj, radhika a, et al. up-regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  gene expression
in human colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas. gastroenterology 1994; 107(4): 1183–
8.
sano h, kawahito y, wilder rl, et al. expression of  xxxg1883xxx  and –2 in human
colorectal cancer. cancer res 1995; 55(17): 3785–9.

490

76.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.

86.

87.
88.

89.
90.
91.
92.

93.
94.

95.
96.
97.

98.

smalley we, dubois rn. colorectal cancer and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. adv
pharmacol 1997; 39: 1–20.
fujita t, matsui m, takaku k, et al. size- and invasion-dependent increase in cyclooxygenase
2 levels in human colorectal carcinomas. cancer res 1998; 58(21): 4823–6.
giardiello fm.  xxxd3259xxx  and polyp regression. cancer metastasis rev 1994; 13(3–4): 279–83.
knudson ag jr. mutation and cancer in man. cancer 1977; 39(4 suppl): 1882–6.
mackawa m, sugano k, sano h, et al. increased expression of  xxxg1884xxx  to -1 in human
colorectal cancers and adenomas, but not in hyperplastic polyps. jpn j clin oncol 1998; 28(7): 421–6.
oshima m, dinchuk je, kargman sl, et al. suppression of intestinal polyposis in apc delta
716 knockout mice by inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-2). cell 1996; 87(5): 803–9.
hao x, bishop ae, wallace m, et al. early expression of cyclo-oxygenase-2 during sporadic
colorectal carcinogenesis. j pathol 1999; 187(3): 295–301.
sheehan km, sheahan k, o’donoghue dp, et al. the relationship between cyclooxygenase2 expression and colorectal cancer. jama 1999; 282(13): 1254–7.
dimberg j, samuelsson a, hugander a, et al. differential expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in
human colorectal cancer. gut 1999; 45(5): 730–2.
sakuma k, fujimore t, hirabayashi k, et al. cyclooxygenase (cox)-2 immunoreactivity and
relationship to p53 and ki-67 expression colorectal cancer. j gastroenterol 1999; 34(2): 189–
94.
giardiello fm, spannhake ew, dubois rn, et al. prostaglandin levels in human colorectal
mucosa: effects of  xxxd3259xxx  in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. dig dis sci 1998;
43(2): 311–6.
berg j, christoph t, bodenteich a, et al. heterogeneous distribution of cox-2 over-expression in human colon carcinoma cells. adv exp med biol 1997; 433: 327–30.
simmons dl, botting rm, robertson pm, et al. induction of an acetaminophen-sensitive
cyclooxygenase with reduced sensitivity to nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs. proc natl
acad sci usa 1999; 96(6): 3275–80.
liu xh, rose dp. differential expression and regulation of  xxxg1883xxx  and -2 in two
human breast cancer cell lines. cancer res 1996; 56(22): 5125–7.
hwang d, scollard d, byrne j, et al. expression of  xxxg1883xxx  and cyclooxygenase2 in human breast cancer. j natl cancer inst 1998; 90(6): 455–60.
jun ss, chen z, pace mc, et al. estrogen upregulates  xxxg1883xxx  gene expression in
ovine fetal pulmonary artery endothelium. j clin invest 1998; 102(1): 176–83.
chakraborty i, das sk, wang j, et al. developmental expression of the cyclo-oxygenase-1 and
cyclo-oxygenase-2 genes in the peri-implantation mouse uterus and their differential regulation by the blastocyst and ovarian steroids. j mol endocrinol 1996; 16(2): 107–22.
wolff h, saukkonen k, anttila s, et al. expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in human lung
carcinoma. cancer res 1998; 58(22): 4997–5001.
hida t, yatabe y, achiwa h, et al. increased expression of  xxxg1884xxx  occurs frequently in human lung cancers, specifically in adenocarcinomas. cancer res 1998; 58(17):
3761–4.
koga h, sakisaka s, ohishi m, et al. expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in human hepatocellular
carcinoma: relevance to tumor dedifferentiation. hepatology 1999; 29(3): 688–96.
shiota g, okubo m, noumi t, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  expression in hepatocellular carcinoma. hepatogastroenterology 1999; 46(25): 407–12.
buckman sy, gresham a, hale p, et al. cox-2 expression is induced by uvb exposure in
human skin: implications for the development of skin cancer. carcinogenesis 1998; 19(5):
723–9.
uefuji k, ichikura t, mochizuki h, et al. expression of  xxxg1884xxx  protein in gastric
adenocarcinoma. j surg oncol 1998; 69: 168–72.

491

99.

100.

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

101.
102.
103.
104.

105.
106.
107.
108.
109.

110.

111.
112.

113.

114.
115.
116.
117.

118.
119.
120.

murata h, kawano s, tsuji s, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  overexpression enhances lymphatic invasion and metastasis in human gastric carcinoma. am j gastroenterol 1999; 94:
451–5.
zimmermann kc, sarbia m, weber aa, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  expression in human
esophageal carcinoma. cancer res 1999; 59(1): 198–204.
tucker on, dannenberg aj, yang ek, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  expression is up-regulated in
human pancreatic cancer. cancer res 1999; 59: 987–90.
chan g, boyle jo, yang ek, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  expression is up-regulated in squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck. cancer res 1999; 59: 991–4.
gupta s, srivastava m, ahmad n, et al. overexpression of  xxxg1884xxx  in human
prostate adenocarcinoma. prostate 2000; 42(1): 73–8.
newton r, seybold j, kuitert lm, et al. repression of  xxxg1884xxx  and prostaglandin
e2 release by dexamethasone occurs by transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms
involving loss of polyadenylated mrna. j biol chem 1998; 273(48): 32312–21.
simon ls. role and regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  during inflammation. am j med 1999;
106(5b): 37s-42s.
polisson r. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs: practical and theoretical considerations in
their selection. am j med 1996; 100(2a): 31s-36s.
bjorkman dj. the effect of aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs on prostaglandins. am j med 1998; 105(1b): 8s-12s.
gierse jk, koboldt cm, walker mc, et al. kinetic basis for selective inhibition of cyclooxygenases. biochem j 1999; 339(pt. 3): 607–14.
pouplana r, perez c, sanchez j, et al. the structural and electronical factors that contribute
affinity for the time-dependent inhibition of  xxxg1883xxx  by indomethacin, diclofenac and fenamates.
j comput aided mol des 1999; 13(3): 297–313.
cronstein bn, montesinos mc weissmann g. sites of action for future therapy: an adenosinedependent mechanism by which aspirin retains its antiinflammatory activity in cyclooxygenase2 and  xxxg1559xxx  knockout mice. osteoarthritis cartilage 1999; 7(4): 361–3.
egan lj, sandborn wj, mays dc, et al. plasma and rectal adenosine in inflammatory bowel
disease: effect of methotrexate. inflamm bowel dis 1999; 5(3): 167–73.
patel r, attur mg, dave mn, et al. regulation of  xxxd2738xxx  and  xxxd1903xxx  production
by csaids ( xxxd3177xxx ) in murine macrophages and bovine chondrocytes stimulated with
lps. inflamm res 1999; 48(6): 337–43.
smalley w, ray wa, daugherty j, et al. use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and
incidence of colorectal cancer: a population-based study. arch intern med 1999; 159(2): 161–
6.
cibere j, sibley j, haga m. rheumatoid arthritis and the risk of malignancy. arthritis rheum
1997; 40(9): 1580–6.
sturmer t, glynn rj, lee im, et al. aspirin use and colorectal cancer: post-trial follow-up data
from the physicians’ health study. ann intern med 1998; 128(9): 713–20.
gann ph, manson je, glynn rj, et al. low-dose aspirin and incidence of colorectal tumors
in a randomized trial. j natl cancer inst 1993; 85(15): 1220–4.
neugut ai, rosenberg dj, ahsan h, et al. association between coronary heart disease and
cancer of the breast, prostate, and colon. cancer epidemiol biomarkers prev 1998; 7(10):
869–73.
farrow dc, vaughan tl, hansten pd, et al. cancer eidemiol biomarkers prev 1998; 7(2):
97–102.
cramer dw, harlow bl, titus-ernstoff l, et al. over-the-counter analgesics and risk of
ovarian cancer. lancet 1998; 351(9096): 104–7.
harris re, namboodiri kk farrar wb. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and breast
cancer. epidemiology 1996; 7(2): 203–5.

492

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

121. harris re, kasbari s farrar wb. prospective study of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
and breast cancer. oncol rep 1999; 6(1): 71–3.
122. schapira dv, theodossiou c lyman gh. the effects of nsaids on breast cancer prognostic
factors. oncol rep 1999; 6(2): 433–5.
123. thun mj. aspirin and gastrointestinal cancer. adv exp med biol 1997; 400a: 395–402.
124. weiss ha, forman d. aspirin, non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs and protection from
colorectal cancer: a review of epidemiological evidence. scand j gastroenterol suppl 1996;
220: 137–41.
125. hida t, leyton j, makheja an, et al. non-small cell lung cancer cycloxygenase activity and
proliferation are inhibited by non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs. anticancer res 1998;
18(2a): 775–82.
126. hara a, yoshimi n, niwa m, et al. apoptosis induced by ns-398, a selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, in human colorectal cancer cell lines. jpn j cancer res 1997; 88(6):
600–4.
127. xu xm, sansores-garcia l, chen xm, et al. suppression of inducible  xxxg1884xxx  gene
transcription by aspirin and  xxxd3219xxx . proc natl acad sci usa 1999; 96(9): 5292–7.
128. piazza ga, rahm al, krutzsch m, et al. antineoplastic drugs  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide and sulfone
inhibit cell growth by inducing apoptosis. cancer res 1995; 55(14): 3110–6.
129. hanif r, pittas a, feng y, et al. effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs on proliferation and on induction of apoptosis in colon cancer cells by a prostaglandin-independent
pathway. biochem pharmacol 1996; 52(2): 237–45.
130. qiao l, shiff sj rigas b.  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide inhibits the proliferation of colon cancer cells:
diminished expression of the proliferation markers pcna and ki-67. cancer lett 1997;
115(2): 229–34.
131. qiao l, shiff sj rigas b.  xxxd3259xxx  sulfide alters the expression of cyclin proteins in ht-29
colon adenocarcinoma cells. int j cancer 1998; 76(1): 99–104.
132. cryer b, feldman m.  xxxg1883xxx  and  xxxg1884xxx  selectivity of widely used
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. am j med 1998; 104(5): 413–21.
133. tjandrawinata rr, hughes-fulford m. up-regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  by product- xxxd1903xxx . adv exp med biol 1997; 407: 163–70.
134. bjarnason i, hayllar j. early pathogenic events in nsaid-induced gastrointestinal damage.
ital j gastroenterol 1996; 28 suppl 4: 19–22.
135. mahmud t, rafi ss, scott dl, et al. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and uncoupling of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. arthritis rheum 1996; 39(12): 1998–2003.
136. masubuchi y, yamada s horie t. diphenylamine as an important structure of nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs to uncouple mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. biochem
pharmacol 1999; 58(5): 861–5.
137. tomoda t, kurashige t, hayashi y, et al. primary changes in liver damage by aspirin in rats.
acta paediatr jpn 1998; 40(6): 593–6.
138. moreno-sanchez r, bravo c, vasquez c, et al. inhibition and uncoupling of oxidative
phosphorylation by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs: study in mitochondria, submitochondrial particles, cells, and whole heart. biochem pharmacol 1999; 57(7): 743–52.
139. ogino m, hisatomi h, murata m, et al. indomethacin suppresses the growth of colon 26,
meth-a and fm3a tumors in mice by reducing the  xxxd1903xxx  content and telomerase
activity in tumor tissues. jpn j cancer res 1999; 90(7): 758–64.
140. somasundaram s, rafi s, hayllar j, et al. mitochondrial damage: a possible mechanism of the
“topical” phase of nsaid induced injury to the rat intestine. gut 1997; 41(3): 344–53.
141. sigthorsson g, jacob m, wrigglesworth j, et al. comparison of indomethacin and  xxxd2727xxx ,
a selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, on key pathophysiologic steps in the pathogenesis of
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug enteropathy in the rat. scand j gastroenterol 1998; 33(7):
728–35.

493

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

142. murphy vj, yang z, rorison ka, et al.  xxxg1884xxx -selective antagonists do not inhibit
growth of colorectal carcinoma cell lines. cancer lett 1998; 122(1–2): 25–30.
143. yang z, hollande f baldwin gs. blockade of long chain fatty acid oxidation by non-steroidal
antiinflammatory drugs may contribute to inhibition of proliferation of human colorectal
carcinoma cell lines. cancer lett 1998; 124(2): 187–91.
144. baldwin gs, murphy vj, yang z, et al. binding of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs to the
alpha-subunit of the trifunctional protein of long chain fatty acid oxidation. j pharmacol exp
ther 1998; 286(2): 1110–4.
145. van lieshout emm, tiemessen dm, roelofs hmj, et al. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs enhance  xxxg1073xxx  theta levels in rat colon. biochim biophys acta 1998;
1381(3): 305–11.
146. reddy bs, rao cv, rivenson a, et al. inhibitory effect of aspirin on azoxymethane-induced
colon carcinogenesis in f344 rats. carcinogenesis 1993; 14(8): 1493–7.
147. ritland sr, gendler sj. chemoprevention of intestinal adenomas in the apcmin mouse by
 xxxd2969xxx : kinetics, strain effects and resistance to chemosuppression. carcinogenesis 1999;
20(1): 51–8.
148. dubois rn, giardiello fm smalley we. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, eicosanoids,
and colorectal cancer prevention. gastroenterol clin north am 1996; 25(4): 773–91.
149. mahmoud nn, bilinski rt, churchill mr, et al. genotype-phenotype correlation in murine
apc mutation: differences in enterocyte migration and response to  xxxd3259xxx . cancer res 1999;
59(2): 353–9.
150. skopinska-rozewska e, piazza ga, sommer e, et al. inhibition of angiogenesis by  xxxd3259xxx 
and its sulfone metabolite (fgn-1): a potential mechanism for their antineoplastic properties.
int j tissue react 1998; 20(3): 85–9.
151. takayama t, katsuki s, takahashi y, et al. aberrant crypt foci of the colon as precursors of
adenoma and cancer. n engl j med 1998; 339(18): 1277–84.
152. dubois rn, shao j, tsujii m, et al. g1 delay in cells overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase-2. cancer res 1996; 56(4): 733–7.
153. winde g, schmid kw, brandt b, et al. clinical and genomic influence of  xxxd3259xxx  on rectal
mucosa in familial adenomatous polyposis. dis colon rectum 1997; 40(10): 1156–68.
154. raskin jb. gastrointestinal effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory therapy. am j med 1999;
106(5b): 3s-12s.
155. warner td, giuliano f, vojnovic i, et al. nonsteroid drug selectivities for cyclo-oxygenase1 rather than cyclo-oxygenase-2 are associated with human gastrointestinal toxicity: a full in
vitro analysis. proc natl acad sci usa 1999; 96(13): 7563–8.
156. russell ri. defining patients at risk of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug gastropathy. ital
j gastroenterol hepatol 1999; 31 suppl 1: s14–8.
157. silagy ca, mcneil jj, donnan ga, et al. adverse effects of low-dose aspirin in a healthy
elderly population. clin pharmacol ther 1993; 54(1): 84–9.
158. cheatum de, arvanitakis c, gumpel m, et al. an endoscopic study of gastroduodenal lesions
induced by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. clin ther 1999; 21(6): 992–1003.
159. whelton a. nephrotoxicity of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs: physiologic foundations
and clinical implications. am j med 1999; 106(5b): 13s-24s.
160. schafer ai. effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs on platelet function and systemic
hemostasis. j clin pharmacol 1995; 35(3): 209–19.
161. schafer ai. effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory therapy on platelets. am j med 1999;
106(5b): 25s-36s.
162. ventura mt, cenci l, giuliano g, et al. retrospective study of adverse reactions to non steroid
antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids): predictive value of controlled challenge with alternative
drugs. immunopharmacol immunotoxicol 1999; 21(3): 455–68.

494

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

163. lipsky lp, abramson sb, crofford l, et al. the classification of cyclooxygenase inhibitors.
j rheumatol 1998; 25(12): 2298–303
164. dammann hg. preferential cox-2 inhibition: its clinical relevance for gastrointestinal nonsteroidal antiinflammatory rheumatic drug toxicity. z gastroenterol 1999; 37: 45–58.
165. pairet m, van ryn j. experiemental models used to investigate the differential inhibition of
cyclooxygenases-1 and  xxxg1884xxx  by non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs. inflamm
res 1998; 47 suppl 2: s93–101.
166. blanco fj, guitian r, moreno j, et al. effect of antiinflammatory drugs on cox-1 and cox2 activity in human articular chondrocytes. j rheumatol 1999; 26(6): 1366–73.
167. laufer s, zechmeister p klein t. development of an in-vitro test system for the evaluation of
 xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors. inflamm res 1999; 48: 133–8.
168. chan cc, boyce s, brideau c, et al. rofecoxib [vioxx,  xxxd3139xxx ; 4-(4'-methylsulfonylphenyl)3–phenyl-2-(5h)-furanone]: a potent and orally active  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor. pharmacological and biochemical profiles. j pharmacol exp ther 1999; 290(2): 551–60.
169. giuliano f, warner td. ex vivo assay to determine the cyclooxygenase selectivity of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. br j pharmacol 1999; 126: 1824–30.
170. swinney dc, mak ay, barnett j, et al. differential allosteric regulation of prostaglandin h
synthase 1 and 2 by  xxxd208xxx . j biol chem 1997; 272(19): 12393–8.
171. callejas na, castrillo a, bosca l, et al. inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis up-regulates
 xxxg1884xxx  induced by lipopolysaccharide and peroxisomal proliferators. j pharmacol
exp ther 1999; 288(3): 1235–41.
172. penning td, talley jj, bertenshaw sr, et al. synthesis and biological evaluation of the 1,5–
diarylpyrazole class of  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors: identification of 4-[5–(4-methylphenyl)3–(trifluoromethyl)- xxxd3045xxx -1–yl]benze nesulfonamide( xxxd457xxx , celecoxib). j med chem
1997; 40: 1347–65.
173. mandell bf. cox 2-selective nsaids: biology, promises, and concerns. cleve clin j med
1999; 66(5): 285–92.
174. lefkowith jb.  xxxg1884xxx  specificity and its clinical implications. am j med 1999;
106(5b): 43s-50s.
175. geis gs. update on clinical developments with celecoxib, a new specific cox-2 inhibitor:
what can we expect? scand j rheumatol suppl 1999; 109: 31–7.
176. leese pt, hubbard rc, karim a, et al. effects of celecoxib, a novel  xxxg1884xxx 
inhibitor, on platelet function in healthy adults: a randomized, controlled trial. j clin pharmacol
2000; 40(2): 124–32.
177. muscara mn, mcknight w, asfaha s, et al. wound collagen deposition in rats: effects of an
no-nsaid and a selective cox-2 inhibitor. br j pharmacol 2000; 129(4): 681–6.
178. kawamori t, rao cv, seibert k, et al. chemopreventive activity of celecoxib, a specific
 xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, against colon carcinogenesis. cancer res 1998; 58(3): 409–12.
179. reddy bs, hirose y, lubet r, steele v, kelloff g, paulson s, seibert k, rao cv.
chemoprevention of colon cancer by specific  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, celecoxib, administered during different stages of carcinogenesis. cancer res 2000; 60(2): 293–7.
180. fischer sm, lo hh, gordon gb, et al. chemopreventive activity of celecoxib, a specific
 xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, and indomethacin against ultraviolet light-induced skin carcinogenesis. mol carcinog 1999; 25(4): 231–40.
181. simon ls, lanza fl, lipsky pe, et al. preliminary study of the safety and efficacy of  xxxd457xxx , a novel  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor: efficacy and safety in two placebo-controlled trials
in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, and studies of gastrointestinal and platelet effects.
arthritis rheum 1998; 41: 1591–602.
182. kaplan-machlis b, klostermeyer bs. the  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors: safety and effectiveness. ann pharmacother1999; 33(9): 979–88.

495

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

183. lazer es, miao ck, cywin cl, et al. effect of structural modification of enol-carboxamidetype nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs on cox-2/cox-1 selectivity. j med chem 1997;
40(6): 980–9.
184. stichtenoth do, wagner b, frolich jc. effects of  xxxd2561xxx  and indomethacin on
cyclooxygenase pathways in healthy volunteers. j investig med 1997; 45(2): 44–9.
185. goldman ap, williams cs, sheng h, et al.  xxxd2561xxx  inhibits the growth of colorectal cancer
cells. carcinogenesis 1998; 19(12): 2195–9.
186. sheng h, shao j, kirkland sc, et al. inhibition of human colon cancer cell growth by selective
inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx . j clin invest 1997; 99: 2254–9.
187. agha am, el-khatib as al-zuhair h. modulation of oxidant status by  xxxd2561xxx  in experimentally induced arthritis. pharmacol res 1999; 40(4): 385–92.
188. wolfe mm. future trends in the development of safer nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
am j med 1998; 105: 44s-52s.
189. ehrich ew, dallob a, de lepeleire i, et al. characterization of rofecoxib as a cyclooxygenase2 isoform inhibitor and demonstration of analgesia in the dental pain model. clin pharmacol
ther 1999; 65: 336–47.
190. o’neill gp, kennedy bp, mancini ja, et al. selective inhibitors of cox-2. agents actions
suppl 1995; 46: 159–68.
191. tsuji s, kawano s, sawaoka h, et al. evidences for involvement of  xxxg1884xxx  in
proliferation of two gastrointestinal cancer cell lines. prostaglandins leukot essent fatty
acids 1996; 55(3): 179–83.
192. sawaoka h, kawano s, tsuji s, et al. effects of nsaids on proliferation of gastric cancer cells
in vitro: possible implication of  xxxg1884xxx  in cancer development. j clin gastroenterol
1998; 27: s47–52.
193. yoshimi n, kawabata k, hara a, et al. inhibitory effect of ns-398, a selective cyclooxygenase2 inhibitor, on azoxymetane-induced aberrant crypt foci in colon carcinogenesis of f344 rats.
jpn j cancer res 1997; 88(11): 1044–51.
194. liu xh, yao s, kirschenbaum a, et al. ns398, a selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor,
induces apoptosis and down-regulates bcl-2 expression in lncap cells. cancer res 1998;
58(19): 4245–9.
195. elder dj, halton de, hague a, et al. induction of apoptotic cell death in human colorectal
carcinoma cell lines by a  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-2)-selective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drug: independence from cox-2 protein expression. clin cancer res 1997; 3(10): 1679–83.
196. banos g, reyes pa. a comparative study of the effect of ten non-steroid antiinflammatory
drugs (nsaids) upon some mitochondrial and platelet functions. int j biochem 1989; 21(12):
1387–94.
197. tran po, gleason ce, poitout v, et al.  xxxd1903xxx (2) mediates inhibition of insulin
secretion by interleukin-1beta. j biol chem 1999; 274(44): 31245–8.
198. barnes cj, hardman we, cameron il, et al. aspirin, but not  xxxd3219xxx , indomethacin,
or  xxxd2688xxx , reversibly suppresses 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced colonic aberrant crypt
foci in rats. dig dis sci 1997; 42(5): 920–6.
199. matsunaga k, yoshimi n, yamada y, et al. inhibitory effects of  xxxd2688xxx , a cyclooxygenase2 inhibitor, and esculetin, a lipoxygenase inhibitor, on  xxxd2685xxx -induced mammary carcinogenesis in rats. jpn j cancer res 1998; 89(5): 496–501.
200. scioscia ka, snyderman ch, rueger r, et al. role of  xxxd208xxx  metabolites in tumor
growth inhibition by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. am j otolaryngol 1997; 18(1): 1–
8.
201. rothstein r. safety profiles of leading nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. am j med 1998;
105(5a): 39s-43s.
202. reimer me, johnston sa, leib ms, et al. the gastroduodenal effects of  xxxd234xxx ,
 xxxd446xxx , and  xxxd2065xxx  in healthy dogs. j vet intern med 1999; 13(5): 472–7.

496

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

203. boni j, korth-bradley j, mcgoldrick k, et al. pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic action
of  xxxd2065xxx  in patients after oral surgery. j clin pharmacol 1999; 39(7): 729–37.
204. gierse jk, mcdonald jj, hauser sd, et al. a single amino acid difference between
 xxxg1883xxx  (cox-1) and -2 (cox-2) reverses the selectivity of cox-2 specific inhibitors. j biol chem 1996; 271: 15810–4.
205. seibert k, zhang y, leahy k, et al. pharmacological and biochemical demonstration of the
role of  xxxg1884xxx  in inflammation and pain. proc natl acad sci usa 1994; 91(25):
12013–7.
206. erickson ba, longo we, panesar n, et al. the effect of selective cyclooxygenase inhibitors
on intestinal epithelial cell mitogenesis. j surg res 1999; 81(1): 101–7.
207. garcia-nieto r, perez c, checa a, et al. molecular model of the interaction between  xxxd2727xxx 
and human  xxxg1884xxx . rheumatology (oxford) 1999; 38: 14–8.
208. fabiola gf, pattabhi v nagarajan k. structural basis for selective inhibition of cox-2 by
 xxxd2727xxx . bioorg med chem 1998; 6(12): 2337–44.
209. shah aa, murray fe fitzgerald dj. the in vivo assessment of  xxxd2727xxx  cyclooxygenase2 selectivity. rheumatology (oxford) 1999; 38 suppl 1: 19–23.
210. caparroz-assef sm, bersani-amado ca, do nascimento ea, et al. effects of the
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug  xxxd2727xxx  on energy metabolism in livers from
adjuvant-induced arthritic rats. res commun mol pathol pharmacol 1998; 99(1): 93–
116.
211. fukutake m, nakatsugi s, isoi t, et al. suppressive effects of  xxxd2727xxx , a selective inhibitor
of  xxxg1884xxx , on azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis in mice. carcinogenesis 1998; 19(11): 1939–42.
212. wakitani k, nanayama t, masaki m, et al. profile of jte-522 as a human cyclooxygenase2 inhibitor. jpn j pharmacol 1998; 78(3): 365–71.
213. tomozawa s, nagawa h, tsuno n, et al. inhibition of haematogenous metastasis of colon
cancer in mice by a selective cox-2 inhibitor, jte-522. br j cancer 1999; 81(8): 1274–9.
214. bayly ci, black wc, leger s, et al. structure-based design of cox-2 selectivity into
 xxxd2141xxx . bioorg med chem lett 1999; 9(3): 307–12.
215. catella-lawson f, mcadam b, morrison bw, et al. effects of specific inhibition of
 xxxg1884xxx  on sodium balance, hemodynamics, and vasoactive eicosanoids. j pharmacol
exp ther1999; 289(2): 735–41.
216. kovacs g. abnormalities of chromosome no. 1 in human solid malignant tumours. int j
cancer 1978; 21(6): 688–94.
217. rowley jd. abnormalities of chromosome no. 1: significance in malignant transformation.
virchows arch b cell pathol 1978; 29(1–2): 139–44.
218. battu s, chable-rabinovitch h, rigaud m, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  expression in human
adenocarcinoma cell line ht29 cl.19a. anticancer res 1998; 18(4a): 2397–403.
219. spirio ln, dixon da, robertson j, et al. the inducible prostaglandin biosynthetic enzyme,
 xxxg1884xxx , is not mutated in patients with attenuated  xxxg170xxx .
cancer res 1998; 58(21): 4909–12.
220. kinoshita t, takahashi y, sakashita t, et al. growth stimulation and induction of epidermal
growth factor receptor by overexpression of cyclooxygenases 1 and 2 in human colon carcinoma cells. biochim biophys acta 1999; 1438: 120–30.
221. guilford p. e-cadherin downregulation in cancer: fuel on the fire? mol med today 1999; 5(4):
172–7.
222. narko k, ristimaki a, macphee m, et al. tumorigenic transformation of immortalized ecv
endothelial cells by  xxxg1883xxx  overexpression. j biol chem 1997; 272(34): 21455–60.
223. kinoshita t, takahashi y, sakashita t, et al. growth stimulation and induction of epidermal
growth factor receptor by overexpression of cyclooxyganse 1 and 2 in human colon carcinoma
cells. biochim biophys acta 1999; 1438(1): 120–30.

497

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

224. brock tg, paine r iii peters-golden m. localization of  xxxg147xxx  to the nucleus of
unstimulated rat basophilic leukemia cells. j biol chem 1994; 2; 269(35): 22059–66.
225. brock tg, mcnish rw, bailie mb, et al. rapid import of cytosolic  xxxg147xxx  into the
nucleus of neutrophils after in vivo recruitment and in vitro adherence. j biol chem 1997;
272(13): 8276–80.
226. peters-golden m. cell biology of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway. am j respir crit care med
1998; 157(6 pt 1): s227–32.
227. morham sg, langebach r, loftin cd, et al. prostaglandin synthase 2 gene disruption causes
severe renal pathology in the mouse. cell 1995; 83: 473–82.
228. simon ls. biologic effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. curr opin rheumatol
1997; 9(3): 178–82.
229. kirtikara k, morham sg, raghow r, et al. compensatory  xxxd1903xxx  biosynthesis in
cyclooxygenase 1 or 2 null cells. j exp med 1998; 187(4): 517–23.
230. simmons dl, botting rm, robertson pm, et al. induction of an acetaminophen-sensitive
cyclooxygenase with reduced sensitivity to nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs. proc natl
acad sci usa 1999; 96(6): 3275–80.
231. lipsky pe. specific cox-2 inhibitors in arthritis, oncology, and beyond: where is the science
headed? j rheumatol 1999; 26 suppl 56: 25–30.
232. lim h, paria bc, das sk, et al. multiple female reproductive failures in cyclooxygenase 2deficient mice. cell 1997; 91(2): 197–208.
233. davis bj, lennard de, lee ca, et al. anovulation in  xxxg1884xxx -deficient mice is
restored by  xxxd1903xxx  and interleukin-1beta. endocrinology1999; 140(6): 2685–95.
234. lim h, gupta ra, ma wg, et al. cyclo-oxygenase-2-derived prostacyclin mediates embryo
implantation in the mouse via  xxxg1806xxx . genes dev 1999; 13(12): 1561–74.
235. han sw, lei zm rao cv. up-regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  gene expression by chorionic
gonadotropin during the differentiation of human endometrial stromal cells into decidua.
endocrinology 1996; 137(5): 1791–7.
236. mckanna ja, zhang mz, wang jl, et al. constitutive expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in rat
vas deferens. am j physiol 1998; 275(1 pt 2):  xxxd3265xxx –33.
237. langenbach r, morham sg, tiano hf, et al. prostaglandin synthase 1 gene disruption in mice
reduces  xxxd208xxx -induced inflammation and indomethacin-induced gastric ulceration.
cell 1995; 83: 483–92.
238. morgan g. nsaid treatment of gastrointestinal abnormalities: a challenge to ‘cytoprotection’
scand j gastroeneterol 1997; 32: 288.
239. morgan g. beneficial effects of nsaids in the gastrointestinal tract. eur j gastroenterol
hepatol 1999; 11(4): 393–400.
240. reese j, brown n, paria bc, et al. cox-2 compensation in the uterus of cox-1 deficient mice
during the preimplantation period. mol cell endocrinol 1999; 150(1–2): 23–31.
241. battu s, rigaud m beneytout jl. resistance to apoptosis and  xxxg1884xxx  expression in
a human adenocarcinoma cell line ht29 cl.19a. anticancer res 1998; 18(5a): 3579–83.
242. subbaramaiah k, telang n, bansal mb, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  gene expression is upregulated
in transformed mammary epithelial cells. ann n y acad sci 1997; 833: 179–85.
243. sheng h, shao j, morrow jd, et al. modulation of apoptosis and bcl-2 expression by
 xxxd1903xxx  in human colon cancer cells. cancer res 1998; 58(2): 362–6.
244. lim jt, piazza ga, han ek, et al.  xxxd3259xxx  derivatives inhibit growth and induce apoptosis
in human prostate cancer cell lines. biochem pharmacol 1999; 58(7): 1097–107.
245. ho l, osaka h, aisen ps, et al. induction of cyclooxygenase (cox)-2 but not cox-1 gene
expression in apoptotic cell death. j neuroimmunol 1998; 89(1–2): 142–9.
246. jobin c, morteau o, han ds, et al. specific  xxxg1559xxx  blockade selectively inhibits tumour
necrosis factor-alpha-induced cox-2 but not constitutive cox-1 gene expression in ht-29
cells. immunology 1998; 95(4): 537–43.

498

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

247. masferrer jl, koki a seibert k. cox-2 inhibitors. a new class of antiangiogenic agents. ann
ny acad sci 1999; 889: 84–6.
248. daniel to, liu h, morrow jd, et al. thromboxane a2 is a mediator of cyclooxygenase-2dependent endothelial migration and angiogenesis. cancer res 1999; 59(18): 4574–7.
249. majima m, isono m, ikeda y, et al. significant roles of inducible cyclooxygenase (cox)-2
in angiogenesis in rat sponge implants. jpn j pharmacol 1997; 75(2): 105–14.
250. plescia oj, smith ah greinwich k. subversion of immune system by tumor cells and role of
prostaglandin. proc natl acad sci usa 1975; 72(5): 1848–51.
251. plescia oj, grinwich k, plescia am. subversive activity of syngeneic tumor cells as an escape
mechanism from immune suverillance and the role of prostaglandins. ann ny acad sci 1976;
276: 455–65.
252. grinwich kd, plescia oj. tumor-mediated immunosuppression: prevention by inhibitors of
prostaglandin synthesis. prostaglandins 1977; 14(6): 1175–82.
253. owen k, gomolka d droller mj. production of  xxxd1903xxx  by tumor cells in vitro.
cancer res 1980; 40(9): 3167–71.
254. young mr, henderson s. enhancement in immunity of tumor bearing mice by immunization
against  xxxd1903xxx . immunol commun 1982; 11(5): 345–56.
255. young mr, dizer m. enhancement of immune function and tumor growth inhibition by
antibodies against  xxxd1903xxx . immunol commun 1983; 12(1): 11–23.
256. ippoliti f, sezzi ml, bellelli l, et al. immunosubversive role of pge2 in tumor bearing mice.
boll ist sieroter milan 1985; 64(1): 25–34.
257. plescia oj, pontieri gm, brown j, et al. amplification by macrophages of prostaglandinmediated immunosuppression in mice bearing syngeneic tumors. prostaglandins leukot med
1984; 16(2): 205–23.
258. young mr, knies s.  xxxd1903xxx  production by lewis lung carcinoma: mechanism for
tumor establishment in vivo. j natl cancer inst 1984; 72(4): 919–22.
259. matsumoto-taniura n, matsumoto k nakamura t. prostaglandin production in mouse mammary tumour cells confers invasive growth potential by inducing  xxxg1044xxx  in
stromal fibroblasts. br j cancer 1999; 81(2): 194–202.
260. mahan m, meunier j, newby m, et al.  xxxd1903xxx  production by el 4 leukemia cells
from c57b/6 mice: mechanism for tumor dissemination. j natl cancer inst 1985; 74(1): 191–
5.
261. young mr, newby m. enhancement of lewis lung carcinoma cell migration by prostaglandin
e2 produced by macrophages. cancer res 1986; 46(1): 160–4.
262. young mr, okada f, tada m, et al. association of increased tumor cell responsiveness to
 xxxd1903xxx  with more aggressive tumor behavior. invasion metastasis 1991; 11(1): 48–
57.
263. sammon am. maize meal, non-esterified linoleic acid, and endemic cancer of the esophagus—preliminary findings. prostaglandins other lipid mediat 1999; 57(2–3): 167–71.
264. wrenshall le, stevens rb, cerra fb, et al. modulation of macrophage and b cell function by
glycosaminoglycans. j leukoc biol 1999; 66(3): 391–400.
265. kim y, fischer sm. transcriptional regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  in mouse skin carcinoma
cells. regulatory role of ccaat/enhancer-binding proteins in the differential expression of
 xxxg1884xxx  in normal and neoplastic tissues. j biol chem 1998; 273(42): 27686–94.
266. tjandrawinata rr, dahiya r, hughes-fulford m. induction of  xxxg1884xxx  mrna by
 xxxd1903xxx  in human prostate carcinoma cells. br j cancer 1997; 75(8): 1111–8.
267. bany bm, kennedy tg. regulation of cyclooxygenase gene expression in rat endometrial
stromal cells: the role of  xxxg681xxx . dev genet 1997; 21(1): 109–15.
268. perkins dj, kniss da. rapid and transient induction of cyclo-oxygenase 2 by  xxxg681xxx  in human amnion-derived wish cells. biochem j 1997; 321( pt 3):
677–81.

499

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

269. mestre jr, subbaramaiah k, sacks pg, et al. retinoids suppress epidermal growth factorinduced transcription of  xxxg1884xxx  in human oral squamous carcinoma cells. cancer
res 1997; 57(14): 2890–5.
270. sato t, nakajima h, fujio k, et al. enhancement of  xxxd1903xxx  production by epidermal
growth factor requires the coordinate activation of cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  and
 xxxg1884xxx  in human squamous carcinoma a431 cells. prostaglandins 1997; 53(5):
355–69.
271. hori t, shibamoto s, hayakawa m, et al. stimulation of prostaglandin production by  xxxg1044xxx  in human gastric carcinoma cells. febs lett 1993; 334(3): 331–4.
272. sauter g, haley j, chew k, kerschmann r et al. epidermal-growth-factor-receptor expression
is associated with rapid tumor proliferation in bladder cancer. int j cancer 1994; 57(4): 508–
14.
273. radinsky r, risin, s, fan, et al. level and function of  xxxg682xxx  predict
the metastatic potential of human colon carcinoma cells. clin cancer res 1995; 1(1): 19–31.
274. jenson hb, leach ct, mcclain kl, et al. benign and malignant smooth muscle tumors
containing epstein-barr virus in children with aids. leuk lymphoma 1997; 27(3–4): 303–14.
275. jimenez-heffernan ja, hardisson d, palacios j, et al. adrenal gland leiomyoma in a child with
acquired immuodeficiency syndrome. pediatr pathol lab med 1995; 15(6): 923–9.
276. chadarevian jp, wok jh, innis s, et al. a newly recognized cause of wheezing: aids-related
broncial leiomyomas. pediatr pulmonol 1997; 24(2): 106–10.
277. kleinschmidt-demasters bk, mierau gw, sze ci, et al. unusual dural and skull-based
mesenchymal neoplasms: a report of four cases. hum pathol 1998: 29(3): 240–5.
278. prevot s, neris j de saint maur pp. detection of epstein barr virus in an leiomyomatous
neoplasm in an adult immunodeficiency virus 1–infected patient. virchows arch 1994; 425(3):
321–5.
279. davidoff am, hebra a, clark bj 3rd, et al. epstein-barr virus-associated hepatic smooth
muscle neoplasm in a cardiac transplant patient. transplantation 1996; 61(3): 515–7.
280. longnecker r, kieff e. a second epstein-barr virus membrane protein (lmp2) is expressed
in latent infection and colocalizes with lmp1. j virol 1990; 64(5): 2319–26.
281. longnecker r. biochemical and genetic studies of epstein-barr virus latent membrane protein
2. leukemia 1994; 8 suppl 1: s46–50.
282. sample j, liebowitz d kieff e. two related epstein-barr virus membrane proteins are
encoded by separate genes. j virol 1989; 63(2): 933–7.
283. miller we, earp hs raab-traub n. the epstein-barr virus latent membrane protein 1 induces
expression of the  xxxg682xxx . j virol 1995; 69(7): 4390–8.
284. spender lc, cannell ej, hollyoake m, et al. control of cell cycle entry and apoptosis in b
lymphocytes infected by epstein-barr virus. j virol 1999; 73(6): 4678–88.
285. wang y, minoshima s shimizu n. precise mapping of the egf receptor gene on the human
chromosome 7p12 using an improved fish technique. jpn j hum genet 1993; 38(4): 399–406.
286. jolly c, michell s, rocchi m, et al. analysis of the transcriptional activity of amplified genes
in tumour cells by fluorescence in situ hybridization. hum genet 1997; 101(1): 81–7.
287. kawasaki k, kudoh j, omoto k, et al. mega base map of the  xxxg681xxx  (egf)
receptor gene flanking regions and structure of the amplification units in egf receptorhyperproducing squamous carcinoma cells. jpn j cancer res 1988; 79(11): 1174–83.
288. wang hm, rajagopal s chakrabarty s. inhibition of human colon cancer malignant cell
behavior and growth by antisense  xxxg682xxx  expression vector. anticancer res 1998; 18(4a): 2297–300.
289. o’mahony ca, beauchamp rd, albo d, et al.  xxxg1884xxx  alters transforming growth
factor-beta 1 response during intestinal tumorigenesis. surgery 1999; 126(2): 364–70.
290. cardillo mr, yap e.  xxxg2269xxx  in colonic neoplasia: a genetic molecular and immunohistochemical study. j exp clin cancer res 1997; 16(3): 281–8.

500

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

291. shao j, sheng h, aramandla r, et al. coordinate regulation of  xxxg1884xxx  and tgfbeta1 in replication error-positive colon cancer and azoxymethane-induced rat colonic tumors.
carcinogenesis 1999; 20(2): 185–91.
292. avery a, paraskeva c, hall p, et al. tgf-beta expression in the human colon: differential
immunostaining along crypt epithelium. br j cancer 1993; 68(1): 137–9.
293. friedman e, gold li, klimstra d, et al. high levels of  xxxg2269xxx 
correlate with disease progression in human colon cancer. cancer epidemiol biomarkers prev
1995; 4(5): 549–54.
294. rao cv, kawamori t, hamid r, et al. chemoprevention of colonic aberrant crypt foci by an
 xxxg1578xxx -selective inhibitor. carcinogenesis 1999; 20(4): 641–4.
295. zhang f, subbaramaiah k, altorki n, et al. dihydroxy bile acids activate the transcription of
 xxxg1884xxx . j biol chem 1998; 273(4): 2424–8.
296. zhang f, altorki nk, mestre jr, et al. curcumin inhibits  xxxg1884xxx  transcription in
bile acid- and  xxxd2925xxx -treated human gastrointestinal epithelial cells. carcinogenesis
1999; 20(3): 445–51.
297. chan ta, morin pj, vogelstein b, et al. mechanisms underlying nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug-mediated apoptosis. proc natl acad sci usa 1998; 95(2): 681–6.
298. chinery r, coffey rj, graves-deal r, et al. prostaglandin j2 and 15–deoxy-delta12,14prostaglandin j2 induce proliferation of cyclooxygenase-depleted colorectal cancer cells.
cancer res 1999; 59: 2739–46.
299. fingleton bm, heppner goss kj, et al.  xxxg1438xxx  in early stage intestinal tumorigenesis.
apmis 1999; 107(1): 102–10.
300. shattuck-brandt rl, lamps lw, heppner goss kj, et al. differential expression of  xxxg1438xxx 
and  xxxg1884xxx  in intestinal and colorectal neoplasms. mol carcinog 1999; 24(3): 177–
87.
301. kelley dj, mestre jr, subbaramaiah k, et al. benzo[a]pyrene up-regulates cyclooxygenase2 gene expression in oral epithelial cells. carcinogenesis 1997; 18(4): 795–9.
302. chinery r, beauchamp rd, shyr y, et al. antioxidants reduce  xxxg1884xxx  expression,
prostaglandin production, and proliferation in colorectal cancer cells. cancer res 1998;
58(11): 2323–7.
303. coffey rj, hawkey cj, damstrup l, et al.  xxxg682xxx  activation induces
nuclear targeting of  xxxg1884xxx , basolateral release of prostaglandins, and mitogenesis
in polarizing colon cancer cells. proc natl acad sci usa 1997; 94(2): 657–62.
304. tetsuka t, baier ld morrison ar. antioxidants inhibit interleukin-1-induced cyclooxygenase
and  xxxd2738xxx  synthase expression in rat mesangial cells. evidence for post-transcriptional
regulation. j biol chem 1996; 271(20): 11689–93.
305. ikawa h, kamitani h, calvo bf, et al. expression of 15-lipoxygenase-1 in human colorectal
cancer. cancer res 1999; 59(2): 360–6.
306. stewart wf, kawas c, corrada m, et al. risk of alzheimer’s disease and duration of nsaid
use. neurology 1997; 48(3): 626–32.
307. popovic m, caballero-bleda m, puelles l, et al. importance of immunological and inflammatory processes in the pathogenesis and therapy of alzheimer’s disease. int j neurosci 1998;
95(3–4): 203–36.
308. montalescot g. use of aspirin in coronary disease. presse med 1995; 24(20): 925–7.
309. ridker pm, cushman m, stampfer mj, et al. inflammation, aspirin, and the risk of
cardiovascular disease in apparently healthy men. n engl j med 1997; 336(14):
973–9.
310. schonbeck u, sukhova gk, graber p, et al. agumented expression of  xxxg1884xxx  in
human atherosclerotic lesions. am j pathol 1999; 155(4): 1281–91.
311. rehman q, sack ke. when to try cox-2-specific inhibitors. safer than standard nsaids in
some situations. postgrad med 1999; 106(4): 95–7, 101–2, 105–6.

501

critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences downloaded from informahealthcare.com by queen's university on 04/20/13
for personal use only.

312. rubin br. specific  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-2) inhibitors. j am osteopath assoc 1999; 99(6):
322–5.
313. dannenberg aj, zakim d. chemoprevention of colorectal cancer through inhibition of
 xxxg1884xxx . semin oncol 1999; 26(5): 499–504.
314. reeves mj, newcomb pa, trentham-dietz a, et al. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use
and protection against colorectal cancer in women. cancer epidemiol biomarkers prev 1996;
5(12): 955–60.
315. austin s, fitzgerald ga. not a mouse stirring: deletion of the  xxxg1873xxx  and love’s labor’s lost. j
clin invest 1999; 103(11): 1481–2.
316. dinchuk je, car bd, focht rj, et al.. renal abnormalities and an altered inflammatory
response in mice lacking cyclooxygenase ii. nature 1995; 378(6555): 406–9.
317. bonventre jv, huang z, taheri mr, et al. reduced fertility and postischaemic brain injury in
mice deficient in cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx . nature 1997; 390(6660): 622–5.
318. audoly lp, tilley sl, goulet j, et al. identification of specific ep receptors responsible for
the hemodynamic effects of pge2. am j physiol 1999; 277(3 pt 2): h924–30.
319. coleman ra, smith wl narumiya s. international union of pharmacology classification of
prostanoid receptors: properties, distribution, and structure of the receptors and their subtypes.
pharmacol rev 1994; 46(2): 205–29.
320. kennedy cr, zhang y, brandon s, et al. salt-sensitive hypertension and reduced fertility in
mice lacking the prostaglandin  xxxg1873xxx  receptor. nat med 1999; 5(2): 217–20.
321. tilley sl, audoly lp, hicks eh, et al. reproductive failure and reduced blood pressure in
mice lacking the  xxxg1873xxx   xxxd1903xxx  receptor. j clin invest 1999; 103(11): 1539–45.
322. ushikubi f, segi e, sugimoto y, et al. impaired febrile response in mice lacking the  xxxd1903xxx  receptor subtype ep3. nature 1998; 395(6699): 281–4.
323. nguyen m, camenisch t, snouwaert jn, et al. the prostaglandin receptor  xxxg1875xxx  triggers
remodelling of the cardiovascular system at birth. nature 1997; 390(6655): 78–81.
324. murata t, ushikubi f, matsuoka t, et al. altered pain perception and inflammatory response
in mice lacking  xxxg1879xxx . nature 1997; 388(6643): 678–82.
325. sugimoto y, segi e, tsuboi k, et al. female reproduction in mice lacking the prostaglandin
f receptor. roles of prostaglandin and oxytocin receptors in parturition. adv exp med biol
1998; 449: 317–21.
326. rao cv, rivenson a, simi b, et al. chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by  xxxd3259xxx , a
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent. cancer res 1995; 55(7): 1464–72.
327. castonguay a, rioux n, duperron c, et al. inhibition of lung tumorigenesis by nsaids: a
working hypothesis. exp lung res 1998; 24(4): 605–15.
328. jalbert g, castonguay a. effects of nsaids on nnk-induced pulmonary and gastric tumorigenesis in a/j mice. cancer lett 1992; 66(1): 21–8.
329. van ryn j, pairet m. clinical experience with  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors. inflamm res 1999;
48(5): 247–54.
330. taketo mm. cox-2 and colon cancer. inflamm res 1998; 47 suppl 2: s112–6.
331. kawai s. cyclooxygenase selectivity and the risk of gastro-intestinal complications of various
non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs: a clinical consideration. inflamm res 1998; 47 suppl 2:
s102–6.
332. riendeau d, percival md, boyce s, et al. biochemical and pharmacological profile of a
tetrasubstituted furanone as a highly selective cox-2 inhibitor. br j pharmacol 1997; 121(1):
105–17.
333. yoshimi n, shimizu m, matsunaga k, et al. chemopreventive effect of n-(2-cyclohexyloxy4-nitrophenyl)methane sulfonamide (ns-398), a selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitor, in rat
colon carcinogenesis induced by azoxymethane. jpn j cancer res 1999; 90(4): 406–12.

502

