sleep medicine 2 (2001) 63±65

www.elsevier.com/locate/sleep

case report

narcolepsy and obesity: remission of severe
cataplexy with sibutramine
lois e. krahn*, wendy r. moore, steven i. altchuler
mayo sleep disorders center, mayo clinic and foundation, 200 first street, sw, rochester, mn 55905, usa
received 22 february 2000; received in revised form 25 may 2000; accepted 25 may 2000

abstract
an overweight patient (body mass index of 34 kg/m 2) with narcolepsy associated with cataplexy is described. polysomnography did not indicate obstructive sleep apnea. her obesity was treated with sibutramine, a norepinephrine, serotonin and
dopamine reuptake inhibiting medication and her severe cataplexy remitted. clinicians must be aware that sibutramine may
suppress cataplexy when evaluating excessive daytime sleepiness in an overweight patient taking this anti-obesity medication.
therefore a negative history of cataplexy in these cases may be misleading and narcolepsy may be overlooked in the differential
diagnosis. sibutramine should be discontinued before polysomnography and multiple sleep latency testing but may be a useful
medication in the management of obese narcoleptic patients with cataplexy. with the discovery of decreased hypocretin 1 levels
in humans with narcolepsy, a neuropeptide that modulates sleep and feeding, the association between narcolepsy and obesity
requires more attention. q 2001 elsevier science b.v. all rights reserved.
keywords: narcolepsy; cataplexy; sibutramine; monamines; sleep; obesity

1. introduction
issues related to narcolepsy and obesity are of interest since the observation that hypocretin 1, a neuropeptide that modulates both sleep and feeding in
animals, is decreased signi®cantly in the cerebrospinal ¯uid of many patients with narcolepsy [1]. we
describe an overweight patient with narcolepsy in
whom the anti-obesity drug, sibutramine, effectively
suppressed cataplexy.
2. case report
a 17-year-old high school student presented for
* corresponding author. tel.: 11-507-266-7603; fax: 11-507266-7772.
e-mail address: krahn.lois@mayo.edu (l.e. krahn).

evaluation for excessive daytime sleepiness. she estimated that she napped for at least 4 h during each
school day. she would go to bed at 21:00 h and
sleep until 06:00 h, with occasional awakenings. she
had daily cataplexy involving buckling of her knees,
upper extremity weakness causing her to drop items,
and eyelid weakness which was triggered by laughter,
tension, fright, and elation. on two occasions, she had
fallen and hit her head. she also had sleep paralysis,
hypnagogic hallucinations, and sleep talking. her
weight was 198 lbs, with a height of 66 00 (body
mass index (bmi) 32 kg/m 2).
she underwent 1 week of wrist actigraphy that
recorded decreased daytime activity and at least 7 h
of sleep at night. overnight polysomnography showed
an initial rem latency of 5 min but no other pathology including sleep disordered breathing. the multiple sleep latency test done the next day showed rapid

1389-9457/01/$ - see front matter q 2001 elsevier science b.v. all rights reserved.
pii: s 1389-945 7(00)00056-3

64

l.e. krahn et al. / sleep medicine 2 (2001) 63±65

eye movement (rem) sleep on all four naps, with a
mean initial sleep latency of 0.25 min. the patient was
prescribed pemoline and then methylphenidate. after
several years, she discontinued all medication due to
nausea and anxiety.
at age 21, she returned for follow-up because of
excessive daytime sleepiness and cataplexy, several
episodes daily. the patient observed a humorous
videotape while undergoing polysomnographic monitoring. she experienced two brief cataplectic episodes
with bilateral quadriceps are¯exia [2]. the patient was
prescribed methylphenidate, 30 mg/day, and advised
to follow good sleep hygiene. the patient's sleepiness
improved markedly, cataplexy was reduced to several
episodes per week, but the daily sleep paralysis and
hypnagogic hallucinations persisted, unchanged. in
february 1999, she requested to change to moda®nil
because of nervousness caused by methylphenidate.
she started at 200 mg/day and reported an excellent
response, with improved daytime alertness and no
side effects. she continued to have weekly cataplexy,
which she tried to suppress unsuccessfully by biting
her tongue. she perceived cataplexy as more frequent
and severe, lasting up to 15 min. the patient was
prescribed an antidepressant for her cataplexy;
however, she never ®lled the prescription.
she saw an endocrinologist regarding her weight,
which had increased to 206 lbs (bmi 34 kg/m 2) who
prescribed sibutramine, 10 mg/day, with a low calorie
diet. at follow-up 3 months later, she had had no
cataplexy episodes on the moda®nil and sibutramine.
the cessation of cataplexy was immediate after starting the sibutramine. she experienced slow weight loss
of 7 kg to date and continues on the sibutramine.
3. discussion
cataplexy can be a symptom of narcolepsy that
leads to injury. typically patients are treated with
antidepressant medications that increase norepinephrine or serotonin levels in the brain and suppress cataplexy, possibly by suppressing rem sleep [3,4]
medications other than antidepressants, for example
gamma hydroxybutyrate, have been reported to
reduce cataplexy but these are not available to clinicians [5].
in this case, the patient was prescribed sibutramine,

an anti-obesity medication which has norepinephrine,
serotonin, and dopamine reuptake inhibition [6±9].
this medication is not known to have any antidepressant effect. the indication is for weight loss with a
reduced calorie diet. sibutramine is recommended
for patients with an initial bmi of greater than 30 kg/
m 2 or other risk factors like hypertension, diabetes, and
dyslipidemia. the most frequent side effects are dry
mouth, anorexia, headache, insomnia, and constipation
[10]. more serious, but rare, side effects include
increases in blood pressure, pulse rate, lowering the
seizure threshold, and exacerbating gallstone formation. in rats, sibutramine has increased body temperature. the recommended dosage is 10±15 mg/day. the
medication is used carefully with serotonin reuptake
inhibitors as well as serotonin agonists, and furthermore, it is contraindicated with monamine oxidase
inhibitors because of the risk of serotonin syndrome.
because sibutramine is metabolized by cytochrome
p450 (3a4), this medication should be used cautiously
with ketoconazole and erythromycin. there is no
published information about its safety in combination
with moda®nil or other psychostimulants.
the likely mechanism of action for weight loss with
sibutramine is unknown but it is known to increase
monamine levels through reuptake inhibition. while
sibutramine needs to be used primarily to treat
obesity, its apparent ef®cacy for cataplexy is intriguing and may prove useful for overweight patients
with well-documented narcolepsy with cataplexy. the
tendency to cause insomnia may be bene®cial for
patients with narcolepsy. in this case, sibutramine
effectively suppressed frequent and potentially injurious cataplexy most likely because of its norepinephrine reuptake inhibition. longer term follow-up studies
are necessary to determine its ef®cacy in managing
cataplexy as well as obesity. furthermore, a more
systematic study of potential drug interactions needs
to be conducted.
although obstructive sleep apnea is the most
common sleep disorder in obese patients with excessive daytime sleepiness, narcolepsy should not be
overlooked. when obtaining a history of cataplexy,
clinician should be aware that sibutramine usage
may obscure this important symptom. if patients are
prescribed sibutramine, this medication should be
discontinued before polysomnography or multiple
sleep latency testing. once the diagnosis of narco-

l.e. krahn et al. / sleep medicine 2 (2001) 63±65

lepsy has been established, this medication may be
useful in the management of overweight patients
with cataplexy.
references
[1] nishino s, ripley b, overeem s, lammers gj, et al. hypocretin (orexin) de®ciency in human narcolepsy (letter). lancet
2000;355:39±40.
[2] krahn le, boeve bf, olson ej, herold dl, et al. a standardized test for cataplexy. sleep med 2000 in press.
[3] shapiro wr. treatment of cataplexy with clomipramine. arch
 xxxd122xxx  1975;32:653±656.
[4] guilleminault g, gelb m. in: fahn s, hallett m, luders ho,
maroden cd, editors. clinical aspects and features of cataplexy. negative motor phenomena, advances in neurology,
vol. 67. lippincott-raven: philadelphia, pa, 1995 pp. 65±
77.

65

[5] scrima l, hartman pg, johnson jr fh, hiller fc. ef®cacy of
gamma-hydroxybutyrate versus placebo in treating narcolepsy-cataplexy: double-blind subjective measures. bio
psych 1989;26(4):331±343.
[6] bach ds, rissanen am, mendel cm, shepherd g, et al.
absence of cardiac valve dysfunction in obese patients treated
with sibutramine. obesity res 1999;7(4):363±369.
[7] apselbaum m, vague p, ziegler o, hanotin c, et al. longterm maintenance of weight loss after a very low calorie diet: a
randomized blinded trial of the ef®cacy and tolerability of
sibutramine. am j med 1999;106(2):179±184.
[8] hind id, mangham je, ghani sp, haddock re, et al. sibutramine pharmakinetics in young and elderly healthy subjects.
eur j clin pharmacol 1999;54(11):847±849.
[9] mcneely w, gowa kl. sibutramine. a review of its contribution to the management of obesity. drugs 1998;56(6):1093±
1124.
[10] luque ca, rey ja. sibutramine: a serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake-inhibitor for the treatment of obesity. ann pharmacol 1999;33(9):968±978.

