allergy 2000: 55: 17±27
printed in uk. all rights reserved

copyright # munksgaard 2000
allergy
issn 0108-1675

antiallergic effects of h1-receptor antagonists
the primary mechanism of antihistamine action in the treatment of allergic
diseases is believed to be competitive antagonism of histamine binding to cellular
receptors (speci®cally, the h1-receptors), which are present on nerve endings,
smooth muscles, and glandular cells. this notion is supported by the fact that
structurally unrelated drugs antagonize the h1-receptor and provide clinical
bene®t. however, h1-receptor antagonism may not be their sole mechanism of
action in treating allergic rhinitis. on the basis of in vitro and animal experiments,
drugs classi®ed as h1-receptor antagonists have long been recognized to have
additional pharmacological properties. most ®rst-generation h1-antihistamines
have anticholinergic, sedative, local anaesthetic, and anti-5-ht effects, which
might favourably affect the symptoms of the allergic response but also contribute to
side-effects. these additional properties are not uniformly distributed among
drugs classi®ed as h1-receptor antagonists.  xxxd255xxx , for example, inhibits in vitro
ige-mediated histamine and leukotriene (lt) release from mast cells and
basophils. in human challenge models, terfenadine,  xxxd255xxx , and loratadine
reduce ige-mediated histamine release. cetirizine reduces eosinophilic in®ltration
at the site of antigen challenge in the skin, but not the nose. in a nasal antigen
challenge model, cetirizine pretreatment did not affect the levels of histamine and
 xxxd14xxx  recovered in postchallenge lavages, whereas the levels of
albumin, n-tosyl-l-arginine methyl ester (tame) esterase activity, and lts were
reduced. terfenadine, cetirizine, and loratadine blocked allergen-induced
hyperresponsiveness to  xxxd2586xxx . in view of the complexity of the
pathophysiology of allergy, a number of h1 antagonists with additional properties
are currently under development for allergic diseases. mizolastine, a new h1receptor antagonist, has been shown to have additional actions that should help
reduce the allergic response. in animal models, mizolastine inhibits antigeninduced eosinophil in®ltration into mouse skin and into the nasal cavity of guineapigs. mizolastine also signi®cantly inhibits antigen-induced neutrophil in®ltration
into the bronchoalveolar lavage ¯uids of guinea-pigs. in addition, it inhibits
 xxxd208xxx -induced paw oedema in rats without affecting carrageenininduced rat paw oedema, suggesting an effect on lt generation. in man,
mizolastine inhibits early and late antigen-induced soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (icam-1) levels in skin blisters. it also inhibits anaphylactic release of
histamine from rodent mast cells, ltc4 and ltb4 release from mouse bonemarrow-derived mast cells, ltc4 release from rat intestinal mast cells, and 5lipoxygenase activity of polymorphonuclear neutrophils of guinea-pig intestines
and rat basophilic leukaemia cells. it is clear that a number of h1-antihistamines
have multiple effects on the allergic in¯ammatory response. it is equally clear that
these antiallergic effects are not uniformly shared among all drugs of this class. the
assessment of the clinical signi®cance of these results and research regarding the
parts of the molecules responsible for these activities are underway.

introduction

in the early 20th century, dale & laidlaw ®rst studied
the physiological effects of histamine and showed that it
induced smooth-muscle contraction and vasodilatation
(1). they drew the analogy between the effect of
histamine and the immediate response to an injected
foreign protein in previously sensitized animals and
postulated that histamine might play a role in this

f. m. baroody, r. m. naclerio

section of otolaryngology±head and neck surgery,
department of surgery, pritzker school of medicine,
university of chicago, chicago, illinois, usa

key words: allergic diseases;  xxxd255xxx ; cetirizine;
h1-receptor antagonists; loratadine; mizolastine;
terfenadine.
fuad m. baroody, md
assistant professor of otolaryngology±head and neck
surgery and pediatrics
university of chicago
5841 s. maryland avenue
mc1035
chicago
illinois 60637
usa
tel. +(312) 702-4790
fax: +(312) 702-6809
e-mail: fbaroody@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu.

reaction. in 1927, best et al. isolated histamine from
animal tissues (2), and lewis reported that a histaminelike substance was released from cells in the skin by the
interaction of antigen and antibody (3). in 1937, bovet
& staub detected the ®rst drug with antihistaminic
activity, and in 1944 the ®rst antihistamine was
developed for human use (4, 5). since then, the use of
antihistamines in the treatment of allergic disease has
17

baroody and naclerio
grown rapidly. more than 20 different h1-receptor
antagonists and over 100 different antihistaminecontaining products are currently available for clinical
use. in addition, several new h1-antihistamines are in
various stages of development. numerous clinical trials
support the ef®cacy of these drugs in reducing sneezing
and rhinorrhoea during episodes of allergic rhinitis, and
their utility in treating this condition is indisputable (6).
despite the abundance of clinical data, the mechanism
by which antihistamines relieve allergic symptoms is not
fully understood. the primary mechanism of antihistamine action is believed to be competitive antagonism of
histamine binding to cellular receptors, speci®cally the
h1-receptors, which are present on nerve endings,
smooth muscles, and glandular cells. however, h1antagonism may not be their sole mechanism of action.
most ®rst-generation h1-antihistamines also have
anticholinergic, sedative, local anaesthetic, and antiserotonin effects that might favourably affect the
symptoms of the allergic response and also contribute
to side-effects (6). more recently, some h1-receptor
antagonists have been shown to have anti-in¯ammatory
effects, such as reducing cellular in¯ux and allergeninduced hyperresponsiveness; these properties are
thought to contribute to ef®cacy, but the biological
mechanisms are not well understood. these additional
properties are not uniformly distributed among drugs
classi®ed as h1-receptor antagonists.
to understand the impact of new antihistamines with
enhanced effects on allergic rhinitis, a brief description
of the pathophysiology is necessary. in a sensitized
individual, exposure of the nasal mucosa to allergen will
lead to cross-linking of ige receptors on mast cells and
the release of multiple in¯ammatory mediators. these
mediators include histamine, prostaglandins (pgs), and
leukotrienes (lts), which are thought to lead to the
clinical symptoms, an event termed the early-phase
reaction. histamine binds to h1-receptors on nerves,
vessels, and glandular cells, and contributes to the nasal
symptoms of sneezing, itching, congestion, and rhinorrhea. it is now clear that the early release of mediators
during the allergic reaction is not the only important
pathophysiological phenomenon that contributes to the
disease process. a late in¯ammatory response follows
exposure to allergen and is characterized by an
in¯ammatory cellular in¯ux of which eosinophils and
lymphocytes are important components. the lymphocytes are primarily th2 cells, and they produce characteristic cytokines including interleukin (il)-4,  xxxg1180xxx ,
and granulocyte-macrophage  xxxg526xxx 
(gm-csf). these substances perpetuate the in¯ammatory allergic response by virtue of their activities such as
the promotion of ige synthesis (il-4 and il-13) and the
chemotaxis and increased survival of eosinophils ( xxxg1180xxx ).
several chemokines are also recognized as important
contributors to the in¯ammatory response, such as
 xxxg363xxx , il-8, monocyte chemotactic proteins, and
18

 xxxg354xxx , and these also have a variety of proin¯ammatory effects. this in¯ammatory response results in a
state of hyperresponsiveness of the nasal mucosa to
further allergen exposure (priming) and to exposure to
nonspeci®c stimuli, such as histamine and  xxxd2586xxx .
this hyperresponsiveness is characteristic of clinical
disease and is illustrated by the increased reactivity of
allergic subjects to pollen during a progressing allergy
season and their increased responsiveness to nonspeci®c
environmental stimuli, such as cigarette smoke, strong
perfumes and pollutants.
this paper will review some in vitro and in vivo effects
of h1-receptor antagonists as they relate to the various
pathophysiological steps of the allergic response, with
special emphasis on the activities of these agents that
extend beyond pure h1-receptor antagonism.
mizolastine, one of the newer agents with extended
properties, will be highlighted.
 xxxd255xxx 

in view of the observations that tricyclic antihistamines
inhibit histamine release from basophils in vitro, this
property was studied in vivo (7). in order to accomplish
this goal, a nasal challenge model that permitted
observation of the biochemical events after antigen
provocation was developed. levels of histamine in nasal
secretions, before and after antigen provocation, were
used as a quantitative indicator of mast-cell activation.
in vitro experimentation with  xxxd255xxx  base, a
tricyclic antihistamine of the piperidine class, showed
that it inhibited histamine and lt release by 45% and
85%, respectively, when used at a concentration of
10x3 m (8). concentrations less than 10x4 m had no
signi®cant effect. as these concentrations would be
dif®cult to obtain from oral administration of the drug,
we investigated topical delivery. eight patients were
given 0.5 mg of  xxxd255xxx  intranasally in a double-blind,
crossover study (7).  xxxd255xxx  signi®cantly suppressed
sneezing (p<0.05) and inhibited the elevation of levels
of histamine (p<0.07), tame-esterase activity
(p<0.01), and kinins (p<0.05) in nasal lavage ¯uids
collected after antigen challenges. our observations
were consistent with the notion that  xxxd255xxx , given in
suf®cient concentration, was capable of inhibiting mastcell histamine release in vitro and in vivo. the development of this challenge model permitted the investigation
of properties of antiallergic agents, including their h1antihistaminic activity and other anti-in¯ammatory and
mediator suppressor characteristics.
terfenadine

terfenadine is one of the best-studied h1-antihistamines. to better understand its role in allergic rhinitis,
we used in vivo models to monitor symptoms and

h1-receptor antagonists

figure 1. effect of terfenadine, 60 and 300 mg twice daily, on mediator release after antigen challenge. x-axis depicts challenge
protocol. dil: diluent for allergen extract; 10, 100, and 1000 pnu: increasing doses of ragweed or grass extract in protein nitrogen units.
levels of kinin (a), histamine (b), albumin (c), and tame-esterase activity (d) in nasal lavages were signi®cantly reduced by
premedication with both doses of terfenadine compared to placebo. reproduced with permission from american review of respiratory
diseases, of®cial journal of american thoracic society, # american lung association (10).

mediator release into nasal secretions following nasal
challenge with either histamine or antigen (9). because
terfenadine is a nonsedating antihistamine, we assessed
whether a large dose of 300 mg orally twice daily would
uncover additional properties that could provide additional therapeutic advantages (10). a double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial was performed in 12
subjects with allergic rhinitis to evaluate the effect of
1-week pretreatment with terfenadine, 60 mg twice daily
or 300 mg twice daily, on the response to sequential
nasal challenges with allergen and histamine. the response to allergen challenge was monitored by counting
sneezes and quantifying the levels of histamine, kinins,
tame-esterase activity, and albumin in recovered nasal
lavages. the volunteers were challenged twice with the
diluent for the antigen extract, and then three times with
increasing amounts of ragweed or grass antigen extract.
each challenge was separated by 12 min. a nasal lavage
was performed 10 min after each challenge, with an
additional lavage performed 20 min after the 1000
protein nitrogen units (pnu) challenge. immediately
following the last lavage after antigen provocation, the
nose was challenged with three doses of histamine (0.04,
0.2, and 1.0 mg), the number of sneezes was recorded,
and the nose was lavaged 10 min after each challenge to
measure the levels of albumin. the challenge with
histamine served as a positive control. prolonged
treatment with terfenadine reduced the number of
sneezes following antigen challenge. associated with
the clinical ef®cacy, terfenadine signi®cantly reduced the
levels of kinins (p<0.02), albumin (p=0.01), and
tame-esterase activity (p=0.01), which are, in part,
indicators of vascular permeability, suggesting a major

effect of histamine on the nasal vasculature during the
immediate allergic reaction. a signi®cant reduction
(p<0.03) in the levels of histamine was of particular
interest and suggested an inhibition of mast-cell
degranulation by both the 60- and 300-mg doses of
terfenadine (fig. 1).
the clinical importance of the inhibition of histamine
release by terfenadine is unknown. as both the low and
high doses decreased histamine release, using a dose of
terfenadine greater than that recommended to achieve
the additional anti-in¯ammatory effects is not advisable, as the incidence of adverse cardiac events
increases. following histamine challenge, terfenadine
dramatically reduced the number of sneezes and the
levels of albumin, demonstrating its potency as an h1
antagonist. this study, like the one reported above,
emphasized the importance of the h1-receptor in
mediating sneezing and increased vascular permeability. to reproduce the results of this observation and
address possible physiological effects, the effect of
terfenadine was tested in another nasal challenge system
using localized ®lter paper discs to challenge the nasal
mucosa and measure generated secretions. using this
system, the physiological effects of antigen challenge,
such as secretion weights, nasal airway resistance,
sneezes, and symptoms can be monitored and in¯ammatory mediators simultaneously measured. out of
season, eight volunteers allergic to ragweed or grass
were given a single dose of either terfenadine, 60 mg, or
placebo 2 h prior to challenge (11). using paper discs, a
unilateral antigen challenge was performed with a single
dose of 333 pnu of the relevant antigen. the response
was monitored by counting the number of sneezes,
19

baroody and naclerio

figure 2. levels of histamine in nasal secretions after challenge with diluent for allergen extract and 333 pnu of either grass or ragweed
allergen. diluent or allergen was applied to one nostril (ipsilateral), and secretions were collected from both side of challenge and
opposite nostril (contralateral) after provocation. panel a shows results on side of challenge and denotes signi®cant increase in
histamine after allergen challenge compared to challenge with diluent in patients receiving placebo (light bars) and terfenadine (dark
bars) with signi®cant reduction in levels by terfenadine. panel b shows results on contralateral side of challenge, which indicate lack of
signi®cant histamine release after allergen challenge in unchallenged nostril. *p<0.05 antigen vs diluent; **p<0.05 terfenadine vs
placebo. ns: not statistically signi®cant. reproduced with permission (11).

measuring nasal airway resistance, and determining the
amount of secretions collected in a ®xed time interval.
histamine levels were obtained from secretions eluted
from the collection discs.
terfenadine signi®cantly reduced the number of
sneezes (p<0.05) but had no effect on nasal airway
resistance. both the ipsilateral and contralateral secretory responses were inhibited signi®cantly (p<0.05)
20

compared with placebo, but to a lesser extent than the
reduction after a similarly performed histamine challenge. histamine release, as expected, increased on the
ipsilateral, but not on the contralateral, side of allergen
challenge. terfenadine pretreatment lowered the levels
of histamine in the challenged nostril signi®cantly
(p<0.05), again suggesting an inhibition of mast-cell
histamine release (fig. 2). to ensure that the inhibitory

h1-receptor antagonists

figure 3. inhibition of antigen-induced leukotriene c4 (ltc4)
release in nasal lavage ¯uids after premedication with cetirizine
20 mg daily for three doses. x-axis denotes challenge protocol.
ltc4 levels were reduced in nasal lavage ¯uids after allergen
challenge when patients received cetirizine treatment compared
with placebo. reproduced with permission (16).

effect of terfenadine on antigen-induced nasal secretions
was not due to possible anticholinergic activity, the
effect of premedication with a similar dose of
terfenadine on a  xxxd2586xxx  challenge was studied
with the same system (12). challenging with increasing
doses of  xxxd2586xxx  produced an ipsilateral increase
in secretion weights that was not reduced by terfenadine
premedication, supporting the lack of anticholinergic
activity.
these results concur with the clinical effects of h1antihistamines: very good ef®cacy for sneezing, some
effect on rhinorrhoea, and minimal effect on nasal
congestion. the partial reduction in the secretory
response to antigen suggests that other mediators or
mechanisms contribute signi®cantly to this response.
the marked suppression of histamine and antigeninduced sneezing by terfenadine suggests that the
sneezing response probably results from direct stimulation of nerve endings via h1-receptors. the lack of
ef®cacy of h1-antihistamines to treat nasal congestion
also emphasizes the role of other mediators or receptors
in allergic rhinitis. our observation that treatment with
terfenadine had no effect on nasal airway resistance
measured by anterior rhinomanometry is consistent
with this concept.
albumin, an indicator of vascular permeability,
increases after histamine challenge, consistent with the
presence of h1-receptors on vessels. this h1-mediated
stimulation of blood vessels is completely suppressed by
terfenadine, further supporting the concept that histamine's effects on blood vessels occur via the h1-receptor.
signi®cant inhibition of vascular permeability by
terfenadine after allergen challenge, as evidenced by a
reduction in albumin levels in nasal lavages, suggests an
antagonism of the effects of histamine released from
mast cells. the reduction of histamine levels in recovered
lavage ¯uids by terfenadine could conceivably result
from mechanisms other than inhibition of mast-cell
degranulation, such as suppression of neuronal re¯exes.

the results of the disc experiments, however, support the
inability of the nasonasal re¯ex to induce histamine
release. when discs were used to collect secretions from
the challenged and nonchallenged sides, secretions
increased on both sides, while histamine increased
only on the challenged side. this suggests that histamine
is released by mast cells due to direct contact with
antigen at the challenge site.
the mechanism by which terfenadine suppressed
histamine release is not apparent from our studies. the
duration of pretreatment and the activity of a
metabolite of terfenadine, which is rapidly metabolized,
could be important variables. in vitro studies showed
inhibition of histamine release from mast cells treated
with terfenadine, supporting our in vivo observations
(13).
to study the effects of terfenadine on allergic
in¯ammation and epithelial cell expression of  xxxg1127xxx , ciprandi et al. performed a double-blind, placebocontrolled study in 20 subjects with seasonal allergic
rhinitis to parieteria judaica (14). patients received
terfenadine 120 mg/daily or placebo for 7 days during
the allergy season, and the following objective parameters of the allergic response were monitored:
symptom scores, number of in¯ammatory cells in
nasal lavages, positivity of icam-1 staining on
epithelial cells, and levels of  xxxg1965xxx 
(ecp) and myeloperoxidase (mpo). compared to
placebo, pretreatment with terfenadine resulted in a
signi®cant reduction in clinical symptoms (p<0.02);
number of eosinophils (p<0.025), neutrophils
(p<0.01), and metachromatic cells (p<0.01), in nasal
secretions; icam-1 positivity on nasal epithelial cells
(p<0.005); and nasal lavage levels of ecp (p<0.01).
the ®ndings of this study and the others described in this
section thus illustrate that terfenadine, which is classi®ed
as an h1-antihistamine, has antiallergic properties that
extend from inhibition of mediator release during the
early-phase response to reduction of in¯ammatory
cellular in®ltration during allergic in¯ammation.

cetirizine

cetirizine, the oxidative metabolite of hydroxyzine, is
a  xxxd1774xxx  class h1-receptor antagonist. receptorbinding studies showed that cetirizine, compared to
terfenadine and hydroxyzine, was more selective to h1
sites and had less binding to serotonin, dopamine,
a-adrenergic, and calcium-channel receptors (15). to
evaluate the effects of cetirizine on mediator release
during the early allergic response, a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study in 10 asymptomatic, seasonal allergic subjects was performed to
compare pretreatment with 20 mg of cetirizine daily for
three doses and placebo on the response to intranasal
challenge with antigen (16). the two study days were
21

baroody and naclerio

figure 4. effects of different agents on  xxxg147xxx  activity in guinea-pig peritoneal polymorphonuclear leukocytes. t: terfenadine
10 mm; k: ketotifen 10 mm; a:  xxxd236xxx  10 mm; c: cetirizine 10 mm. values are meanstse (n=3). adapted from sudo et al. (32).

separated by approximately 2 weeks. the protocol for
the nasal challenge involved nasal lavage and serial
challenges with 10, 100, and 1000 pnu of dialyzed
ragweed or mixed grass pollen extract. the number of
sneezes after each antigen dose was counted. the
resultant lavage ¯uid/secretion mixture was assayed for
histamine, tame-esterase activity, albumin, ltc4,
and  xxxg1073xxx . after placebo pretreatment, the subjects
sneezed in response to antigen stimulation. concordant
with the sneezing was a dose-dependent increase in the
levels of histamine,  xxxg1073xxx , ltc4, albumin, and tameesterase activity recovered in the lavages after challenge.
cetirizine pretreatment dramatically reduced the
number of sneezes (p=0.005) but not the levels of
histamine and  xxxg1073xxx  recovered in postchallenge
lavages. however, levels of albumin (p=0.02),
tame esterase activity (p=0.005), and lts
(p=0.06) (fig. 3) were reduced with cetirizine treatment. these ®ndings support the notion that cetirizine,
an h1-antihistamine, competes with histamine for h1receptors on nerves, thereby reducing sneezing, and on
blood vessels, thereby decreasing vascular permeability.
the absence of an effect on histamine and  xxxg1073xxx 
production argues that mast-cell activation by antigen
provocation was equivalent on the two study days. this
observation, in addition to inhibition of sneezing,
further suggests that histamine release from mast cells
resulted directly from mast-cell activation, and argues
against the idea that neuronal re¯exes stimulate mastcell release.
the most interesting result from this study was the
inhibition of sulphidopeptide lt production by an
antihistamine. mast-cell activation in vitro causes the
generation of ltc4. as seen in this study, ltc4 is
generated during the acute allergic response, implying
that mast cells are the source of lt production. as
cetirizine in vitro did not inhibit lt, histamine, or
22

 xxxg1073xxx  production during ige-mediated mast-cell stimulation, other cells within the nasal mucosa may
contribute to lt generation. furthermore, as lt
production is inhibited by cetirizine, we can hypothesize
that it results from histamine stimulation of the other
cell source(s). however, in separate studies, histamine
stimulation of the nasal mucosa did not lead to lt
generation (17). the clinical signi®cance of the inhibition of lt production by antihistamines requires
further study. our results emphasize the advantage of
correlating in vivo and in vitro results and the greater
complexity of the in vivo system.
studies evaluating the effect of cetirizine on the
cutaneous allergic response have shown that it reduces
eosinophilic in®ltration at the site of antigen challenge
in a skin chamber challenge model (18). this ®nding has
not been consistently reproduced. atkins et al., using a
similar skin challenge model, have reported no
signi®cant difference in eosinophil accumulation at
antigen sites during placebo and cetirizine treatment
periods (19).
on the other hand, klementsson et al. evaluated the
effect of cetirizine on eosinophil in®ltration into nasal
secretions hours after the immediate allergic reaction
(20). they compared the effects of terfenadine,
cetirizine, and placebo. both drugs inhibited the
symptoms of the immediate reaction, while neither
drug had an effect on the number of recovered
eosinophils. why cetirizine should prevent the selective
recruitment of eosinophils to the skin but not the nasal
cavity is unknown. klementsson et al. also investigated
the effects of terfenadine and cetirizine on the allergeninduced hyperresponsiveness to  xxxd2586xxx . as
neither drug affects the nasal response to  xxxd2586xxx ,
this was a valid test of hyperresponsiveness. surprisingly, both drugs blocked this phenomenon.
majchel et al. showed that histamine does not induce

h1-receptor antagonists

figure 5. effect of different agents on in¯ammatory reaction induced by intradermal injection of  xxxd208xxx  (aa, 0.3%) in rat
hind paw. either distilled water, dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg), or mizolastine (0.3 mg/kg) were given orally 2 h before aa injection.
there was signi®cant and prolonged reduction of aa-induced reaction after administration of both active agents compared to control,
with inhibitory effect of dexamethasone being larger than that of mizolastine. ***p<0.001 compared with control treated rats.
reproduced with permission (33).

hyperresponsiveness to  xxxd2586xxx  (17). thus the
mechanism by which these two antihistamines reduce
hyperresponsiveness is probably not related to their h1antagonistic properties, and it remains unclear.
in a randomized, parallel-group, double-blind study
of 20 patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis during the
allergy season, ciprandi et al. compared the effects of
oral cetirizine and loratadine, both 10 mg daily. effects
were measured on clinical scores, cellular in¯ux, and
icam-1 positivity of epithelial cells in nasal scrapings,
and levels of ecp, mpo, and  xxxg720xxx 
(epo) in nasal lavages (21). in the cetirizine-treated
group, compared with a pretreatment baseline, symptom scores (p=0.002); icam-1 expression on epithelial cells (p=0.01); the number of neutrophils
(p=0.015), eosinophils (p=0.03), and metachromatic
cells (p=0.001); and levels of ecp (p=0.01), epo
(p=0.002), and histamine (p=0.02) in nasal lavages
were signi®cantly reduced. levels of mpo in the
lavages did not change signi®cantly. unlike studies
described above, this one demonstrated an effect of
cetirizine on cellular in¯ux and icam-1 expression on
epithelial cells, as well as a reduction in histamine and
eosinophil mediators. the differences between the study
designs (nasal provocation versus seasonal allergic
in¯ammation) as well as methodological differences
might explain the discrepant results.

loratadine

loratadine is an 8-chloro-n-ethoxycarbonyl derivative
of  xxxd255xxx . bousquet et al. performed a three-way
crossover experiment comparing the effects of 1-week
treatment with loratadine, terfenadine, and placebo on
mediator release during the immediate response to nasal
challenge with antigen (22). both active drugs suppressed symptoms and the release of histamine and
 xxxg1073xxx , suggesting an effect on mast-cell activation.
with a similar model, andersson et al. showed a
signi®cant reduction in histamine release during the
early allergic reaction after loratadine treatment
(p<0.05) (23).
we performed a double-blind, three-way crossover
study comparing the effects of 1-week pretreatment
with loratadine 10 mg once daily, terfenadine 60 mg
twice daily, or placebo. effects were measured on the
acute nasal response to antigen challenge, the cellular
in¯ux after challenge, and the induction of increased
responsiveness to  xxxd2586xxx  24 h later (24).
fourteen patients completed the protocol. the
number of sneezes and the levels of histamine, tryptase,
 xxxg1073xxx , ltc4, kinins, albumin, and tame-esterase
activity were evaluated in recovered nasal lavage ¯uids
during the acute allergic reaction. the total number of
eosinophils in nasal lavage ¯uids was counted before
23

baroody and naclerio
and 24 h after antigen challenge, and the weight of
 xxxd2586xxx -induced nasal secretions was recorded
24 h after antigen challenge.
the number of sneezes and the levels of mediators
recovered in nasal lavage ¯uids were compared for all
treatment limbs of the study. pretreatment with
loratadine signi®cantly reduced the number of sneezes
(p<0.05) after challenge. furthermore, when looking
at the maximal increase above the diluent response,
pretreatment with loratadine signi®cantly reduced the
levels of histamine (p=0.02), kinins (p=0.02), and
albumin (p=0.01) in recovered lavages. loratadine
tended to decrease the levels of tryptase,  xxxg1073xxx , ltc4,
and tame-esterase activity, but this did not reach
statistical signi®cance. terfenadine signi®cantly
reduced sneezes and the levels of histamine, kinins,
albumin, and tame-esterase in lavage ¯uids (p<0.05
for all parameters). the response parameters after
pretreatment with loratadine or terfenadine did not
differ signi®cantly.
in placebo-treated patients, total eosinophil numbers
increased signi®cantly 24 h after antigen challenge, and
neither terfenadine nor loratadine had any inhibitory
effect on this event. reactivity to  xxxd2586xxx  was
assessed by quantifying the weight of secretions
generated after the application of increasing doses of
 xxxd2586xxx  to the nasal septum with ®lter-paper
discs. reactivity to  xxxd2586xxx  24 h after antigen
challenge signi®cantly increased compared to the baseline test performed during the screening visit in placebotreated patients, with the response to the lowest dose
of  xxxd2586xxx  (0.41 mg/ml) being signi®cantly increased. in loratadine- and terfenadine-treated patients,
the responses after screening did not differ signi®cantly
from those after antigen, suggesting that both antihistamines prevented the increased reactivity to  xxxd2586xxx  observed 24 h after antigen challenge.
raptopoulou et al. treated patients with allergic
rhinitis with either loratadine 10 mg once daily or
placebo for 1 month (25). loratadine-treated patients
had a signi®cantly lower symptom score (p<0.05). the
number of il-2 receptors and human leukocyte
antigen-dr positive cells was signi®cantly decreased
in the loratadine-treated group (p<0.05). how loratadine exerted its effect on t cells remains to be
determined. in another study examining the effect of
loratadine on cellular allergic in¯ammation, ciprandi
et al. medicated 10 subjects with seasonal allergic
rhinitis with oral loratadine 10 mg daily and monitored
the effects of active treatment compared to baseline
(21). premedication with loratadine resulted in signi®cant reductions from pretreatment baseline in the
following parameters: symptom score (p=0.002),
icam-1 expression on nasal epithelial cells (p=0.02),
the number of eosinophils (p=0.016) and metachromatic cells (p=0.01) in nasal scrapings, and levels of
ecp (p<0.002), epo (p<0.006) and histamine
24

(p=0.01) in nasal lavages. the results from this nonplacebo-controlled study differed from those of earlier
challenge studies in terms of the reduction in in¯ammatory cellular in¯ux, and this could be a result of the
different methodological and design techniques
employed.
mizolastine

mizolastine is a new second-generation, selective and
peripherally active h1-receptor antagonist that is used
in the treatment of allergic rhinitis and urticaria
(26±28). the h1-receptor activity of mizolastine was
studied by evaluating the af®nity of this compound for
[ xxxd3050xxx -binding sites on guinea-pig cerebellar
membranes (29). mizolastine had an af®nity for these
receptors similar to that of  xxxd236xxx , and had a
10±20-fold higher af®nity than terfenadine, cetirizine,
or loratadine (table 1). the selectivity of mizolastine
for the h1-receptor was also demonstrated, as [3h]
mizolastine binding to guinea-pig cerebellar membranes
was inhibited by h1-receptor antagonists, but not by
h2- or h3-receptor ligands (29). furthermore, mizolastine displayed very low af®nity for adrenergic, dopaminergic, serotonergic, and muscarinic cholinergic
receptors.
to investigate potential antiallergic activities of
mizolastine beyond h1-receptor antagonism, levrier
et al. measured levels of histamine in bronchoalveolar
lavage ¯uids of guinea-pigs sensitized with aerosolized
albumin and later challenged with the allergen (30). the
animals were premedicated with different doses of
either mizolastine or loratadine orally, 2 h before
ovalbumin challenge and killed 2 min after provocation. as can be seen from table 2, mizolastine
signi®cantly reduced levels of histamine in bronchoalveolar lavage ¯uids compared to nonmedicated,
challenged controls at doses of 0.3 and 1.0 mg/kg
(p<0.01), while loratadine provided comparable inhibition only at a higher dose of 3 mg/kg. these studies
suggest a potential mast-cell inhibitory role for
mizolastine in allergen-induced reactions in the lower
airways of guinea-pigs, and support the higher potency
of mizolastine than loratadine in achieving this effect.
yamada et al. induced ltc4 production in rat
peritoneal exudate cells and mouse bone-marrowtable 1. displacement by mizolastine and other antihistamines of [ xxxd3050xxx  binding
to membranes from guinea-pig cerebellum (29)
antihistamine
mizolastine
 xxxd236xxx 
terfenadine
cetirizine
loratadine

ic50
(nmol/l)
47
52
450
470
1000

h1-receptor antagonists
table 2. levels of histamine in bronchoalveolar lavage of ovalbumin-sensitized and
challenged guinea pigs with and without premedication with mizolastine and loratadine
experimental group
nonsensitized controls
sensitized and challenged
mizolastine

loratadine

dose
(mg/kg po)

histamine
(ng/ml)

vehicle
vehicle
0.1
0.3
1.0
1.0
3.0

117t17
279t35*
187t36
154t20**
110t13**
217t49
125t20**

* p<0.01 vs nonsensitized controls, ** p<0.01 vs sensitized and challenged controls (30).

derived mast cells in response to calcium ionophore
a23187 and antigen to investigate the effect of
mizolastine on lt production. the investigators
studied the inhibitory effect of mizolastine and other
antihistamines added 15 min before stimulation (31).
compared to control, pretreatment with mizolastine led
to signi®cant inhibition of a23187-induced ltc4
release in rat peritoneal exudate cells at concentrations
of 3 (p<0.05) and 10 mm (p<0.01) with an ic50 of
3.8 mm. in these experiments, terfenadine and ketotifen
did not inhibit ltc4 production signi®cantly. in mouse
bone-marrow-derived mast cells, premedication with
mizolastine resulted in signi®cant inhibition of
a23187-induced ltc4 release compared to controls
at concentrations of 1 (p<0.01) and 10 mm (p<0.01;
ic50 of 1.3 mm) and terfenadine at concentrations of
3 mm (p<0.01), with ketotifen showing no signi®cant
inhibition. when antigen-induced release of lts was
studied in mouse bone-marrow-derived mast cells,
mizolastine signi®cantly (p<0.01) inhibited ltb4
release compared with controls  xxxd1891xxx  mm (ic50 of
6.4 mm), terfenadine at 3 mm, and ketotifen at 100 mm.
when antigen-induced ltc4 release was studied in the
same experimental setup, mizolastine-inhibited release
was greater than controls  xxxd1891xxx  mm (ic50 of 3.0 mm;
p<0.01), terfenadine at 3 mm (p<0.05), and ketotifen
at 100 mm (p<0.01) (31). the same authors showed
that mizolastine inhibited antigen-induced eosinophil
in®ltration into mouse skin and into the nasal cavity of
guinea pigs. the ed50 values for these effects were
0.3 mg/kg p.o. and 0.2 mg/kg i.p., respectively (31).
sudo et al. examined the effect of different antihistamines on  xxxg147xxx  activity in guinea-pig
peritoneal polymorphonuclear leukocytes (32). intestinal polymorphonuclear cells were harvested after
killing the guinea pigs and subjected to supersonic
waves, and the supernatant was collected and studied for
lipoxygenase activity by its ability to metabolize 14clabelled  xxxd208xxx . the effects of different
antihistamines and a  xxxg147xxx  inhibitor (aa861) were studied with this system. as can be seen from
fig. 4, mizolastine was the most potent inhibitor of

 xxxg147xxx  activity among the antihistamines and
had a similar dose-dependent inhibitory pro®le to the
 xxxg147xxx  inhibitor, although at a lower potency.
because the above in vitro studies suggested an
inhibitory effect of mizolastine on  xxxd208xxx 
metabolism, especially the  xxxg147xxx  pathway, the
effects of this antihistamine on arachidonic acidinduced oedema were studied in the rat paw in vivo
model (33). in these experiments, a ¯are reaction was
induced by a single subplantar injection into the right
hind paw of sprague dawley rats of  xxxd208xxx ,
0.1 ml of a 0.3% v/v solution, or carrageenin, 0.1 ml of a
1% suspension. the induced ¯are reactions were
assessed plethysmographically and were reported as
paw volume measurements. subplantar injection of
 xxxd208xxx  into the hind paw induced a longlasting and submaximal ¯are reaction that reached
maximal response at 2±3 h after injection, as indicated
by an increase in rat paw volume up to 0.6±0.8 ml
(fig. 5). the effect of oral dexamethasone, 0.1 mg/kg,
given 2 h before  xxxd208xxx  injection, was used as
a positive control and resulted in a signi®cant
(p<0.001), rapid, and prolonged inhibitory effect on
 xxxd208xxx -induced in¯ammation (fig. 5).
oral mizolastine, 0.3 mg/kg, also resulted in a
signi®cant (p<0.001), rapid inhibition of arachidonic
acid-induced in¯ammation that lasted throughout the
4 h of observation and was smaller than the inhibitory
effect of dexamethasone. when mizolastine was administered in combination with either loratadine or
 xxxd3050xxx , no signi®cant modi®cation of mizolastine's
anti-in¯ammatory effect was observed, suggesting that
the inhibitory actions of mizolastine on arachidonic
acid-induced rat paw oedema are not mediated by
antagonism of the h1-receptor. furthermore, mizolastine exerted no effect on carrageenin-induced rat paw
oedema, and, as carrageenin is thought to induce
in¯ammation via the cycloxygenase pathway, these data
suggest that the effects of mizolastine on arachidonic
acid-induced in¯ammation are mediated by inhibition
of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway.
to investigate additional antiallergic properties of
mizolastine, michel et al. used a skin chamber model to
evaluate its effect on soluble icam-1 production after
challenges with either allergen or histamine (34). in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in 12
grass-pollen-sensitive patients, grass pollen challenge
was performed for 2 h, and icam-1 levels were
measured 2 and 8 h later. compared with placebo,
pretreatment with mizolastine signi®cantly (p=0.03)
reduced icam-1 levels 2 h after challenge and also
reduced levels 8 h after challenge, but the latter
reduction did not reach statistical signi®cance. after
histamine challenge, pretreatment with mizolastine led
to signi®cant reductions in icam-1 levels both at 2
(p=0.004) and 8 h (p=0.05) after challenge compared
with placebo.
25

baroody and naclerio
in clinical studies of subjects with allergic rhinitis,
mizolastine signi®cantly reduced symptoms of rhinoconjunctivitis in double-blind, placebo-controlled
studies in subjects with seasonal and perennial allergic
rhinitis (26, 27). furthermore, its ef®cacy compared
favourably to that of other antihistamines such as
terfenadine, loratadine, and cetirizine. more details
about these clinical studies are available elsewhere in
this supplement. whether treatment with mizolastine in
subjects with allergic rhinitis will lead to inhibition of
mast-cell mediator release and a reduction in  xxxd208xxx  metabolites, such as ltc4 via the lipoxygenase pathway, is still being investigated.

conclusion

on the basis of in vitro and animal experiments, drugs
classi®ed as h1-receptor antagonists have long been
recognized to have additional pharmacological properties. it has been only within the last decade that we have
had the ability to test whether these properties occur in
vivo in man. most of the human studies have focused on
the newly developed agents. it is clear that a number of
h1-antihistamines have effects on various aspects of the
in¯ammatory response. there are many aspects of the

allergic response, such as ige synthesis, neuropeptide
release, and water and electrolyte transport, that have
not been studied.
it is equally clear that these antiallergic effects are not
uniformly shared among this class of drugs. we need to
establish the clinical signi®cance of these antiallergic
effects. simply stated, is an h1-antihistamine with
additional properties a better drug clinically than an
h1-antihistamine without such properties? most clinical
trials comparing different h1-antihistamines have not
consistently found advantages of one drug over
another. while this lack of difference may relate to
the current limits of our testing systems to distinguish
subtle differences, these clinical observations may
emphasize the greater relevance of the effects of
histamine antagonism by these drugs rather than their
antiallergic effects. if the structure of the h1-antihistamines that relates to the other antiallergic properties
can be determined, novel agents for the treatment of
allergic rhinitis may be developed.

acknowledgment
the authors were supported in part by grants ai45583 and dc
02714 from the national institutes of health, bethesda, md,
usa.

references
1. dale hh, laidlaw pp. the
physiological action of bimidozolylethylamine. j physiol
(london) 1910:318±344.
2. best ch, dale hh, dudley hw,
thorpe wv. the nature of the
vasodilator constituents of certain tissue
extracts. j physiol (london)
1927:397±417.
3. lewis t. the blood vessels of the human
skin. london: shaw, 1927.
4. bovet d, staub a. action protectrice
des eâthers phenoliques au cours de
l'intoxication histaminique. cr soc biol
(paris) 1937;124:547±549.
5. bovet d, horclois r, walthert f.
proprieâteâs antihistaminiques de la n-pmethoxybenzyl n-dimethylaminoethyl
alpha amino-pyridine. cr soc biol
(paris) 1944;138:99±100.
6. douglas ww. histamine and
5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) and
their antagonists. in: gilman a,
goodman l, rall t, murad f, editors.
the pharmacologic basis of
therapeutics. 7th ed. new york:
macmillan, 1987:605±638.

26

7. togias a, naclerio rm, warner j,
et al. demonstration of inhibition of
mediator release from mast cells by
 xxxd255xxx  base: in vivo and in vitro
evaluation. jama 1986;255:225±229.
8. lichtenstein lm, gillespie e. the
effects of h1 and h2 antihistamines on
``allergic'' histamine release and its
inhibition by histamine. j pharmacol
exp ther 1975;192:441±450.
9. naclerio rm, meier hl, kageysobotka a, et al. mediator release after
nasal airway challenge with allergen.
am rev respir dis 1983;128:597±602.
10. naclerio rm, kagey-sobotka a,
lichtenstein lm, freidhoff l, proud
d. terfenadine, an h1-antihistamine,
inhibits histamine release in vivo in the
human. am rev respir dis
1990;142:167±171.
11. wagenmann m, baroody fm, kageysobotka a, lichtenstein lm, naclerio
rm. the effect of terfenadine on
unilateral nasal challenge with allergen.
j allergy clin immunol
1994;93:594±605.
12. baroody fm, wagenmann m,
naclerio rm. a comparison of the
secretory response of the nasal mucosa
to  xxxd2586xxx  and histamine. j appl
physiol 1993;74:2661±2671.

13. okayama y, benyon rc, lowman ma,
church mk. in vitro effects of h1antihistamines on histamine and  xxxg1073xxx 
release from mast cells of human lung,
tonsil, and skin. allergy
1994;49:246±253.
14. ciprandi g, pronzato c, ricca v,
varese p, del giacco gs, canonica
gw. terfenadine exerts antiallergic
activity reducing icam-1 expression on
nasal epithelial cells in patients with
pollen allergy. clin exp allergy
1995;25:871±878.
15. spector s, altman r. cetirizine. a
novel antihistamine. am j rhinol
1987;1:147±149.
16. naclerio rm, proud d, kageysobotka a, freidhoff l, norman ps,
lichtenstein lm. the effect of
cetirizine on the early allergic response.
laryngoscope 1989;99:596±599.
17. majchel am, proud d, hubbard wc,
naclerio rm. histamine stimulation of
the nasal mucosa does not induce
prostaglandin or leukotriene generation
or induce  xxxd2586xxx 
hyperresponsiveness. int arch allergy
appl immunol 1991;95:149±155.

h1-receptor antagonists
18. michel l, de vos c, rihoux j-p,
burtin c, benveniste j, dubertret l.
inhibitory effect of oral cetirizine on in
vivo antigen-induced histamine and
paf-acether release and eosinophil
recruitment in human skin. j allergy
clin immunol 1988;82:101±109.
19. atkins p, zweiman b, moskovitz a, von
alimen c, ciliberti m. cellular
in¯ammatory responses and mediator
release during early developing latephase allergic cutaneous in¯ammatory
responses: effects of cetirizine. j allergy
clin immunol 1997;99:806±811.
20. klementsson h, andersson m, pipkorn
u. allergen-induced increase in
nonspeci®c nasal reactivity is blocked
by antihistamines without a clear-cut
relationship to eosinophil in¯ux. j
allergy clin immunol 1990;86:466±472.
21. ciprandi g, pronzato c, ricca v,
passalacqua g, danzig m, canonica
gw. loratadine treatment of rhinitis
due to pollen allergy reduces epithelial
icam-1 expression. clin exp allergy
1997;27:1175±1183.
22. bousquet j, lebel b, chanal i, morel
a, michel fb. antiallergic activity of
h1-receptor antagonists assessed by
nasal challenge. j allergy clin immunol
1988;82(5 pt 1):881±887.

23. andersson m, nolte h, baumgarten
c, pipkorn u. suppressive effects of
loratadine on allergen-induced
histamine release in the nose. allergy
1991;46:540±546.
24. baroody fm, lim m, proud d, kageysobotka a, lichtenstein lm, naclerio
rm. effects of loratadine and
terfenadine on the induced nasal allergic
reaction. arch otolaryngol head neck
surg 1996;122:309±316.
25. raptopoulou g, ilonidis g, orphanou
h, et al. the effects of loratadine on
activated cells of the nasal mucosa in
patients with allergic rhinitis. j investig
allergol clin immunol 1993;3:192±197.
26. leynadier f, bousquet j, murrieta m,
attali p and the  xxxd2504xxx  study group.
ef®cacy and safety of mizolastine in
seasonal allergic rhinitis. ann allergy
asthma immunol 1996;76:163±168.
27. bachert c, brostoff j, scadding g,
tasman j, stalla-bourdillon a,
murrieta m and the riperan study
group. mizolastine therapy has also an
effect on nasal blockade in perennial
allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. allergy
1998;53:969±975.
28. brostoff j, fitzharris p, dunmore c,
theron m, blondin p. ef®cacy of
mizolastine, a new antihistamine,
compared with placebo in the treatment
of chronic idiopathic urticaria. allergy
1996;51:320±325.

29. benavides j, schoemaker h, dana c,
et al. in vivo and in vitro interaction of
the novel selective histamine h1
receptor antagonist mizolastine with h1
receptors in the rodent.
arzneimittelforschung
1995;45:551±558.
30. levrier j, duval d, prouteau m, et al.
anti-anaphylactic activity of the novel
selective  xxxg1078xxx 
antagonist mizolastine in the rodent.
arzneimittelforschung
1995;45:559±568.
31. yamada n, funayama k. inhibitory
effects of mizolastine on the release of
mediators and antagonistic effects
against mediators. jpn pharmacol ther
1998;26(suppl):131±138.
32. sudo k, nagai k, yamada n.
inhibitory effect of mizolastine on
 xxxg147xxx . jpn pharmacol ther
1998;26(suppl):155±157.
33. pichat p, angel i, arbilla s. antiin¯ammatory properties of mizolastine
after oral administration on arachidonic
acid-induced cutaneous reaction in the
rat. arzneimittelforschung
1998;48:173±178.
34. michel l, murrieta-aguttes m, jeanlouis f, levy d, dubertret l.
humoral and cellular responses to
histamine and pollen allergen in a skin
chamber model: effect of mizolastine.
ann allergy asthma immunol
2000;85:64±69.

27

