tpn-evoked dysfunction of islet lysosomal activity mediates impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin release.  we examined the relation between nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion and the islet lysosome acid glucan-1,4-alpha-glucosidase system in rats undergoing  xxxd3210xxx  (tpn). during tpn treatment, serum glucose was normal, but free  xxxd2154xxx , triglycerides, and cholesterol were elevated. islets from tpn-infused rats showed increased basal insulin release, a normal insulin response to cholinergic stimulation but a greatly impaired response when stimulated by glucose or alpha-ketoisocaproic acid. this impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin release was only slightly ameliorated by the carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 inhibitor etomoxir. however, in parallel with the impaired insulin response to glucose, islets from tpn-infused animals displayed reduced activities of islet lysosomal enzymes including the acid glucan-1,4-alpha-glucosidase, a putative key enzyme in nutrient-stimulated insulin release. by comparison, the same lysosomal enzymes were increased in liver tissue. furthermore, in intact control islets, the pseudotetrasaccharide acarbose, a selective inhibitor of acid alpha-glucosidehydrolases, dose dependently suppressed islet acid glucan-1,4-alpha-glucosidase and acid alpha-glucosidase activities in parallel with an inhibitory action on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. by contrast, when incubated with intact tpn islets, acarbose had no effect on either enzyme activity or glucose-induced insulin release. moreover, when acarbose was added directly to tpn islet homogenates, the dose-response effect on the catalytic activity of the acid alpha-glucosidehydrolases was shifted to the right compared with control homogenates. we suggest that a general dysfunction of the islet lysosomal/vacuolar system and reduced catalytic activities of acid glucan-1,4-alpha-glucosidase and acid alpha-glucosidase may be important defects behind the impairment of the transduction mechanisms for nutrient-stimulated insulin release in islets from tpn-infused rats.