pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic aspects of the ideal cox-2 inhibitor: a pharmacologist's perspective.  two classes of antipyretic analgesics were developed about 100 years ago, namely the acidic aspirin-like drugs and non-acidic acetaminophen- xxxd192xxx -like compounds. since then, research has aimed at improving the side-effect profile of the acidic anti-inflammatory aspirin-like drugs and improving the anti-inflammatory efficacy of the non-acidic acetaminophen- xxxd192xxx -like compounds. both drug classes inhibit the cyclooxygenase (cox)-1 and -2 enzymes non-selectively. the aspirin-like drugs achieve particularly high concentrations in inflamed tissue, which is assumed to account for their superior anti-inflammatory potency. these acidic drugs also reach comparatively high concentrations in the stomach wall, kidney cortex and blood, resulting in the well-known side effects that occur with acidic compounds but not with acetaminophen and  xxxd192xxx . following the discovery of the two differentially distributed and regulated coxs, two non-acidic cox-2-selective compounds--celecoxib and rofecoxib--were introduced. they proved to be less toxic to the gastrointestinal tract compared with, for example, diclofenac or naproxen. these non-acidic drugs distribute homogeneously throughout the body--a cause for concern since cox-2 has been found to be present constitutively in many organ systems, including brain, bone and the genito-urinary tract. it appears desirable to combine the tissue-targeted distribution of the highly protein-bound acidic aspirin-type drugs with the selectivity of the cox-2 inhibitors, in order to achieve improved anti-inflammatory activity and at the same time reduce the risk of side effects. such agents should be devoid of cox-1-related side effects in, for example, the inhibition of blood coagulation and should only weakly affect cox-2 related functions of the central nervous system, due to slow blood-brain barrier penetration. we therefore propose that a drug combining the pharmacokinetic characteristics of, for example, ibuprofen with the cox-2 selectivity of rofecoxib is likely to be a superior anti-inflammatory analgesic.