menopause: the journal of the north american menopause society
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 6–15
© 2002 the north american menopause society
嘷
⬁ text printed on acid-free paper.

progestogens in hormonal replacement therapy: new molecules,
risks, and benefits
régine sitruk-ware, md
abstract
while the benefits of progestogen use in hormone replacement therapy (hrt) are well recognized as far as endometrial protection is concerned, their risks and drawbacks have generated
controversial articles.
several risks are attributed to progestogens as a class-effect; however, the progestogens used in
hrt have varying pharmacological properties and do not induce the same side effects. natural
progesterone (p) and some of its derivatives, such as the 19-norprogesterones (nestorone, nomegestrol acetate, trimegestone), do not bind to the  xxxg183xxx  and, hence, do not exert
androgenic side effects. newly synthesized molecules such as  xxxd1946xxx  or dienogest have no
androgenic effect but do have a partial antiandrogenic effect.  xxxd1946xxx  derives from spironolactone and binds to the  xxxg1602xxx .
when the cardiovascular risk factors are considered, some molecules with a higher androgenic
potency than others attenuate the beneficial effects of estrogens on the lipid profile as well as the
vasomotion. on the other hand, other progestogens devoid of androgenic properties do not exert
these deleterious effects. the epidemiological data do not suggest any negative effect of the progestogens administered together with estrogens on cardiovascular morbidity or mortality. however, recent results suggest that in women with established coronary heart disease, hrt may
not protect against further heart attacks when the progestogen selected possesses androgenic
properties.
the data related to the progestogen effect on breast tissue has been interpreted differently from
country to country. however, it has been admitted that, according to the type of progestogen used
and the dose and duration of its application, a predominant antiproliferative effect is observed in the
human breast cells. as far as breast cancer risk is concerned, most epidemiological studies do not
suggest any significant difference between the estrogens given alone or combined with progestogens in hrt.
complying with the classic contraindications of hrt and selecting molecules devoid of estrogenic, androgenic, or glucocorticoid effect should allow a larger use of the progestins without any
major drawback.
key words: progestational steroids – 19-norprogesterones – cardiovascular surrogate risk
markers – vasomotion – atherosclerosis – lipids – breast cancer risk.

introduction

received april 30, 2001; revised and accepted august 6, 2001.
center for biomedical research, population council, new york, ny.
address reprint requests to regine sitruk-ware, center for biomedical
research, population council, 1230 york ave, new york, ny 10021.
e-mail: regine@popcbr.rockefeller.edu.

6

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

t

he well-recognized benefit of progestogen
use in hormone replacement therapy (hrt) is
protection of the endometrium by opposing
the proliferative effect of estrogens. however, some of the most prescribed progestogen molecules also partially oppose the beneficial effects of

progestogens in hrt

estrogens. this effect has raised controversy about the
risk/benefit ratio of combined estrogen and progestogen hrt. among the alleged risks of progestogen in
hrt, cardiovascular disease (cvd) and breast cancer
risk have been the most debated issues.
though not the focus of this article, progestogens
also have parallel effects in the central nervous system,
and depending on the progestogen used, may affect
mood to varying degrees.
benefits of progestogens in hrt: the endometrium

the effects of hormone replacement with estrogen
alone on the risk for endometrial cancer are now reasonably well defined. risk increases with increasing
duration of use, reaching a relative risk of about 10 after
10 or more years of use; the elevation in risk declines
after cessation of use, but the risk is still significantly
raised 5 or more years after last use.1 there are fewer
data in relation to combined hrt with an estrogen and
a progestogen. in all such studies, use of estrogen with
a progestogen was associated with a lower relative risk
of endometrial cancer than use of estrogen alone, and
the relative risk was lower in women using progestogens for 10 or more days per month than in women
using progestogens for less than 10 days per month.
local delivery of the progestogen levonorgestrel released from an intrauterine system at a rate of 20 µg/24
hours has been shown to suppress endometrial growth.
the glands of the endometrium become atrophic and
the epithelium inactive. this system, originally developed for contraception, has been shown to decrease the
amount and duration of normal menstrual flow and to
delay or avoid hysterectomy in women scheduled for
surgery because of heavy bleeding.2 although the system is registered only for contraception, its use for local
delivery of progestogens in the postmenopausal endometrium has been suggested in order to avoid systemic
effects of the progestogen. lower dose systems are under development that are specifically indicated for
postmenopausal women.
risk factors for cardiovascular disease

among the main cardiovascular risk factors recognized for both men and women, obesity, cigarette
smoking, high diastolic blood pressure, hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus may be preventable
causes of coronary heart disease (chd).3 in women,
estrogen deprivation after menopause may affect several of these risk factors.
estrogen replacement therapy (ert) has been
shown to improve insulin sensitivity,4 lower diastolic

blood pressure,5 increase hdl2 levels,6 and stimulate
the production of vasodilating factors such as  xxxd2738xxx  (no) and prostaglandin by the vessel.7 estrogeninduced vasodilatation occurs rapidly, and this effect is
referred to as a nongenomic effect.8 other actions of
estrogens occur after several months and are dependent
on changes in gene expression; these actions are referred to as genomic.8 progestogens down-regulate the
estrogen receptors and hence may interfere with some
of the genomic actions of estrogens through alterations
of the estrogen receptors (er).
combined hrt and breast cancer risk

some studies have shown that women taking estrogen alone increase their risk of developing breast cancer by approximately 10% for each 5 years of use.9–11
the question of whether the addition of a progestogen to ert increases breast cancer risk is difficult to
assess. studies addressing this question have had varying results, many showing no effect,11 and others indicating increased risk with combined therapy over ert
alone.12–15 further investigation of the role of progestogens in breast cancer risk may help to clarify these
conflicting results.
progestogens: mode of action,
classification, activity
mode of action of progestogens

progesterone is a major component in the regulation
of normal female reproductive function. its effects are
mediated by an intracellular receptor (pr), located in
the nucleus of target cells. this receptor was discovered almost 30 years ago. the mechanism of progesterone action in target tissues is complex, and a distinction
has to be made between the direct targets of progesterone action and indirect consequences of progesterone
regulation. for instance, as the effects of progesterone
are mediated by pr, which is induced by estradiol in
most target tissues, the delineation of specific progesterone effects is not clear.16
in the human, two pr proteins, pr-a and pr-b,
have been described. recently, a third activation domain (af-3), which appears to function only in a restricted cell and promoter context, has been found.
pr-a and pr-b are encoded by a single gene under the
control of distinct promoters, each of which gives rise
to a distinct subgroup of pr mrna. the biological importance of these different ratios of pr expression has
not been extensively explored, and little is known of
their relative modulation in vivo.16

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

7

r. sitruk-ware

whether the progestogens available for use to date
are able to bind specifically to pr-a or pr-b and
whether this is of clinical relevance is still unclear.
however, the development of new generations of progestogens to improve the selectivity profile of progestogens has been a great challenge. steroidal and nonsteroidal  xxxg1737xxx  agonists have been
synthesized; the latter are still in a very early stage of
research.17
the progestogens presently available for prescription interact with other steroidal receptors, including
the  xxxg183xxx  (ar), the  xxxg1601xxx  (gr), the  xxxg1602xxx  (mr), and the
human  xxxg730xxx  (er). according to their selectivity profile, these molecules will exert other actions than the expected progestational activity.
classification of progestogens

the synthetic progestogens used in clinical practice
are derived either from testosterone (19-nortestosterone
derivatives) or from progesterone and  xxxd2303xxx  (17-oh progesterone derivatives and 19norprogesterone derivatives).18
among the 19-nortestosterone derivatives, the estrane group includes  xxxd2751xxx , also named  xxxd2751xxx  (net), and its metabolites, and the gonane
group includes levonorgestrel (lng) and its derivatives. the latter, including  xxxd1849xxx  (dsg), its derivative  xxxd2067xxx , gestodene (ges), and  xxxd2753xxx  (also renamed as  xxxd2749xxx ), have been
referred to as third-generation progestogens. by convention, the first generation refers to norethynodrel, the
first progestogen synthesized, and the second generation includes net and lng.18
several new progestogens have been synthesized in
the last decade. dienogest is referred to as a hybrid progestogen, being derived from the gonane group with a
17␣-cyanomethyl group,19 and  xxxd1946xxx  derives
from  xxxd3238xxx .20 the 19-nortestosterone derivatives of  xxxd2303xxx  are also referred to as
“pure” progestational molecules, as they bind almost
exclusively to the  xxxg1737xxx  (pr) and do
not interfere with the other steroid receptors.21 this category includes trimegestone, nomegestrol acetate, and
nestorone, as well as a new compound related to
nestorone with a methyl radical in c18.22
very small structural changes may induce
considerable difference on the effects of
the progestogens

the addition of a double bond in c6–7 position of the
 xxxd2303xxx  skeleton, as well as a deletion of

8

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

the ch3 radical in position c19, confers to the molecule of nom ac, a higher progestational potency23
than  xxxd2554xxx  (mpa). in contrast,
nestorone, another 19-nor derivative of  xxxd2303xxx , without a ch3 radical in position 6, must be
administered parenterally because of its rapid hepatic
metabolism.24
comparative progestational activity of
various progestogens

the progestational activity is usually tested using the
mcphail index in immature rabbits, and also the pregnancy maintenance and the ovulation inhibition tests in
rats. using these in vivo tests, nestorone appears to be
the most potent progestogen, being 10 times more potent than levonorgestrel and 100 times more potent than
progesterone itself when the molecules are administered subcutaneously.24 when given orally, net,
mpa, and  xxxd1946xxx  are more potent than progesterone but less than lng,18,20 and nom ac is 4 times
more active than mpa23 (fig. 1). the addition to the
nestorone molecule of a methyl radical in c18 confers
to the new molecule 3 to 10 times more progestational
potency on the same tests.22
androgenic activity of progestogens

the binding affinity of the various progestogens to
the sex steroid receptors such as the er or the androgen
receptor (ar) indicate considerable difference between the molecules, and this test does not always correlate with the in vivo tests of estrogenic or androgenic
potency.
using the rat ventral prostate as a source of ar, the
relative binding affinity (rba) of levonorgestrel and
 xxxd1849xxx  was 70% and 40% that of testosterone, respectively. in contrast, nestorone and progesterone did
not show any significant binding.24
the in vivo biological assay of androgenicity usually
considers the effect of a given compound on the weight
increase of the ventral prostate and other male sex organs in immature male rats. using these models, levonorgestrel and  xxxd2067xxx  express androgenicity and increase the weight of ventral prostate in a
dose-dependent manner, while nestorone and progesterone do not induce such effects.24
in similar experiments, bullock and bardin 25
showed the androgenicity of mpa at high doses. mpa
is a progestogen that has both androgenic and synandrogenic activities and has been shown in mice to
stimulate the growth of mouse prostate-seminal
vesicle, kidney, and submaxillary gland.26 this androgenic property of mpa may explain some of its effects

progestogens in hrt

fig. 1. comparison of relative potencies of
synthetic progestogens on standard bioassays
testing the ability of the progestogens to transform the endometrium in rabbits and to inhibit
ovulation in rats. the order of potencies is
represented from left to right. doses that elicited half maximum response (ed50) of the
mcphail index were 1 µg, 10 µg, and 100 µg
s.c. of nestorone (nes), levonorgestrel
(lng) and progesterone, respectively.
nestorone is about 10 times more potent than
levonorgestrel and 100 times more potent
than progesterone in this assay (24). the arrows indicate the order of potency of the other
progestogens. (data from references 19, 20,
21, 23, 24, 29)
tmg, trimegestone; dsg,  xxxd1849xxx ;
nomac, nomegestrol acetate; mpa,  xxxd2554xxx ; net,  xxxd2751xxx ; cpa,  xxxd1786xxx .

on the lipids6 and vessels. duc et al27 showed no effect
of nomegestrol acetate (nom ac), even when administered at very high doses.
estrogenic activity of progestogens

in a study evaluating the estrogenic activity of progestogens, the uterine weight of ovariectomized immature female rats was significantly increased by levonorgestrel but not by nestorone at similar doses.24 similarly, both compounds did not bind to the estrogen
receptor.24
conclusions

to summarize, when the classification of progestogens is made according to their other activities, rather
than the progestational one, the 19-nor-testosterone derivatives are shown to exert some androgenic activity,
but only a few of them exert an estrogenic effect. the
17-hydroxy-progesterone derivatives have varying activities;  xxxd1786xxx  (cpa) is a potent antiandrogenic compound, while mpa has slight androgenic activity25 and also exerts glucocorticoid activity
when given at very high doses.28  xxxd1946xxx , more
recently synthesized in this class of compounds, is essentially an anti-mineralocorticoid progestogen and exerts some anti-androgenic activity.20
the 19-norprogesterone derivatives appear more
specifically progestational and do not possess any androgenic, estrogenic, or glucocorticoid activity.24,27
nom ac has a partial anti-androgenic effect, but that
effect is 20 times less than cpa.27

using the ratio between the binding affinities to the
progesterone and the androgen receptors (pr/ar) as a
selectivity index, kumar et al.24 have determined that
nestorone has the highest value (590), followed by
3-keto-dsg (6) and levonorgestrel(1). when considering three 19-nortestosterone derivatives and based on
that index,  xxxd2067xxx  was considered very selective when compared to levonorgestrel and  xxxd2751xxx . the 19-nor progesterone derivative nestorone,
having a high affinity to pr but a very low affinity for
ar exhibits a very high selectivity index.
most of the progestogens available to the prescriber
exert the activity they are supposed to have, namely the
progestational effect, and all of them are able to oppose
the proliferative effect of estrogens on the endometrium. however, their progestational potency varies,
and the dose needed to achieve the effect varies from a
few micrograms to several milligrams. in addition, according to their structure and the steroid from which
they are derived, the different molecules will exert
other activities, some considered beneficial, some being drawbacks leading to side effects.
therefore, it appears inappropriate to claim that the
side effects of “progestogens” are a class-effect given
these differences.
pharmacokinetic differences
between progestogens

another aspect to consider in the evaluation of the
progestogen actions relates to their pharmacokinetic
properties and their binding to serum proteins. the
comparison of radioactivity recovered in urine and fe-

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

9

r. sitruk-ware

ces after oral or iv administration of a labeled compound would indicate the absolute bioavailability of
that compound and determine its absorption via the oral
route. the compounds with the highest oral bioavailability are gestodene,  xxxd1849xxx , and  xxxd1786xxx  (cpa).29–31
the half-life of the compounds is also determined by
their binding to plasma proteins. while both net and
levonorgestrel bind to the  xxxg2066xxx  (shbg), their half-lives vary, the terminal half-life
(␤ 1⁄2 life) being around 7 to 8 hours for net and up to
26 hours for lng. in contrast, cpa has an elimination
half-life of 48 hours31 and nom ac of about 50
hours.21 as compared with testosterone as a reference,
levonorgestrel and  xxxd2067xxx  exhibit a significant but lower affinity to shbg.24
progesterone and nestorone (nes) do not bind to
shbg, and the free fraction of nes would be greater
than most of the 19-nortestosterone-derived progestogens. the oral bioavailability of nestorone is only
about 10%, with a shorter half-life than progestogens
that bind to shbg. however, a much slower elimination rate is observed after chronic subdermal implant.32
effects of the progestins on
surrogate markers of
cardiovascular risk
effects of the progestogens on lipids and lipoproteins

the effects of ert on serum lipid concentration results largely from er-mediated effects on the hepatic
expression of apoprotein genes.8 most of the studies
evaluating the effect of estrogens on the lipoproteins
have shown a reduction of ldl-c levels and an increase of hdl-c levels by 10% to 15%.6 progestogens
with androgenic properties have been shown to slightly
oppose the hdl-raising effect of estrogen,6 while
 xxxd3023xxx  and some 19 nor-progesterone derivatives such as nomegestrol acetate (nom ac) do not
affect the hdl levels.6,33
in the postmenopausal estrogen/progestin intervention (pepi) trial,6 875 postmenopausal women were
followed for 3 years in a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. five groups were evaluated. one
group received placebo, one received unopposed  xxxd2044xxx , and three groups received combined
hrt. in the combined hrt regimens, all subjects received 0.625 mg of  xxxd2044xxx  and one of
three progestogen or progesterone doses: 1) mpa, 10
mg/day, given sequentially over 12 days a month; 2)
mpa given continuously at 2.5 mg/day; and 3)  xxxd3023xxx , 200 mg/day for 12 days a month. all

10

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

four treatment regimens induced an increase in hdl
levels and a decrease in ldl levels. however, the increase in hdl-c was partially reversed in the groups
where mpa was added to oral estrogens, while oral  xxxd3023xxx  did not modify the estrogeninduced rise. the results observed for estrogen effects
on ldl were not modified by the addition of either
mpa or progesterone.
in another randomized comparative double-blind
trial comparing the effects of nom ac to  xxxd2751xxx  acetate (neta), both given orally at a dose of 5 mg
per day, the increase in hdl-c observed under  xxxd2040xxx  was partially reversed by neta, but not
by nom ac, a 19-norprogesterone derivative.34
the relevance of these lipid changes has been questioned. the role of hdl changes in the alleged cardiovascular protective effects of estrogens is only partial
and would account for 30% to a maximum of 50% of
cardiovascular protective effects.35
effects of progestogens on carbohydrate metabolism

glucose intolerance and hyperinsulinemia are wellknown risk factors for cardiovascular disease. postmenopausal women have been shown to have a reduced
number of peripheral insulin receptors compared with
premenopausal women in the early follicular phase.36
insulin is a potent stimulus to endothelial cell growth
and also regulates  xxxg1318xxx  activity.37 therefore a
reduction in fasting insulin levels may be important in
controlling one of the mechanisms of cvd.
other studies using the oral glucose tolerance tests
(ogtt), performed before and 6 months after each
treatment regimen, showed no significant changes of
glucose and insulin response to ogtt with dydrogesterone4 or nom ac.38
godsland et al.,39 in an open, randomized comparative study of 61 postmenopausal women, evaluated the
effects of oral equine estrogens with sequential oral levonorgestrel (0.075 mg/day, 12 day/month), or transdermal estradiol with sequential transdermal neta
(0.250 mg/day, 14day/month). using intravenous glucose tolerance tests, they found that oral therapy caused
a deterioration of glucose tolerance and an overall increase in plasma insulin most likely caused by the androgenic properties of levonorgestrel. on the other
hand, no change in insulin response or in glucose occurred with the transdermal therapy; although the progestogen used also exhibited some androgenic properties on lipids, it did not affect carbohydrate metabolism
when given transdermally.
in the above studies of combined hrt, variations in
response to oral or iv glucose tolerance tests were ob-

progestogens in hrt

served according to the androgenic or non-androgenic
properties of the progestogen used, the latter being neutral toward carbohydrate metabolism.
effects of progestogens on blood pressure

menopause by itself has no influence on high blood
pressure (bp) according to longitudinal studies.40
whether normotensive or hypertensive women would
be at higher risk of increased bp during treatment has
been questioned.
the recently synthesized  xxxd1946xxx  exerts a potent anti-mineralocorticoid effect and in young women
receiving oral contraceptives containing 3 mg of
 xxxd1946xxx , a significant decrease in blood pressure
was observed after 6 months of treatment.20
in another study, long-term treatment with a combined regimen of transdermal estradiol and  xxxd2554xxx  in normotensive postmenopausal
women was reported by pang et al.5 in this case, treatment was associated with a reduction in mean systolic
and diastolic blood pressures.
direct effects of progestogens on
the vessels

much attention has been directed toward the effects
of sex steroids on the vessels. although estrogens have
been shown to exert beneficial effects on the vascular
wall, some progestogens may reverse that benefit.
the vessel wall and endothelial factors

blood vessel walls contain smooth muscle cells and
an endothelial cell lining. these cells bind estrogens
with high affinity, and ers have been identified in both
types of vascular cells in women and men.41
the presence of estrogen and progesterone binding
sites in endothelial cells and in the vessel walls has been
documented in animal and human arteries.42 estrogens
have both rapid and long-term effects on the blood vessel wall. the mechanism that mediates the rapid effects
of estrogens is not fully understood.
however, estrogen enhances the bioavailability of
endothelial-derived no, which causes the relaxation of
smooth-muscle cells.8 thus, these stimuli cause the
contraction of smooth muscle-cell (and paradoxically)
vasoconstriction.8 these rapid effects do not appear to
involve changes in gene expression.
in postmenopausal women, the levels of vasodilator
factors,  xxxd2738xxx , and prostacyclin, as well as vasoconstrictive factors,  xxxg674xxx  and thromboxanea2, vary under therapy. ylikorkala et al.7 have recently
shown that women who smoke have high levels of en-

dothelin-1. in these women, transdermal combined
therapy with estradiol and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate, but
not oral estradiol and oral neta, was able to significantly decrease the levels of this potent vasoconstrictive agent.
vasomotion

major studies performed in the primate model since
the early 90s, have shown that sex hormones modulate
the vasomotor response of the main arteries, particularly the coronary arteries.43 in the cynomolgus monkey, 17␤-estradiol modulated the responses of the
coronary arteries of the animals to acetylcholine
(acc).43–45 estrogen-deprived atherosclerotic monkeys were compared with animals receiving estrogen
replacement therapy. the degree of coronary artery
constriction following an infusion of acc was measured in both groups of animals. paradoxical vasoconstriction occurred following acc infusion in the untreated animals, while estradiol therapy restored the
normal endothelium-dependent vasodilatation.
the process occurred rapidly, and vasomotion was
restored to normal within 20 minutes of an intravenous
injection of estrogens. progesterone did not reverse the
effects of estrogens. the authors concluded that estrogens preserved the normal endothelium-mediated dilation of coronary arteries, and  xxxd3023xxx  did
not reverse this potential cardioprotective mechanism.
however, in the same model, the addition of cyclic or
continuous mpa to estrogens inhibited acc responses
by 50%.45 in contrast, williams et al.46 indicated that
another progestogen, nomegestrol acetate, without any
androgenic property, did not diminish the beneficial effects of estrogens on the coronary dilator response in
monkeys.
rosano et al.47 studied the effects of progestogens
upon effort-induced myocardial ischemia in female
patients with chd. they found that mpa, but not
natural p, slightly reversed the beneficial effect of
chronic therapy with estrogen (e) on st depression on
the electrocardiogram.
although mpa belongs to the pregnane group of
progestogens, it interacts with the androgen receptors
and induces synandrogenic effects at high doses.25
these properties might explain some of its effects.
atherosclerosis

the experiments of adams et al.48 in the female cynomolgus monkey showed no direct relation between
lipid changes and atherosclerosis. these authors examined the effects of sex-hormone replacement therapy on

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

11

r. sitruk-ware

diet-induced coronary artery atherosclerosis, expressed
as the plaque area developed in the vessels of female
ovariectomized monkeys. the animals received either
no therapy, estradiol, or combined estradiol and progesterone from subcutaneous implants. in parallel, the
animals were fed with a highly atherogenic diet for 25
months. the plaque area was significantly less developed in both groups of animals that received steroids as
compared with the control group. this occurred even
though hdl and total cholesterol levels were not different from one group to the other. their results suggested that hrt has antiatherogenic effects, independent of variation in the lipid formula, and that natural
progesterone does not reverse the beneficial effects of
estradiol.
randomized controlled trials on hrt
and cvd

only double-blind, randomized, controlled trials
will provide definite proof that e and p protect against
coronary disease. several ongoing trials focus on primary or secondary prevention of chd, and their results
will be known by 2005 or 2006.49
primary prevention trials

the women’s health initiative in the united states
and the medical research council-hrt study in europe are designed as long-term primary prevention trials and will enroll postmenopausal women without
coronary disease. the long-term follow-up of treatment and placebo groups will help to answer questions
of presumed protective effects of hrt using  xxxd2044xxx  and mpa, in preventing cvd
and chd.49 it would be inappropriate to extend the results of these trials to hrt in general, as the results will
relate specifically to the type of hrt used in each
study.
secondary prevention trials

results from secondary prevention trials were obtained before the primary prevention could be established. the heart and estrogen/progestin replacement
study was designed as a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial to determine whether estrogen
(cee) plus continuous progestogen (mpa) is superior
to placebo in preventing recurrent events in 2,763
women with documented coronary disease.50
these women have been followed-up for 4.1 years
on average. the primary outcome was the occurrence
of non-fatal myocardial infarction or chd death. after
4 years of follow-up, the same number of events were

12

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

recorded in both the active and the placebo groups; this
finding indicates that the combined hrt regimen did
not reduce the overall rate of coronary events in postmenopausal women with previous chd.
the relative hazard (rh) for a further event was 0.99
(95%; ci 0.8–1.2). in addition, there was no significant
difference between groups in any of the secondary outcomes, despite a net decrease in ldl and an increase in
hdl cholesterol levels in the hormone-treated group.
in the estrogen replacement angiography study,
angiography was used to compare the effects of estrogens, with and without mpa, with placebo on the vessels of women with previously documented chd. no
difference was found between the three groups on the
progression of coronary atherosclerosis in women with
established disease.51
different progestogens may produce different results. unfortunately, most of the large ongoing trials
have selected the same hrt regimen for their study
designs, thus preventing comparison of different
regimens.
progestins and breast cancer risk

although many epidemiologic studies were conducted to assess the relationship between ert and
breast cancer risk, only a few of them address specifically the role of the progestogens. however, the largest
study published to date re-analyzing the data of most of
the cohort studies published over the last two decades,
no difference appears between estrogen given alone
and those combined with progestogens.11
more recent studies indicated a higher risk in users of
combined treatment.12–15 in all these studies, hrt use
for 5 years or more increased the risk of breast cancer,
and the risk appeared higher in women who use combined hrt. however, in all of these cohorts, the percentage of users of combined hrt is rather low. in
schairer et al.,12 the percentage of women in the cohort who received combined hrt was only 4%. also,
5% of that cohort had unknown therapy. had these 5%
used estrogen alone or combined therapy, the results
for each category might have changed. in addition,
there is no information about the risk factors of the
women in that cohort, which makes the results difficult
to interpret.
another interesting result from the recent studies
pertains to the schedule of the combined hrt regimen
used by women, either on a sequential basis or as continuous combined treatment. while ross et al.13 indicate a lower risk in women using a continuous combined regimen, magnusson et al.14 found the opposite
results and a lower risk in women on sequential

progestogens in hrt

therapy. in the swedish cohort, women received fixed
combinations of oral estradiol or  xxxd2040xxx  with
 xxxd2751xxx  or levonorgestrel progestogens. the
ross et al. cohort included mostly women receiving
 xxxd2044xxx  and mpa.
it has been shown that oral estradiol converts to estrone, and levels of e1 up to 466 pg/ml were found in
the plasma of women who received 2 mg oral micronized estradiol.52 therefore, the total estrogenic environment is much higher with the type of hrt described
in magnusson et al. than in the cohort of ross et al. the
opposite findings in both cohorts according to the
schedule of therapy make it difficult to draw definite
conclusions.
these studies relate to the rather recent co-prescription of progestogens with estrogens for menopausal
therapy, especially in the united states, where most
of the large epidemiological surveys have been
conducted. also, one must bear in mind that the progestogens prescribed for hrt differ from country
to country, and their effects also differ according to
the category to which they belong. in the us, most
of the prescriptions of progestogens relate to mpa,
while in europe derivatives of progesterone are
preferred for hrt, such as  xxxd3023xxx ,
 xxxd1957xxx , chlormadinone acetate derived from
17-oh-progesterone, or nom ac derived from 19norprogesterone. derivatives of testosterone such as
 xxxd2751xxx  and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate are also prescribed in various combinations available for hrt and
mostly prescribed in scandinavian countries.
therefore, in europe several compounds are used
and the population of hrt users is not as homogeneous
as it appears in the us. in addition, estradiol 17ß
and  xxxd2040xxx  are more often prescribed in
europe than are  xxxd2044xxx , which have been
mostly prescribed in the united states for decades. the
doses of estrogens prescribed for hrt vary between
europe and the us as well. consequently, the hormonal balance of both estrogen and progestogen do
vary considerably.
in addition, as the co-prescription of progestogens
with ert is rather recent, the percentage of patients
who received combined hrt is usually very low in
most of the cohort studies reporting the follow-up of
patients treated in the 80s and up to the mid 90s.
in animal experiments, progesterone added to estrogen triggers the differentiation of the mammary tissue.
in humans the data are less clear-cut. some recent
experiments have indicated a higher proliferation
rate in the breast tissue exposed to progesterone.
whether the increase in surface area of the breast gland

observed under treatment with combined hrt indicates proliferation or differentiation of the tissue remains controversial.15
here again, only randomized controlled trials may
provide an answer. however, given the magnitude and
cost of these trials requested for each type of treatment
used, only very few therapeutic schedules are presently
being tested.
it will be very important to obtain the results of the
primary prevention trials expected in 2005 and 2006.
however, one will not be able to extrapolate the results
to treatments other than the ones used in these studies.
other effects of progestogens: the
central nervous system

progesterone and its metabolites present in the brain
exert their actions on target cells after binding to intracellular progesterone receptors or by action on the cellular membrane. their effects on the brain are diverse,
and it is well known that some derivatives of progesterone modulate behavior, namely anxiety, stress,
sleep, and memory.53
the 5␤-reduced derivatives of p have evidenced
sedative and anesthetic properties. the sedative effects
of p and 3␣,5␣ tetrahydro progesterone (th p) mimic
those of agonist modulators of gabaa receptors and
particularly benzodiazepines. in humans, alphaxalone,
which has a structure similar to that of 3␣,5␣-th p, has
been used for long time as an anesthetic. 3␣,5␣-th p
itself has been administered to women with good tolerance to induce anesthesia for delivery. p also exerts an
anxiolytic effect via a pr-independent mechanism and
only after its conversion to 3␣,5␣-th p. these p effects are blocked by co-administration of a 5␣-reductase inhibitor.
in women with partial epilepsy, backström showed a
significant decrease in eeg spike frequency during p
infusion.54 finally, a synthetic analogue of 3␣,5␣-th
p, ganaxolone is currently under phase ii clinical investigation for epilepsy.
these findings explain some of the undesirable effects of progesterone on mood. however, most of the
synthetic progestogens are not converted into these 3␣
and 5␣ metabolites and do not exert the same effects.55
conclusion

although the benefits of progestogen use in hrt regarding endometrial protection are well recognized, the
associated risks and drawbacks have generated considerable controversy. some progestogens, with a higher
androgenic potency than others, may attenuate the beneficial effects of estrogens on the lipid profile as well as

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

13

r. sitruk-ware

vasomotion. on the other hand, other progestogens devoid of androgenic properties do not exert these deleterious effects. progesterone itself and its natural derivatives do not display androgenic properties and have a
different effect on the vascular wall.
further data are needed to compare the effects
of various steroids used in clinical practice, which
differ from country to country. in women without
established chd, complying with the classic contraindications of hrt and selecting progestogens devoid of
estrogenic, androgenic, or glucocorticoid effects can
still be recommended.
references
1. key tj. progestins in postmenopausal women: epidemiological
data on relationships with endometrial and breast cancer risk. in:
sitruk-ware r, mishell d, eds. progestins and antiprogestins in
clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000:279–87.
2. lähteenmäki p, haukkamaa m, puolakka j, et al. open randomised
study of use of levonorgestrel releasing intrauterine system as alternative to hysterectomy. bmj 1998;316:1122–6.
3. rich-edwards jw, mason je, hennekens ch, buring je. the primary prevention of coronary heart disease in women. n engl j med
1995;332:1758–66.
4. de cleyn k, buytaert p, coppens m. carbohydrate metabolism
during hormonal substitution therapy. maturitas 1989;11:235–42.
5. pang sc, greendale ga, cedars mi, cambone ac, lozano k, eggena p, judd hl. long term effects of transdermal estradiol with and
without  xxxd2554xxx . fertil steril 1993;59:76–82.
6. the writing group for the pepi trial. effects of estrogen or
estrogen/progestin regimens on heart disease risk factors in postmenopausal women: the postmenopausal estrogen/progestin interventions (pepi) trial. jama 1995;273:199–208.
7. ylikorkala o, cacciatore b, paakkari i, tikkanen mj, viinikka l,
toivonen j. the long-term effects of oral and transdermal postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy on  xxxd2738xxx ,  xxxg674xxx , prostacyclin, and thromboxane. fertil steril 1998;69:883–8.
8. mendelsohn me, karas rh. the protective effects of estrogen on
the cardiovascular system. n engl j med 1999;340:1801–1.
9. steinberg kk, thacker sb, smith sj, et al. a meta-analysis of the
effect of estrogen replacement therapy on the risk of breast cancer.
jama 1991;265:1985–90.
10. pike mc, bernstein l, spicer dv. the relationship of exogenous
hormones to breast cancer risk. in: niederhuber je, ed. current
therapy in oncology. philadelphia: bc decker, 1995.
11. collaborative group on hormonal factors in breast cancer. breast
cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative reanalysis
of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 52705 women with
breast cancer and 108411 women without breast cancer. lancet
1997;350:1047–59.
12. schairer c, lubin j, troisi r, et al. menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. jama
2000;283:485–91.
13. ross rk, paganni-hill a, wan pc, pike mc. effect of hormone
replacement therapy on breast cancer risk: estrogen versus estrogen
plus progestin. j natl cancer inst 2000;92:328–32.
14. magnusson c, baron ja, correira n, et al. breast cancer risk following long term oestrogen and oestrogen-progestin replacement
therapy. int j cancer 1999;31;339–44.
15. santen r, pinkeron j, mccartney c, petroni gr. risk of breast
cancer with progestins in combination with estrogen as hormone
replacement therapy. j clin endrocrinol metab 2001;86:16–23.
16. guiochon-mantel a. structure of the  xxxg1737xxx  and
mode of action of progesterone. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell d, eds.

14

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m
dekker, 2000:1–13.
zhi l, tegley cm, kallel ea, et al. 5-aryl-1,2-dihydrochromeno[3,4-f]quinolines: a novel class of nonsteroidal human  xxxg1737xxx  agonists. j med chem 1998;41:291–302.
henzl mr, edwards ja. pharmacology of progestins: 17␣ xxxd2303xxx  derivatives and progestins of the first and second generation. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell d, eds. progestins and
antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000:
101–32.
oettel m and holz c. hybrid progestins: the example of dienogest.
in: sitruk-ware r, mishell d, eds. progestins and antiprogestins in
clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000:163–78.
oelkers w, foidart jm, dombrovicz n, welter a, heithecker r.
effects of a new oral contraceptive containing an antimineralocorticoid progestogen,  xxxd1946xxx , on the renin-aldosterone system, body weight, blood pressure, glucose tolerance, and lipid metabolism. j clin endocrinol metab 1995;80:1816–21.
sitruk-ware r, sundaram k. pharmacology of new progestogens:
the 19-nor progesterone derivatives. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell jr
dr, eds. progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new
york: m. dekker, 2000:153–61.
tuba z, bardin cw, dancsi a, et al. synthesis and biological activity of a new progestogen, 16-methylene-17␣-hydroxy-18methyl-19-norpregn-4-ene-3, 20-dione acetate. steroids 2000;65:
266–74.
paris j, thevenot r, bonnet p, granero m. the pharmacological
profile of tx 066 (17␣-acetoxy-6methyl-19-nor-4, 6-pregna-diene3, 20-dione), a new oral progestative. drug res 1983;33:710–15.
kumar n, koide ss, tsong yy, sundaram k. nestorone: a progestin with a unique pharmacological profile. steroids 2000;65:
629–36.
bullock lp, bardin cw. androgenic, synandrogenic, and antiandrogenic actions of progestins. ann ny acad sci 1977;286:321–30.
bullock lp, bardin cw, sherman mr. androgenic, antiandrogenic, and synandrogenic actions of progestins: role of steric and
allosteric interactions with androgen receptors. endocrinology
1978;103:1768–78.
duc i, botella j, bonnet p, fraboul f, delansome r, paris j. antiandrogenic properties of nomegestrol acetate. arzneimittelforschung 1995;45:70–4.
hellman l, yoshida k, zumoff b, levin j, kream j, fukushima
dk. the effect of  xxxd2554xxx  on the pituitaryadrenal axis. j clin endocrinol metab 1976;42:912–7.
wilde mi, balfour ja. gestodene. a review of its pharmacology,
efficacy and tolerability in combined contraceptive preparations.
drugs 1995;50:364–95.
shenfield gm, griffin jm. clinical pharmacokinetics of contraceptive steroids. an update. clin pharmacokinet 1991;20:15–37.
dusterberg b, humpel m, speck u. terminal half-lives in plasma
and bioavailability of  xxxd2751xxx , levonorgestrel, cyproterone
acetate and gestodene in rats, beagles and rhesus monkeys. contraception 1981;24:673–83.
noe g, salvatierra a, heikinheimo o, maturana x, croxatto hb.
pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of st 1435 administered by
different routes. contraception 1993;48:548–56.
conard j, basdevant a, thomas jl, et al. cardiovascular risk factors and combined estrogen-progestin replacement therapy: a placebo-controlled study with nomegestrol acetate and estradiol. fertil
steril 1995;64:957–62.
dorangeon p, thomas jl, gillery p, lumbroso m, hazard mc.
short term effects on lipids and lipoproteins of two progesterones
used in postmenopausal replacement therapy. eur j clin res 1992;
3:187–93.
bush tl, barrett-connor e, cowan ld, et al. cardiovascular mortality and noncontraceptive use of estrogen in women: results from
the lipid research clinics program follow-up study. circulation
1987;75:1102–9.
de pirro r, fusco a, bertoli a, greco av, lauro r. insulin recep-

progestogens in hrt

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.

tors during the menstrual cycle in normal women. j clin endocrinol
metab 1978;47:1387–9.
chait a, bierman el, albers jj.  xxxg1318xxx 
activity in cultured human skin fibroblasts. mechanisms of insulininduced stimulation. j clin invest 1979;64:1309–19.
dorangeon p, thomas jl, lumbroso m, hazard mc, dorangeon s.
effects of nomegestrol acetate on carbohydrate metabolism in premenopausal women. 13th world congress of gynecology and obstetrics (figo), singapore, 1991; abstract no. 0636.
godsland if, gangar k, walton c, et al. insulin resistance, secretion, and elimination in postmenopausal women receiving oral or
transdermal hormone replacement therapy. metabolism 1993;42:
846–53.
casiglia e, d’este d, ginocchio g, et al. lack of influence of menopause on blood pressure and cardiovascular risk profile: a 16-year
longitudinal study concerning a cohort of 568 women. j hypertens
1996;14:729–36.
karas rh, patterson bl, mendelsohn me. human vascular smooth
muscle cells contain functional  xxxg730xxx . circulation 1994;
89:1943–50.
bergquist a, bergquist d, ferno m. estrogen and progesterone receptors in vessel walls. acta obstet gynaecol scand 1993;72:10–6.
clarkson tb, anthony ms, potvin klein k. hormone replacement
therapy and coronary artery atherosclerosis: the monkey model. br
j obstet gynaecol 1993;103(suppl 13):53–8.
williams jk, adams mr, klopfenstein hs. estrogen modulates
responses of atherosclerotic coronary arteries. circulation 1990;81:
1680–7.
williams ak, honore ek, washburn sa, clarkson tb. effects of
hormone replacement therapy on reactivity of atherosclerotic coronary arteries in cynomolgus monkeys. j am coll cardiol 1994;24:
1757–61.
williams jk, cline jm, honoré ek, delansome r, paris j. coadministration of nomegestrol acetate does not diminish the beneficial
effects of estradiol on coronary artery dilator responses in non human primates. am j obstet gynecol 1998;179:1288–94.

47. rosano gmc, chierchia sl, morgani gl, gabriele m, leonardo f,
sarrel pm, collins p. effect of the association of different progestogens to estradiol 17␤ therapy upon effort-induced myocardial
ischemia in female patients with coronary artery disease. jacc
344a: 1997; abstract 1028–1167.
48. adams mr, kaplan jr, manuck sb, koritnik dr, parks js, wolfe
ms, clarkson tb. inhibition of coronary artery atherosclerosis by
 xxxd2037xxx  estradiol in ovariectomized monkeys. lack of an effect of
added progesterone. arteriosclerosis 1990;10:1051–7.
49. spencer cp, cooper aj, stevenson jc. clinical trials in progress
with hormone replacement therapy. exp opin invest drugs 1996;5:
739–49.
50. hulley s, grady d, bush t, et al. heart and estrogen/progestin replacement study (hers) research group. randomized trial of estrogen plus progestin for secondary prevention of coronary heart
disease in postmenopausal women. jama 1998;280:605–13.
51. herrington dm, reboussin dm, brosnihan kb, et al. effects of
estrogen replacement on the progression of coronary-artery atherosclerosis. n engl j med 2000;343:522–9.
52. yen ssc, martin pl, burnier am, czekala nm, greney jr mo,
callantine mr. circulating estradiol, estrone and gonadotropin levels following the administration of orally active 17ß-estradiol in
postmenopausal women. j clin endocrinol metab 1975;40:
518–20.
53. el-etr m, schumacher m, baulieu ee. effects of progesterone and
related steroids in the brain. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell d, eds. progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000:15–58.
54. backström t, zetterlund b, blom s, romano m. effects of intravenous progesterone infusions on the epileptic discharge frequency
in women with partial epilepsy. acta  xxxd122xxx  scand 1984;69:240–8.
55. björn i, boxo m, nojd ks, nyberg s, backström t. negative mood
changes during hormone replacement therapy: a comparison between two progestogens. am j obstet gynecol 2000;183:1419–26.

menopause, vol. 9, no. 1, 2002

15

