aliment pharmacol ther 2002; 16: 343±351.

review article: the complexity of drug development for irritable bowel
syndrome
m. a. ka mm
physiology unit, st mark's hospital, london, uk
accepted for publication 4 october 2001

summary

drug development for functional gastrointestinal
disorders is complex. these conditions involve central
and peripheral physiological changes, together with
psychological factors. methodological problems have
included a poor appreciation of the physiological and
psychological correlates of patients' symptoms, a lack
of animal models of proven relevance, and safety
issues. government, patient pressure groups and the
internet can also in¯uence a drug's success. most
recent interest has focused on the serotonin (5-ht)
modifying drugs.  xxxd1708xxx  has been withdrawn in
some countries because of concerns related to qt
prolongation and cardiac arrhythmias. the 5-ht3
antagonists, developed to modify visceral sensation,

introduction

drug development for functional gastrointestinal disorders is more complex than development of drugs for
infective, in¯ammatory or neoplastic disorders. in these
latter conditions there is identi®able tissue pathology
and single pharmacological targets are likely to be
effective treatments, with potential therapeutic bene®t
from blocking single pathogenic pathways. in contrast
there is usually no identi®able tissue pathology in
functional gut disorders. their aetio-pathogenesis
involves central and peripheral physiological changes,

correspondence: professor m. a. kamm, st mark's hospital, watford
road, harrow, middlesex  xxxd951xxx  3uj, uk.
e-mail: kamm@ic.ac.uk
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd

have caused constipation; alosetron, also withdrawn,
caused ischaemic colitis. the  xxxg1117xxx  agonists induce
peristalsis;  xxxd3302xxx  and  xxxd3039xxx , both delayed in
their development due to issues of safety and ef®cacy,
bene®t patients with `constipation-predominant'
irritable bowel syndrome or idiopathic constipation.
5-ht1
agonists
improve
impaired
gastric
accommodation and symptoms in patients with
functional dyspepsia. antidepressants also affect
serotonin metabolism. previous examples of success
in this area involved drugs targeted at peripheral
receptors mediating motor function or secretion.
modi®cation of sensory function is a much more
challenging objective. the experience with serotonin
modifying drugs has been mixed, and some important
lessons are there to be learnt.

many of which may be by-passable, making targeting
more dif®cult. psychological issues are also of greater
relevance.1
there is a perceived need, however, for effective
pharmacological therapies for patients with functional
gastrointestinal disorders. patients often feel that their
symptoms persist despite the use of currently available
therapies. physicians feel that current drug therapies
are inadequate. pharmaceutical companies see this
therapeutic area as one of great ®nancial potential.
this article aims to explore these issues and highlights
recent experience with the serotinergic modifying drugs.
there are still important basic issues to be resolved
about the nature of patients' symptoms. which symptoms do patients ®nd most troublesome? do these
symptoms relate to simple or single physiological
abnormalities that can be easily targeted? are there
343

344

m. a. kamm

multiple or compensatory physiological pathways (physiological redundancy) that will cause the effect of
targeting a single receptor to be by-passed, thereby
diminishing effectiveness? are these patients likely to be
satis®ed by drug treatment, or do they have comorbidity, especially psychological, which may limit the
therapeutic effectiveness of treatment?
animal models for functional disorders need to be
developed that more accurately re¯ect the human
condition. although models that re¯ect chronic stress,
with a link between psychological morbidity and gut
physiological changes, have been developed, their
closeness to the human condition is uncertain. physiological differences between animal test species and man
need to be better understood.
once a drug reaches the stage of evaluation in man,
there are further complex issues. the response in
healthy volunteers in phase one studies may not
parallel changes seen in patients. the aim is for these
drugs to alter physiological processes, yet there have not
been enough phase 1 and 2 studies establishing the
physiological mechanism by which these drugs might
be acting. some drugs have continued down the path of
clinical development, despite evidence of lack of physiological and symptomatic effect.
recent phase 3 trials have involved large numbers of
patients, to achieve results of clear statistical signi®cance and to meet licensing requirements in relation to
the number of patients treated. these trials have
involved very large numbers of centres, sometimes
more than 100. investigators in these trials lack a sense
of `ownership' of the trials, and often participate for
®nancial reasons. under these conditions, patients are
often entered who are unlikely to bene®t from any
treatment. these large studies can also prejudice the
outcome of trials involving drugs that may be effective.
a new approach to phase 3 studies may be helpful.
phase three studies can be concentrated in a limited
number of centres, each of which would be able to
contribute a substantial number of patients. investigators would then have a vested intellectual interest in
ensuring a high quality study. improvements are
needed to consider which patients are eligible for
enrolment into such studies. for example, restriction
of entry to consecutive newly referred patients would
exclude patients who have failed every other treatment;
the latter patients need to form the basis of specialized
phase 3 or 4 studies. consideration also needs to be
given to the psychological assessment of patients

entered into trials for functional disordersðpsychological factors may be important predictors of response.
these and other issues pertaining to clinical trial design
have been discussed recently.2
in all trials of drugs in irritable bowel syndrome there
has been great dif®culty in de®ning end-points that
re¯ect a bene®cial effect on the patient's global well
being, on irritable bowel syndrome-related symptoms,
and speci®cally on pain, discomfort and bloating. the
rome 2 group have attempted to establish some endpoints that may be useful in clinical trials.3 these issues
require further exploration.
drug development does not only involve patients,
doctors and drug companies. the social environment,
government, technological development and the global
economy now also impact on the ability to bring a new
drug to the market. social and political issues need to be
addressed for successful drug development, licensing
and marketing. patient pressure groups are now a
potent force in supporting pharmaceutical companies if
they feel there is an unmet clinical need that a
particular drug may ful®l. these pressure groups may
also facilitate rapid licensing by direct pressure on
licensing authorities and politicians.
in contrast, other consumer pressure groups may
exert negative pressure on licensing authorities and
politicians if a drug is found to have adverse effects
disproportionate to its perceived clinical bene®t or the
perceived clinical need. this may delay or prevent
licensing of a drug with an adverse event pro®le,
which under other circumstances (such as an alternative clinical indication) would be acceptable, or
precipitate or contribute to the withdrawal of an
already licensed drug.
the internet is likely to play an increasing role in
in¯uencing consumer (patient) behaviour. groups of
sufferers who share a condition can communicate
rapidly across the world if there is an effective drug
available. even if a drug is very expensive, they may
be able to bring pressure on health authorities,
government and insurance companies to in¯uence
spending. they can also communicate rapidly if a
drug is perceived to be dangerous. if a drug becomes
tarnished in public, perhaps because of well publicised
side-effects, this can now seal its fate rapidly. this is
more likely to happen in the vague, non life-threatening
therapeutic area of functional disorders. bad publicity
can do more than harm a single drug's sales; it can also
harm the image of large pharmaceutical companies,
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

review: drug development for ibs

whose value on the stock exchange is of major concern
to investors.
just at the time when there is an increase in wealth to
spend on drugs in the developed world, other threats
to drug company pro®ts from new drugs are emerging.
companies are perceived as over-pricing their drugs,
even in relation to the high costs of development, and
have been criticised for this. more pressure will come
from government and health care organizations to
reduce the cost of drugs. many developing countries
have poor patent protection, limiting the potential
pro®ts to be made in these enormous emerging
markets.
consider these aspects of drug development in the
context of recent pharmacological development for
functional disorders, in particular irritable bowel syndrome. in this therapeutic area there have been no
major pharmacological successes in recent times. in the
1990s the french company juvenal, in association with
parke-davis, failed to get fedotozine licensed in its
country of development, france, because of perceived
inadequate ef®cacy. after a long history in the marketplace, and world-wide annual sales in excess of us$
1 billion, janssen stopped marketing  xxxd1708xxx  in the
usa and had its licence suspended in the uk, because
of an excessive incidence of sudden death thought to
be related to prolonged qt interval conduction abnormalities. at the present time the area of greatest
research activity and immediate application in the
area of functional gastrointestinal disorders relates to
the 5-ht (serotonin) modifying drugs.
this review aims to consider some of the dif®culties
inherent in developing drugs for irritable bowel syndrome and related functional disorders. it focuses on the
recent experiences in relation to serotinergic drugs, to
highlight where problems may occur. this article is not
intended to comprehensively review the status of all
drugs under investigation or development for these
conditions.
the serotonin modifying drugs

serotonin (5-ht) is found widely distributed throughout
the gut and in the central nervous system. in the gut
most 5-ht is located in mucosal enterochromaf®n cells,
which are sensory transducers that release 5-ht to
activate intrinsic (via 5-ht1p and  xxxg1117xxx  receptors)
and extrinsic (via 5-ht3) receptors) primary afferent
nerves.4
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

345

5-ht3 antagonists
the rationale for focusing on serotonin (5-ht). the 5-ht3
antagonists proved to be a major advance in the
treatment of chemotherapy-related emesis. chemotherapeutic drugs for malignant disorders that caused
marked vomiting were found to cause the release of
large amounts of serotonin from enterochromaf®n
cells in the gut. this serotonin acted on 5-ht3
receptors in the gut and brain stem. the recognition
of the presence of 5-ht3 receptors on visceral afferent
nerves at that time raised the prospect that such drugs
may also be useful to modify disorders of visceral
sensitivity. at approximately the same time, thinking
about functional disorders had moved from focusing
solely on disorders of gut contractility, that is motor
function, to one of altered peripheral sensation, or
central processing of peripheral sensory signals. it
therefore seemed reasonable to explore the possibility
that these drugs may alter visceral sensation, and
perhaps thereby symptoms, in patients with functional
gastrointestinal disorders. this approach completely
ignored the psychological component of patients with
functional disorders, and was predicated on the
assumption that simple blocking of peripheral sensory
pathways would diminish symptoms.
one of the ®rst steps in testing a potential antinociceptive drug involves animal studies. distension of the
large bowel of rats is a commonly used animal model.
balloon distension to a noxious level produces behavioural changes, hypotension and abdominal contractions. drugs are tested for their ability to raise the pain
threshold, with responses measured by these physiological changes and by afferent nerve activation. 5-ht3
receptors were identi®ed in the spine of rats, and were
shown to be involved in the mediation of pain induced
by colonic distension. 5-ht3 antagonists were tested in
animals and shown to modify peripheral sensation.
these studies provided further fuel for the development
of these drugs for the treatment of functional gut
disorders.
ondansetron, granisetron and other early 5-ht3 antagonists. ondansetron was one of the ®rst 5-ht3 antagonists to be evaluated for its effect in healthy volunteers
and patients with irritable bowel syndrome. it had a
modest effect on altering rectal sensory thresholds, and
a modest effect on pain in patients.5 this led to the
search for more potent 5-ht3 antagonists.

346

m. a. kamm

 xxxd1708xxx .  xxxd1708xxx , a substituted piperidinyl benzamide, is a weak 5-ht3 antagonist and more marked
 xxxg1117xxx  agonist. its effect is predominantly in the upper
gut, with little effect on the large bowel. this may relate
to its lack of  xxxg1117xxx  selectivity; at least one of the
 xxxd1708xxx  metabolites is a potent 5-ht3 antagonist.
 xxxd1708xxx  was prescribed for use in functional dyspepsia, a condition that over-laps substantially with
irritable bowel syndrome. it was also used to treat
re¯ux disease. several studies and meta-analyses had
shown it to be superior to placebo for both these
indications.
concern had been raised about the possibility that
 xxxd1708xxx  was associated with an increased incidence
of heart rhythm abnormalities, possibly mediated via
q-t interval prolongation. in june 1998, the us
food and drug administration (fda) determined
that use of  xxxd1708xxx  was contraindicated in: (i) patients
concurrently taking medications that interfere with
 xxxd1708xxx  metabolism or prolong the qt interval or
(ii) patients with other diseases that predispose to such
arrhythmias. patients and doctors were alerted by an
addition to the boxed warning in the label and a `dear
health care professional' letter sent by the drug's
manufacturer.
data have been analysed for the 1-year periods before
and after the regulatory action, from the populationbased, research databases of two managed care
organizations and a state medicaid programme.6
the regulatory action taken by the fda had minimal
effect on prescribing of the drug in patients in whom
its use was contraindicated.
recent concern has led to withdrawal of the drug from
the market. according to the federal drug administration (fda) by the end of 1999  xxxd1708xxx  had been
associated with 341 reports of heart rhythm abnormalities, including 80 reports of deaths.7 most of these
adverse events occurred in patients who were either: (i)
taking other medications, such as erythromycin, which
are known to increase the risk of cardiac arrhythmia
associated with  xxxd1708xxx , or (ii) were suffering from
another condition known to predispose to arrhythmias.
janssen pharmaceutica stopped marketing  xxxd1708xxx  in
the us on the 14 july 2000. the drug was still available
after this date in the us through a limited access
programme for patients in whom it is thought to
provide `unique bene®t'.
in the uk the product licence for  xxxd1708xxx  was
suspended by the medicines control agency. since

 xxxd1708xxx  was licensed in the uk in 1988 the mca had
received 60 reports of serious cardiovascular reactions,
®ve of which were fatal. world-wide there had been 386
reports of serious ventricular arrhythmias, 125 of
which had been fatal, and 50 reports of sudden
unexplained death.8 the drug is currently under
europe-wide review. marketing has been suspended in
several european countries and in canada.
alosetron. alosetron is 10 times more potent than
ondansetron, with a good bioavailability. it has been
shown to decrease activation of spinal neurones and
decrease the autonomic pain response in animals
during painful colonic distension. when given intracerebrally into rats it decreased the blood pressure
changes induced by painful visceral stimulation.9 the
drug was also shown to have an anxiolytic effect in
animals.
in healthy volunteers the drug did not have the same
effect on visceral sensory function. studies of gastric10
and colonic distension11 did not show a change in
visceral sensation. no anxiolytic effect has been demonstrated in humans.
in healthy adults alosetron was shown to prolong
colonic transit and induce constipation. it also increased
rectal compliance, that is reduced rectal wall tone. in
the small intestine it was shown to increase sodium and
water absorption.
the optimal dose in patients with irritable bowel
syndrome has been found to be 1 mg twice daily. four
large multicentre, international, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trials were conducted to assess
the bene®t of this drug in treating `diarrhoea predominant' irritable bowel syndrome. each trial was of
12 weeks duration, the minimum period considered
acceptable to demonstrate ef®cacy and to minimize the
placebo response. relief of pain was the primary endpoint, although establishing a robust de®nition of a
response for this symptom is complex and dif®cult.
one of the key double-blind studies was published by
camilleri et al. in the lancet last year.12 of 1463
screened female patients at 119 sites in the usa, 647
patients were randomized to alosetron 1 mg or placebo
twice daily for 12 weeks.
twenty-four per cent in the alosetron group and 16%
in the placebo group dropped out, the former mainly
due to constipation. constipation occurred in 30% and
3% of patients in the alosetron and placebo groups,
respectively.
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

review: drug development for ibs

the primary end-point was de®ned as `adequate relief
of irritable bowel syndrome pain and discomfort for at
least 2 weeks per month'. a patient experiencing such
relief was termed a monthly responder. patients were
asked every 7 days `if in the past 7 days you have had
adequate relief of your irritable bowel syndrome pain
and discomfort?'. forty-one per cent of patients on
alosetron compared to 29% on placebo reported
adequate relief of pain for all 3 months of treatment.
alosetron also decreased urgency and stool frequency,
and increased stool ®rmness.
in this study, as in others, actual pain scores were not
provided. neither were data provided on the number of
patients who were actually pain free at different times,
on active drug and placebo. the criterion for bene®t was
complex. studies such as this are hard to interpret in
terms of their clinical relevance and the magnitude of
the clinical bene®t, compared to placebo, of the drug
being tested.
one patient on alosetron in this study developed
ischaemic colitis. this patient also had positive immunohistochemical staining for e. coli 0157, although no
data were provided on stool culture.
· constipation as a side-effect of alosetron
the assumption that a large proportion of patients with
irritable bowel syndrome have true diarrhoea needs
careful scrutiny. true diarrhoea should be regarded as
stools that are of loose consistency associated with an
excessive stool weight (more than 200 g in western
societies). most patients with irritable bowel syndrome
and so-called `diarrhoea' have normal stool weight. in
one study of 38 patients with irritable bowel syndrome
the mean stool weight was 116 gm, despite 55% of
stools being `unformed'.13 in a further study mean stool
weight was 153 g, despite a mean bowel frequency of
1.9 times per day and 60% of stools being reported by
patients as `unformed'.14 in a sub-group of 14 patients
reporting severe diarrhoea, 86% of stools were reported
as `unformed', but the mean stool weight was only
152 g.
the 5-ht3 antagonists have a predictable effect of
causing constipation. these drugs were therefore tested
in patients with irritable bowel syndrome in whom
diarrhoea was perceived to be a prominent symptom.
this may have been an error in drug development. most
patients with irritable bowel syndrome are constipated;
that is, they either have infrequent bowel actions, feel
that they empty their bowel inadequately, or strain
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

347

excessively. most patients who have been labelled as
`diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome', that
is patients who report frequent bowel actions, sometimes in association with loose bowel actions, have
rectal irritability. their frequent need to empty their
bowel is not related to increased stool output. they are
likely to experience constipation as a side-effect of a
5-ht3 drug, and they are likely to tolerate it less well
because of their altered psychological pro®le.
these patients have increased anxiety levels. in the
physiology laboratory rectal balloon distension demonstrates enhanced rectal perception, with lesser tolerated
volumes of rectal distension (personal unpublished
observations). this is in contrast to patients with
constipation-predominant irritable bowel and decreased
bowel frequency, who have rectal insensitivity and have
an elevated rectal sensory threshold.
· ischaemic colitis as a side-effect of alosetron
ischaemic colitis was recognized as a side-effect of this
drug during clinical trials prior to licensing. the extent
of this side-effect was dif®cult to predict from the limited
number of subjects studied prior to licensing. ultimately
the incidence of ischaemic colitis, estimated at one in
750 patients prior to licensing, proved to be reasonably
accurate. this problem of infrequent, but not extremely
rare, side-effects emerging post-licensing in drugs approved after trials involving several hundred or one to
two thousand patients, demonstrates the risks in drug
development that continue even after a drug comes to
market.
· post-licensing events7
alosetron was approved by the us federal drug
administration (fda) on the 9 february 2000. it was
licensed for use in women with diarrhoea-predominant
irritable bowel syndrome. it was recognized at the time
of licensing that `adequate relief of pain' was seen at a
rate of about 15% above placebo. constipation was
recognized to occur in 28% of patients. a prevalence of
one in 750 of ischaemic colitis was identi®ed.
the fda convened an advisory committee on 27 june
2000 to readdress the safety of alosetron. at that time
there were eight new reports of ischaemic colitis and
concern about constipation. amongst other changes,
the fda instituted a lea¯et in the packaging detailing
the risks associated with the drug.
a public consumer group issued a press release on the
31 august 2000, casting doubt on the drug's bene®ts

348

m. a. kamm

and highlighting the associated risks of constipation and
ischaemic colitis. this was reported in the usa by a
number of media groups. ultimately the of®ce of postmarketing drug risk assessment (opdra), an fda
agency, recommended that alosetron be withdrawn
from the market. glaxowellcome, a number of medical
academics, some patients, and patient interest groups,
sought an independent review by the fda. this did not
take place.
glaxowellcome submitted a risk management plan
to the fda on the 2 november 2000 to evaluate the
safety of alosetron. there had been 500 000 prescriptions for 350 000 patients. seventy serious adverse
events had been reported to the fda, including 49
cases of ischaemic colitis (therefore a ratio of 1 in
750). there were 21 cases of severe constipation. of
these 70 patients, 34 were hospitalized, 10 required
surgery and 5 died.
on the 28 november 2000 glaxowellcome withdrew
the drug after discussions with the fda. the process of
seeking a license for this drug world-wide was subsequently halted. at the time of writing this article the
fda is considering whether this drug should be made
available on a restricted basis.
this sequence of events highlights issues relating to
risk±bene®t for conditions that are non life-threatening
and produce no permanent tissue damage. quality of
life issues are central to such considerations. these
issues may also apply to other drugs used to treat pain,
such as the nonsteroidal anti-in¯ammatory drugs; these
drugs are known to be associated with an increased risk
of peptic ulceration, gut perforation and death.
 xxxd1692xxx . other 5-ht3 antagonists in development
include  xxxd1692xxx  (solvay pharmaceuticals). a case of
ischaemic colitis has been reported with this drug.
 xxxg1117xxx  agonists
 xxxg1117xxx  gut receptors are involved in motor, sensory and
secretory function. receptors are located on enterocytes, enterochromaf®n cells, smooth muscle cells and
neurones. neurones known to possess  xxxg1117xxx  receptors
include intrinsic primary afferent neurones, cholinergic
interneurones that activate excitatory and inhibitory
neurones involved in peristalsis, and possibly visceral
afferent neurones.
 xxxg1117xxx  receptors are also located in the central
nervous system, the urinary bladder and the atria of

the heart. there are no heart ventricle  xxxg1117xxx  receptors. all the  xxxg1117xxx  agonists, regardless of their
structure, have the potential to affect cardiac rhythm,
via an effect on the atrial  xxxg1117xxx  receptors. whether
they have this effect clinically will depend at least in
part on the dose used.
endogenous serotonin, released from enterochromaf®n
cells, initiates peristalsis at least in part by stimulating
 xxxg1117xxx  receptors on primary afferent neurones. this
sets in train a series of neuronal events that have been
reasonably well characterized. proximal gut contraction, distal circular muscle relaxation and longitudinal
muscle shortening are co-ordinated to produce peristalsis. exogenous  xxxg1117xxx  agonists are thought to
induce peristalsis by stimulating the same afferent
neurones, and by activating intrinsic enteric cholinergic neurones.
endogenous serotinergic changes have also been
implicated in the genesis of `postinfective' irritable bowel
syndrome. a prospective study from shef®eld demonstrated that irritable bowel symptoms persisted in 31%
of patients with proven salmonella gastro-enteritis after
1 year.15 those most likely to have persistent symptoms
had greater psychological morbidity on psychological
testing when ®rst admitted with their infective episode
than patients who recovered completely. population studies have demonstrated a similar residual effect
of irritable bowel syndrome and diarrhoea after infectious gastro-enteritis, and this has been shown to be
signi®cantly higher than the incidence of newly occurring irritable bowel syndrome in the population in
general. it is not known how many patients with
irritable bowel syndrome can accurately attribute the
onset of symptoms to infection, although it has been
retrospectively estimated at between 6 and 17%.
an increase in chronic in¯ammatory cells has been
observed in some patients with postinfective irritable
bowel syndrome. in a cohort of patients prospectively
followed after enteric infection, some with persistent
symptoms had increased numbers of intraepithelial
lymphocytes and an increase in the ratio of epithelial
enterochromaf®n cells to enterocytes. these changes
were associated with altered gut permeability. it has
been suggested that such patients have an exaggerated
postprandial release of serotonin.
 xxxg1117xxx  agonists hasten gut transit, and alter ¯uid
secretion and visceral sensitivity. they produce loose
bowel actions and increased bowel frequency, in
volunteers and patients.
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

review: drug development for ibs

 xxxd3302xxx .  xxxd3302xxx , an  xxxd2951xxx  indole derivative of serotonin, is a selective partial  xxxg1117xxx  agonist.
it is well absorbed and distributes widely into tissues.
it stimulates the peristaltic re¯ex in vitro, and increases
intestinal and colonic motility in a co-ordinated fashion,
resulting in hastened transit. it reduces visceral afferent
®ring and sensation in response to distension in
animals. it accelerates gastric, small bowel and colonic
transit in healthy volunteers, and in patients with
irritable bowel syndrome.  xxxd3302xxx  also stimulates
water and chloride secretion.16
this drug does not appear to cause qt interval
prolongation or arrhythmias. this may relate to the
low dose used clinically.
three large phase 3 randomized placebo controlled
trials have been performed in patients with constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome.16 most
subjects (about 85%) were women. patients felt signi®cant improvement in global ef®cacy, abdominal pain,
bowel frequency and stool consistency. importantly, in
relation to the adverse effects of these drugs,  xxxd3302xxx  is
well tolerated in patients with `diarrhoea predominant'
irritable bowel syndrome.17
in one study the proportion of patients experiencing
bene®t with regard to pain was 9% greater for active
drug compared to placebo for patients on 4 mg per day
and 8% for 12 mg per day. in the second study there
was no signi®cant gain. in the third study the
proportions were 6% for 4 mg and 12% for 12 mg.
the gain was slightly more if no account was taken of
the effect of laxatives concurrently taken. these highly
statistically signi®cant differences need to be assessed in
relation to the clinical bene®t. ef®cacy has not been
demonstrated in males, even when data from the three
studies were pooled. the response was greater, about
15%, if analysis was restricted to patients with hard or
normal stools and those with low bowel frequency.
diarrhoea occurred in 12% of  xxxd3302xxx  treated
patients, usually transiently in the ®rst week.
in may 2001 novartis and bristol-myers squibb
withdrew the marketing application for  xxxd3302xxx  from
the europena agency for evaluation of medical products (emea). the decision resulted from a difference of
opinion with the committee for proprietary medicinal
products (cpmp) regarding the relevance of the clinical
effect. there was also disagreement over the methodological conduct of some preclinical studies. the companies are undertaking further clinical studies; clinical
endpoints will need further discussion with the emea.
ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

349

the drug is unlikely to reach the market in europe
before 2003.
in june 2001 the us food and drug administration
(fda) issued a `not approvable' letter on  xxxd3302xxx . the
fda requested additional data regarding abdominal
surgery, in particular gall-bladder surgery, in patients
treated with  xxxd3302xxx . patients with irritable bowel
syndrome are likely to have increased abdominal
surgical episodes related to the lack of accurate
diagnosis of the cause of their pain. some of these
patients will have incidental gall stones. it is also
possible, however, that  xxxd3302xxx  affects gall-bladder
motility, or alters the proportion of conjugated and
deconjugated bile acids, and their enterohepatic circulation, secondary to improved gut transit.
 xxxd3039xxx .  xxxd3039xxx  is a selective  xxxg1117xxx  agonist,
developed by janssen. this drug has been shown to
accelerate oro-caecal transit and whole gut transit time
in healthy volunteers18 and patients with idiopathic
constipation.19
the drug has shown convincing evidence of ef®cacy, in
both multicentre studies20 and in a large single centre
double-blind study.19
 xxxd3039xxx  improves stool frequency and consistency
in patients with constipation. in addition to this motor,
and possibly secretory, effect it also appears to modify
pain. visceral sensitivity is enhanced in patients, and
bloating and pain reduced.19 it is not clear whether the
latter occurs as a result of improved gut motor function,
or as a separate effect on sensory function.
at the time of writing development of  xxxd3039xxx  has
been suspended, pending toxicity studies. concerns
have been raised about carcinogenicity in animal
studies, and possible cardiac effects.
the clinical development programme for  xxxd3039xxx 
has focused on idiopathic constipation. this group of
patients share many symptoms and have a lot of clinical
overlap with patients with constipation-predominant
irritable bowel syndrome. if drug development continues the clinical development programme is likely to be
extended in this direction.
5-ht1 agonists
patients with functional dyspepsia have been shown to
have hypersensitivity to gastric distension and impaired
gastric accommodation to a meal.21 these physiological changes correlate with increased psychological

350

m. a. kamm

morbidity on psychometric testing.22 5-ht1 agonists
sumitriptan23 and buspirone24 decrease symptoms
in patients with functional dyspepsia. symptomatic
improvement is associated with enhanced gastric
accommodation to a meal. these drugs deserve further
evaluation for their potential role in treating patients
with a range of functional symptoms including functional dyspepsia and bloating. a limiting factor may be
their propensity to cause increased lower oesophageal
sphincter transient relaxations, and therefore to possibly
increase gastro-oesophageal re¯ux.
antidepressants
clinical experience suggests that antidepressants used in
low dose are effective in treating patients with functional gut disorders whose predominant symptom is
pain. in a retrospective series of 138 patients with
irritable bowel syndrome 89% experienced improvement, and 61% had complete remission, of symptoms.25
patients with predominant pain were more likely to
respond than those with predominant altered bowel
habit. age, gender, duration of symptoms, diarrhoea or
constipation predominance, and presence or absence of
psychiatric features did not in¯uence the likely response
to antidepressant drug treatment.
large controlled trials of antidepressants for functional
gut disorders are beginning to emerge. the antidepressant serotonin reuptake inhibitor (ssri) paroxetine has
recently been evaluated in comparison with individual
psychotherapy or routine care in patients with irritable
bowel syndrome. at 1 year follow up paroxetine and
psychotherapy were superior to routine care in reducing
associated disability, although gastrointestinal symptoms were similar in all three groups.26
whether the effect of these drugs is mediated by their
central or peripheral effect, or both, is unknown.
conclusion

for pharmaceutical companies drug development for
functional disorders is a hazardous process. examples of
success have involved drugs targeted at speci®c end organ
receptors known to play an important role in motor
function or secretion, such as the mu±opioid analogue
loperamide,27, 28 or the somatostatin analogue octreotide.29 modi®cation of sensory function is a much more
challenging target. the experience with serotonin modifying drugs has been mixed, and some important lessons

are there to be learnt. future lines of research with novel
compounds need to keep these lessons in mind.
acknowledgement

con¯ict of interest: m. kamm has acted as a consultant
to glaxosmithkline, janssen pharmaceutica and novartis.
references
1 kamm ma. the role of psychosocial factors in functional gut
disease. eur j surg 1998; 164: 37±40.
2 kamm ma. entry criteria for drug trials of irritable bowel
syndrome. am j med 1999; 107(5a): 51s±58s.
3 drossman da, corrazziari e, talley nj, thompson wg,
whitehead we. the functional gastrointestinal disorders,
2nd edn. mclean, va, usa: degnon associates, 2000.
4 gershon md. review article: roles played by 5-hydroxytryptamine in the physiology of the bowel. aliment pharmacol
ther 1999; 13(suppl. 2): 15±30.
5 goldberg pa, kamm ma, setti-carraro p, van der sijp jrm,
roth c. modi®cation of visceral sensitivity and pain in irritable
bowel syndrome by 5-ht3 antagonism (ondansetron).
digestion 1996; 57: 478±83.
6 smalley w, shatin d, wysowski dk, et al. contraindicated use
of  xxxd1708xxx : impact of food and drug administration regulatory action. j am med assoc 2000; 284: 3036±9.
7 federal drug administration (usa) website. http://
www.fda.gov/cder/drug [2/12/2001].
8 ferriman a. news. uk licence for  xxxd1708xxx  suspended. br med
j 2000; 321: 259.
9 miura m, lawson dc, clary em, et al. central modulation of
rectal-distension induced blood pressure changes by alosteron,
a  xxxg1116xxx  antagonist. dig dis sci 1999; 44: 20±4.
10 zerbib f, bruley des varannes s, oriola rc, mcdonald j, isal
jp, galmiche jp. alosteron does not affect the visceral perception of gastric distension in healthy subjects. aliment
pharmacol ther 1994; 8: 403±7.
11 delvaux m, louvel d, mamet j-p, et al. effect of alosetron on
responses to colonic distension in patients with irritable bowel
syndrome. aliment pharmacol ther 1998; 12: 849±55.
12 camilleri m, nortcutt ar, kong s, dukes ge, mcsorley d,
mangel aw. ef®cacy and safety of alosetron in women with
irritable bowel syndrome: a randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. lancet 2000; 355: 1035±40.
13 cann pa, read nw, holdsworth cd. what is the bene®t of
coarse wheat bran in patients with irritable bowel syndrome?
gut 1984; 25: 168±73.
14 cann pa, read nw, holdsworth cd, barends d. role of
loperamide and placebo in management of irritable bowel
syndrome. dig dis sci 1994; 29: 239±47.
15 gwee ka, graham jc, mckendrick mw, et al. psychometric
scores and persistence of irritable bowel after infectious diarrhoea. lancet 1996; 347: 150±3.

ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

review: drug development for ibs
16 camilleri m. review article:  xxxd3302xxx . aliment pharmacol
ther 2001; 15: 277±89.
17 lef kowitz m, ligozio g, heggland j, dunger-baldauf c, ruegg
pc.  xxxd3302xxx  is well tolerated in patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. gut 2000; 47
(suppl. 3): a217(abstract).
18 emmanuel av, kamm ma, roy aj, antonelli k. effect of a
novel prokinetic drug, r093877, on gastrointestinal transit in
healthy volunteers. gut 1998; 42: 511±6.
19 emmanuel av, nicholls t, roy aj, antonelli k, kamm ma.
 xxxd3039xxx  imporves colonic transit and stool frequency in
patients with slow and normal transit constipation. gastroenterology 2000; 118: a846(abstract).
20 johanson jf, miner pb, parkman hp, wojcik rl, karcher k,
woods m.  xxxd3039xxx  improves bowel movement frequency
and symptoms in patients with chronic constipation: results of
two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. gastroenterology
2000; 118: a175(abstract).
21 fischler b, de gucht v, tack j, janssens j. psychosocial and
psychopathological correlates of hypersensitivity to gastric
distension in functional dyspepsia. gastroenterology 1999;
116: a163(abstract).
22 fischler b, de gucht v, tack j, janssens j. relationship
between job stress and physiopathological mechansims
in functional dyspepsia. gastreonterology 1999; 116:
a163(abstract).

ó 2002 blackwell science ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 16, 343±351

351

23 tack j, piessevaux h, coulie b, janssens j. in¯uence of a
fundus-relaxing drug on meal-related symptoms in dyspeptic
patients with hyper-sensitivity to gastric distension. gastroenterology 1999; 116: a324(abstract).
24 tack j, piessevaux h, coulie b, fischler b, de gucht v,
janssens j. a placebo-controlled trial of buspirone, a fundusrelaxing drug, in functional dyspepsia: effect on symptoms and
gastric sensory and motor function. gastroenterology 1999;
116: a325(abstract).
25 clouse re, lustman pj, geisman ra, alpers dh. antidepressant therapy in 138 patients with irritable bowel syndrome: a
®ve-year clinical experience. aliment pharmacol ther 1994;
8: 409±16.
26 creed fh, fernandes l, guthrie e, et al. the cost-effectiveness
of psychotherapy and ssri antidepressants for severe irritable
bowel syndrome. gastroenterology 2001; 120(suppl. 1):
a115(abstract).
27 camilleri m. review article: clinical evidence to support current therapies of irritable bowel syndrome. aliment pharmacol ther 1999; 13(suppl. 2): 48±53.
28 herbst f, kamm ma, nicholls rj. effects of loperamide on
ileoanal pouch function. br j surg 1998; 85: 1428±32.
29 harris ag, o'dorisio tm, woltering ea, et al. consensus
statement: octreotide dose titration in secretory diarrhea.
diarrhea management consensus development panel. dig dis
sci 1995; 40(7): 1464±73.

