clinical and experimental pharmacology and physiology (2002) 29, 412–418

age-related changes in dopamine d2 receptors
in rat heart and coronary vessels
carlo cavallotti,* federica nuti,* paolo bruzzone† and massimo mancone*
*department of cardiovascular and respiratory sciences and †department of general surgery,
university la sapienza, rome, italy

summary
1. the distribution of dopamine d2 receptors in rat heart and
coronary vessels and the possible age-related changes in d2
receptor density were studied. the pharmacological characteristics and the anatomical location of dopamine d2-like receptor
sites in rat heart and coronary vessels were investigated
using combined binding techniques and light microscopy
autoradiography.
2. samples of heart and coronary vessels were harvested
from young and old rats. on frozen slices, dopaminergic d2
receptors were labelled by means of a selective d2 ligand, namely
[3h]-spiroperidol (spiperone). inhibition studies were performed using unlabelled agonists and/or labelled and unlabelled
antagonists to define pharmacological specificity of the binding.
physiological experiments were performed to demonstrate
the selective antagonism between d2 receptors and many
dopaminergic drugs.
3. [3h]-spiroperidol was bound to sections of rat heart and
coronary artery (in a manner consistent with the labelling of
dopamine d2-like receptors) with an equilibrium dissociation
constant of approximately 2.4  0.7 nmol/l and a maximum
capacity of binding sites of 65.8  4.5 fmol/mg protein.
experiments performed on sections of coronary veins did not
allow the evaluation of specific binding. autoradiography,
observed with light microscopy, showed the development
of specific silver grains within the whole wall of rat heart
and coronary artery. the greater sensitivity to displacement
by  xxxd155xxx , bromocriptine,  xxxd1927xxx , haloperidol,
raclopride and l-sulpiride than to displacement by n-propylnorapomorphine, quinpirole and clozapine suggests that the
binding sites observed in these experiments are likely to belong
to the dopamine  xxxg656xxx  subtype.
4. comparing results in young and old rats, we observed
numerous significant age-related changes, including a decrease
in d2 receptors localized in rat heart and coronary artery wall.
these d2 receptors show a specific location, in close relationship with dopaminergic nerve fibres. they decrease with age
and their role remains unknown.

correspondence: dr carlo cavallotti, dipartimento di scienze cardiovascolari e respiratorie, sezione di anatomia, via a, borelli 50 00161 roma,
italy. email: cavallotti@uniroma1.it
received 14 august 2001; revision 31 october 2001; accepted
29 november 2001.

key words: age-related changes, autoradiography, coronary
vessels, dopaminergic receptors, heart, marker binding techniques, quantitative analysis of images, spiroperidol.

introduction
dopamine (da) is a potent cardiovascular neurotransmitter.1 it
enhances myocardial contractility and increases cardiac output;2
moreover, it causes coronary vasoconstriction or vasodilation,3
depending on the activation of different receptors.
dopamine receptors play an important role in controlling the
principal functions of the cardiovascular circulation, as shown by
biochemical, morphological and pharmacological studies.4–7 until
a few years ago, dopamine receptors were traditionally divided into
two functional groups, termed d1 and d2, in the central nervous
system and da1 and  xxxd1379xxx  in the periphery.8 the application of
modern molecular biology techniques, such as the use of recombinant dna methodology, has resulted in the cloning of five different
dopamine receptor subtypes termed d1 (or d1a), d2 (splice
variants d2s/d2l; or d2a-s/d2a-l), d3 (or d2b), d4 (or d2c) and
d5 (or d1b).9
considering the lack of specific markers and/or displacers for the
recently cloned dopamine receptors, it is difficult to establish whether
the binding sites located in the tissues belong to the d2 or other
receptor subtypes.
until now, both d1 and  xxxg656xxx  subtypes have been described
located in the artery wall.10 the d1 receptors, located in the smooth
muscles, mediate direct vasodilator effects, whereas the stimulation
of d2 receptors, located presynaptically (on the first neuron), causes
an indirect vascular dilation counteracting the vasoconstrictor
activity of the sympathetic nervous fibres.11
the d1 receptors are located in the coronary artery wall and also
in rat heart, as demonstrated by microscopic immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopic immunocytochemistry and in situ amplification
of mrna by ozono et al.12
although da, da receptor agonists and dopaminergic prodrugs
are used in the treatment of heart failure,13 no investigations have
been reported concerning the pharmacological profile of the d2
receptors in the heart, with the exception of many studies from our
laboratory that, investigating the cardiovascular system and the
kidney, have shown the presence of d2 receptors in rat heart, as in
other vascular districts of the rat body.5 moreover, no data are available concerning the biochemical characteristics and the radioreceptor
profile of  xxxg656xxx  sites in coronary arteries.
for these reasons, we investigated the pharmacological profile
and anatomical localization of d2 receptors in both the heart and

413

d2 receptors in coronary vessels

table 1 pharmacological specificity of the binding between [3h]-spiroperidol and a section of rat large-calibre (diameter > 120 m) left coronary artery
drug

inhibition
constant (fmol/l)

drug

inhibition
constant (fmol/l)

adtn
 xxxd155xxx 
apomorphine
 xxxd372xxx 
butaclamol +
clozapine
dihydrexine
 xxxd1927xxx 
dopamine
fenaldopam
skf 38393
skf 81297
haloperidol
 xxxd2419xxx 
 xxxd2498xxx 

> 10000
<5
260  16
26  3
> 10 000
320  12
> 5000
< 10
<5
> 5000
> 5000
> 5000
< 20
> 5000
<5

 xxxd2621xxx 
 xxxd2637xxx 
olanzapine
pergolide
 xxxd2914xxx 
propranolol
quinpirole
raclopride
sch 23390
skf 83566
sch 39166
[3h]-spiroperidol
serotonin
l-sulpiride
tioridazine

> 5000
> 5000
460  22
> 5000
> 10 000
> 10 000
150  10
<5
> 10 000
> 10 000
> 10 000
maximum binding
> 5000
<5
320  18

results are expressed in fmol/l (sem) and are the concentration of each drug able to inhibit 50% of the specific binding between [3h]-spiroperidol
and samples of coronary artery. the maximum binding capacity under the best experimental conditions between samples and [3h]-spiroperidol
expressed as fmol/mg protein (sem) is 65.8  4.5. the dissociation constant between radioligand and receptors expressed in nmol/l per (sem) is
2.4  0.7.
table 2 changes in bodyweight, heart weight and protein content between
young and old rats
age of rats
bodyweight (g)
heart weight (mg)
protein (mg/g heart)

3 months

24 months

250  34
1350  52
108.4  12.2

565  48
1670  68
103.6  16.5

data are the meansem of at least three determinations per animal.

coronary vessels of young and old rats with the aim of describing
possible age-related changes.

methods
male wistar rats (12 rats aged 3 months, considered young, and 12 aged
24 months, considered aged) weighing 250–560 g, were used in our experiments. animals were caged in groups of three and were housed under
controlled lighting (lights on from 08.00 to 20.00 h). food and water were
provided ad libitum. this study was performed in accordance with the guide
for the care and use of laboratory animals published by the us national
institutes of health. animals were killed by terminal anaesthesia and were
used for the harvesting of multiple organ biopsies. in particular, the heart
was removed, weighed and cut into small pieces. fragments of the coronary
artery, vein and heart were immediately placed into a cryoprotective medium
within a thermoinsulated container with co2 ice and delivered within 2 h to
our laboratory. the main coronary vessels studied were the left, right
and anterior interventricular branch of the coronary arteries; the coronary
microcirculation is referred to the heart myocardium. finally, samples
of coronary veins were harvested near the coronary sinus. internal and
external diameters of the vessels were measured under an operating microscope, provided with a micrometer, at magnification of 10. vessels were
defined as large when the external diameter was > 120 m, medium when
the external diameter was between 70 and 120 m and small when the
external diameter was < 70m.14

tissue preparation
to identify, characterize and localize dopamine d2 receptors, autoradiographic and marker binding techniques were performed, based on the use

table 3 quantitative analysis of images indicating the number of
silver grains present in vessel walls from young (3-month-old) and old
(24-month-old) rats
age of rats
3 months
24 months
right large coronary artery
right medium-sized coronary artery
right small coronary artery
large coronary vein
small coronary vein
heart myocardium

334  28
292  26
144  19
16  3
18  2
90  13

218  21*
186  22*
85  13*
12  2
15  4
47  9*

results are the mean (sem) number of silver grains in 100 m2
surface of the vessels investigated. values < 20 can be considered as
‘background’ (see methods). *p < 0.001 compared with young rats.
of labelled highly selective substances and specific inhibitors for different
dopamine receptor subtypes.15 pharmacological characterization and autoradiographic location of d2 receptors were studied using [3h]-spiroperidol
(spiperone).6 results were quantified by quantimet (leica) image analysis
(microsystems imaging solutions, cambridge, uk). after harvesting,
samples of coronary vessels and heart were washed with cold saline
solution (to remove blood and cell debris) and placed in a cryoprotective
medium (oct, tissue tek, miles, mo, usa). the fragments were then
placed in isopentane, refrigerated by co2 ice and preserved at –80°c until
use. the oct blocks were then cut serially into 8–10 m slices in a microtome cryostat chamber at –20°c, deposited on gelatine-coated microscope
slides and weighed before and after slice deposition in order to determine
their weight. samples were air-dried and treated for pharmacological
characterization and autoradiographic location of dopamine d2 receptors.

radioreceptor studies to mark the d2 sites
sections were incubated for different times and at different temperatures
in 170 mol/l tris-hcl buffer in the presence of increasing (0.5–7 nmol/l)
concentrations of [3h]-spiroperidol. non-specific binding was obtained when
1 mol/l unlabelled spiroperidol was added to the incubation medium with
the specific marker. to avoid the binding of the marker to the 5-hydroxytryptamine  xxxg1113xxx  sites,15 1 mol/l  xxxd2419xxx  was added to the incubation medium. in other experiments, 1 mol/l (+)-butaclamol was added
to the incubation medium with the aim of displacing [3h]-spiroperidol
binding to a non-specific (background) level. at the end of the incubation

414

c cavallotti et al.

period, sections were washed (2  5 min) in cold buffer solution, deposited
on whatman gf-b filters (whatman, london, uk), submersed into glass
vials containing scintillation fluid and the radioactivity in the samples was
determine using a beckman counter ((beckman instruments, palo alto, ca,
usa) for [3h].
the specificity of [3h]-spiroperidol binding for d2 receptors was proved
by incubating sections for 60 min at 37°c with the marker in the presence
of increasing dopaminergic, serotoninergic and adrenergic agents. lower
concentrations of [3h]-spiroperidol (0.5 nmol/l) were selected to avoid dense
silver grain labelling. we chose the incubation time (30 min), temperature
(25°c) and concentration of [3h]-spiroperidol (2.5 nmol/l) to allow us to
obtain wider discrimination between specific and non-specific binding. this
value represents the maximal density capacity of binding sites (maximum
binding). the inhibition constant (ki) was determined by means of the cheng
and prussoff formula:16
ki = ic50/(1 + s/kd)
where ki is the experimental value of the inhibition constant (specific for
each substance), the ic50 is the concentration of the competitive substance
that causes the displacement of 50% of binding (experimental value specific
for each substance), kd is the dissociation constant for the radioligand and
s is the optimal concentration of radioligand used in our binding experiments (experimental value specific for each substance)

autoradiographic experiments
the same marker, temperature and incubation time used for the pharmacological radioimmunoassay were used in autoradiographic experiments.
sections were incubated with [3h]-spiroperidol (with or without 1 mol/l
unlabelled spiroperidol to observe total and non-specific binding). specific
binding was determined by subtracting the non-specific from total binding.
after incubation and washing, sections were further washed in h2o and
treated for light microscopic autoradiography. slides were covered with
nuclear emulsion ilford 1.4 (ilford imaging gmbh, marly switzerland)
diluted 1 : 1 with purified water. autoradiographies (slide + emulsion) were
kept in the darkroom for 6–8 weeks and then treated with kodak d19
(developing bath; kodak eastman co. italian spa, rome, italy) and with
agefix agfa (fixing bath; agfa-gevaert italia, rome, italy). sections
were stained with toluidine blue and observed under a zeiss axiophot (rome,
italy) microscope equipped for bright and dark field observations.
inhibition studies were performed with unlabelled agonists to define the
pharmacological specificity of the binding between the receptor and the
related marker. moreover, physiological experiments were performed with
the aim of demonstrating a selective antagonism between d2 receptors and
related markers. in fact, the selective d2-like receptor antagonist  xxxd1927xxx  is able to block the actions of dopamine on the emetic centre (present
in the medulla oblongata of rats, near the vestibular nuclei) in a dose-related
manner; this response was inhibited or abolished by the  xxxg656xxx  ligand
spiroperidol.

protein concentration
in all experiments, samples of heart and coronary vessels were weighed
and placed on dry ice (specimens for radioreceptor experiments) or into an
ice-cold homogenization buffer (samples for estimating the protein content).
tissue protein concentrations were determined by the method of lowry
et al.17 using bovine  xxxg124xxx  (bsa) as the standard and folin
phenol as the reagent.

histofluorescence microscopy
for the staining of dopaminergic nerve fibres, a glyoxylic acid-induced
fluorescence (gif) technique was used, as described by qayyum and
fatani.18 briefly, the staining solution was prepared immediately before
use by adding 0.2 mol/l sucrose and 1% glyoxylic acid to a solution of
0.236 mol/l potassium phosphate monobasic (ph 7.4); this staining solution
is named sucrose, phosphate, glyoxylic acid. slides with samples were
immediately dipped into this solution for 5 min. to ensure a comparable
fluorescence, it is important to standardize times and temperatures without

intervals. after staining, the sections must be drained, covered with nonautofluorescent immersion oil, heated at 95°c for 5 min and coverslipped.
the sections must then be observed immediately, analysed and photographed
to prevent the diffusion and photodecomposition of the fluorescence.
sections were examined and photographed under a zeiss photomicroscope
equipped with exciter and barrier filters and with a mercury lamp for observation of fluorescence

quantitative analysis of images
in order to evaluate the amount of silver grains, a quantitative analysis of
the intensity of the staining was performed using a quantimet analyser
(leica; microsystems imaging systems). the values of control photographs
(from samples incubated without marker) were considered as zero. each
photograph was examined separately, evaluating the standard error of the
mean (sem). quantitative analysis of images (qai) may provide incorrect
results. in fact, the main choices (i.e. the instructions for the software) are
ordered by each research worker according to personal preferences. for these
reasons, the data tend to be partial rather than impartial and it is necessary
to follow very careful rules.
the counts must be repeated at least three times using a double-blind technique. all counts should be performed by different research workers, on
different analysers and with samples identified only by a number or by a
letter. final results must be obtained by another research worker, who examines experimental protocols to identify each sample and attribute specific
values. final values must be submitted to the statistical analysis of data. the
values reported in the present paper represent the intensity of staining for
each sample and are expressed in conventional units (cu) sem. further
details on qai are reported in the manual that comes with the quantimet
leica 500 image analyser.19

statistical analysis of data
the statistical methods used throughout the present study must be interpreted
as an accurate description of the data rather than a statistical inference of
such data. preliminary values were obtained with the aid of basic sample
statistics. mean values, maximum and minimum limits, variations, sd, sem
and correlation coefficients were determined according to serio.20
the relationship between each pair of variables was studied using the
respective correlation coefficients grouped in a correlation matrix, thus
enabling us to study the existence of a linear (values next +1 or –1) or
non-linear (values next +0) dependency. finally, a correlative analysis of
the morphological and biochemical data was performed by comparing the
significant differences for each group with the corresponding values of the
other homogeneous groups. correlation coefficients are significant when they
are lower than 0.001 (p < 0.001), whereas they are not significant when
the values are higher than 0.05 (p > 0.05). this correlation coefficient was
calculated according to castino and roletto.21

sources of chemicals
[3h]-spiroperidol (specific activity 189.0 bq/nmol) was obtained from the
amersham radiochemical center (amersham, england). isomers of butaclamol (tert-butyl-3aoctahydro-2,3,4,4,8,9,13 ba,141h-benzo[6,7]cyclohepta-[1,2,3-de] xxxd3047xxx [2,1a]isoquinoléinol-3; dci), haloperidol and
 xxxd2637xxx  were obtained from research biochemicals (natick, nj, usa).
sch-23390 and isomers of sulpiride were obtained from schering
plough (bloomfield, nj, usa) and ravizza (milan, italy), respectively.
 xxxd1927xxx  and  xxxd2419xxx  were produced by jannsen (beerse, belgium).
 xxxd2097xxx  was obtained from smith, kline & french (philadelphia, pa,
usa). bromocriptine and  xxxd2914xxx  were products of sandoz (basel,
switzerland) and ciba-geigy (basel, switzerland), respectively. unlabelled
spiroperidol and other chemicals were purchased from sigma chemical
(st louis, mo, usa).

results
results on radioreceptor binding experiments and other quantitative
results are summarized in tables 1–3, whereas morphological auto-

d2 receptors in coronary vessels
radiographic results on frozen sections of rat heart and/or coronary
vessels are reported in figs 1–6. table 1 shows that [3h]-spiroperidol
was bound by sections of coronary artery in a manner consistent
with the labelling of d2 receptors.the kd for [3h]-spiroperidol was
approximately 2.4  0.7 nmol/l, whereas the maximum binding
capacity (mbc) was 65.8  4.5 fmol/mg protein. the rank order of
potency of dopaminergic drugs in the displacement or inhibition
of [3h]-spiroperidol binding was spiroperidol >  xxxd155xxx  >
l-sulpiride > raclopride >  xxxd1927xxx  > (+)-butaclamol > haloperidol > bromocriptine > n-propyl-norapomorphine > quinpirole >
clozapine. these pharmacological results show the specificity of the
binding between d2 receptors and the marker. moreover, the physiological results demonstrate that d2 receptors are not only defined
by their ability to bind specific markers, but also by their pharmacological properties and/or by their physiological responses. table 2
clearly shows age-related changes, evident in body and heart
weights, whereas the protein amount appears unchanged. table 3
shows data obtained by qai for the number of silver grains present
in the wall of some coronary vessels from young and old rats. as
can be seen, ageing results in a marked decrease in the number of
silver grains (i.e. d2 receptors) in the structures studied.
autoradiography showed that [3h]-spiroperidol binding sites were

fig. 1 light autoradiography of the heart of a 3-month-old rat (original
magnification 10), original length 8 mm, showing staining of d2 dopaminergic receptors. observation in dark field. numerous silver grains are
present all over the wall of the endocardium, myocardium and epicardium.
a, left atrium chamber; v, left ventricle chamber.

415

localized all over in the wall of the endocardium, myocardium and
epicardium (fig. 1) development of silver grains is so dense that,
in order to quantify their number, lower concentrations of radioligand
must be used. ageing results in a marked decrease in the number
of silver grains (i.e. d2 receptors; fig. 2). in addition, in the left coronary artery (large extraparenchymal branch of a young rat, 3 months
of age), [3h]-spiroperidol binding sites were localized all over the
adventitia, media and endothelial layers of the coronary artery
(fig. 3). there was a marked decrease in the number of silver grains
in older rats (24 months of age). silver grains appear concentrated
only in the adventitia and in the intima (fig. 4). figure 5 summarizes
the normal morphology of the whole wall of a medium-sized coronary artery; three layers can be seen. figure 6 is a dark field observation of the same sample shown in fig. 5 but stained with gif. the
whole wall of the medium-sized eft coronary artery is provided by
four groups of nerve fibres of catecholaminergic nerve fibres (cnf):
adventitial, transitional zone between adventitia and media, transitional zone between media and intima and, finally, endothelial. d2
receptors, shown previously in figs 1–4, are still all in close relationship with these cnf. our descriptive observations have been

fig. 2 light autoradiography of the heart of a 24-month-old rat (original
magnification 10), original length 10 mm, showing d2 dopaminergic
receptor staining. observation in dark field. fewer silver grains are present
in the wall of the whole heart or in the myocardium (compare with fig. 1).
ageing results in a marked decrease in silver grains, corresponding to d2
receptors. a, left atrium chamber; v, left ventricle chamber.

416

c cavallotti et al.

improved by functional data obtained by comparing the results in
young and aged rats. ageing induces an increase in bodyweight and
heart weight (not correlated with an analogous increase in the amount
of protein). at the same time, ageing induces a marked decrease
in d2 receptors localized in both the rat heart and coronary artery
wall.

discussion
the distribution of d2 receptors was studied in the heart and in the
wall of coronary vessels of young and old rats, with the aim to determine possible age-related changes.
our observations provide direct evidence that the majority of
d2 receptors are present in the mostly innervated zones of the
myocardium and vascular wall and, therefore, are in close relationships with the nerve fibres. however, a small proportion of these
receptors (approximately 20%) are located in the endothelium of
the coronary vessels and/or in the endocardium.
these preliminary microscopic results allow us to go deeper,
to ultrastructural and molecular levels. the binding profile of
[3h]-spiroperidol to sections of rat heart was consistent with the
labelling of dopamine d2 sites. light microscope autoradiography
revealed silver grains throughout the atrial and ventricular walls,
frequently associated in clusters.
these findings suggest that the cardiac actions of dopamine are
mediated through the activaton of d2 receptors. arterial d2 sites

fig. 4 left rat coronary artery, extraparenchymal large-sized branch
(original magnification 400), original diameter > 120 m, showing d2
dopaminergic receptor staining. few silver grains are present in the wall
of the whole vessel. sample taken from a 24-month-old rat. observation
in dark field. ageing results in a marked decrease in the number of silver
grains that appear concentrated in the intima and adventitia.

fig. 3 left rat coronary artery, extraparenchymal large-sized branch
(original magnification 400), original diameter > 120m, showing d2
dopaminergic receptor staining. observation in dark field. numerous
silver grains are present in the wall of the whole vessel, especially in the
adventitia and intima. sample taken from a 3-month-old rat.

fig. 5 bright field observation. transverse section of an extraparenchimal
branch of the left coronary artery (medium size) stained with haematoxylin–eosin to verify microanatomical details. l, lumen; e, endothelial
layer; m, muscular layer; a, adventitial layer. (original magnification
1320.)

417

d2 receptors in coronary vessels

binding and autoradiographic techniques allows us to analyse
the morphological localization of d2 receptors in rat heart and
coronary arteries. these findings may be useful to gain a better
knowledge of the role of d2 receptors in the regulation of cardiovascular function together with data on the peripheral dopaminergic
system26–29 and d1 receptors.12 age-related changes result in a
decrease in the number of silver grains, corresponding to the
number of d2 receptors. the pathophysiological role of d2
receptors remains unknown. further studies, including the use of
in situ hybridization techniques, are necessary to establish the
dopamine receptor subtypes expressed by the rat heart and coronary
vessels and labelled with [3h]-spiroperidol.

acknowledgements
fig. 6 dark field observation of the same sample shown in fig. 5 stained
with glyoxylic acid-induced fluorescence (gif). the entire adventitial layer
(a) is supplied with catecholaminergic nerve fibres. the muscular layer
(m) shows two nerve plexuses in the transitional zones adventitia–media
and media–intima. finally, the endothelial layer (e) shows fluorescent
catecholaminergic nerve fibres (cnf). l, lumen. (original magnification
1320.)

show a double localization: adventitial and endothelial. in the first
case, they correspond to the vascular areas where autonomic neuroeffector plexuses are located22 and, therefore, these receptors are
sensitive to neurotrasmitters. in contrast, the endothelial sites are
not in close relationship with nerve fibres and are sensitive to
circulating neuromodulators. presently, low resolutions, technical
difficulties and high costs characterize the autoradiographic and/or
radioreceptor binding techniques applied for the studies on da
receptors.15
there are five subtypes of dopamine receptors.23 the d2 receptors in the heart and coronary vessels are of particular interest
because they inhibit adenylate cyclase and ca2+ channels, stimulate
k+ channels and modulate phosphatidylinositol metabolism.24 all
these functions play a key role in cardiac and coronary functions.
the d2 receptors are both pre- and post-synaptic. the first neuron
is dopaminergic and contains presynaptic receptors, also called
autoreceptors. the second neuron is not dopaminergic and contains
only post-synaptic receptors. the d2 receptors are partially stimulated by dopamine, apomorphine and pergolide. in constrast, they
are totally stimulated by ergolinic drugs, such as  xxxd372xxx ,
 xxxd2498xxx  (ly 171555) and quinpirole. neuroleptic drugs are
antagonists of d2 receptors, especially the d2l splice variants.
 xxxd155xxx  is a selective blocker of d2 and d4 receptors.
human autopsy samples, harvested for autoradiographic techniques, can be damaged by post-mortem changes. in contrast, only
small fragments can be obtained during conventional biopsies. for
these reasons, our experiments were performed on samples harvested
from animals.
the present data suggest that the use of combined radioreceptor
assay and autoradiographic techniques may provide a useful tool
for studying the role of the receptors for each neurotransmitter
and the effcts of drugs that act on the receptors involved in the
regulation of cardiac and coronary functions.
more detailed information about the molecular basis of the action
of dopamine in the regulation of cardiac function is needed, because
only few data are available on the biochemical characteristics of
putative dopamine receptors in the myocardium.25 in conclusion, the
above findings demonstrate that the use of appropriate radioreceptor

the authors are greatly indebted to drs f jecker and n miani
(department of anatomy, university cattolica del s cuore, rome,
italy) for their suggestions and criticisms. the medline, internet and
other informatic consulting services of drs p sagnelli, fm tranquilli
leali and m cameroni (department of cardiovascular and
respiratory sciences, university la sapienza, rome, italy) are
gratefully acknowledged. the technical assistance of mr dario
caporuscio, the photographic service of mr giuseppe leoncini
(laboratory of scientific photography, rome, italy) and the kind
help of mrs sharon hobby in the revision of the english language
are also gratefully acknowledged.

references
1. goldberg li. cardiovascular and renal actions of dopamine: potential
clinical applications. pharmacol. rev. 1972; 24: 1–29.
2. lokhandwala mf, barrett rj. cardiovascular dopamine receptors:
physiological, pharmacological and therapeutic implications. j. auton.
pharmacol. 1982; 4: 189–98.
3. poelaert ji, mungroop he, koolen jj, van den berg pc. hemodynamic
effects of dopexamine in patients following coronary artery bypass
surgery. j. cardiothorac. vasc. anesth. 1989; 3: 441–3.
4. amenta f. biochemistry and autoradiography of peripheral dopamine
receptors. in: amenta f (ed.). peripheral dopamine pathophysiology.
crc press, boca raton. 1990; 39–51.
5. amenta f. density and distribution of dopamine receptors in the cardiovascular system and in the kidney. j. auton. pharmacol. suppl. 1990b;
10: s11–18.
6. amenta f, ricci a, de rossi m. localization of dopamine receptors at
the periphery. in: mannelli m (ed.). the peripheral dopaminergic
system: its role in cardiovascular homeostasis. ares serono symposia,
rome. 1998; 21–41.
7. goldberg li, kohli jd. peripheral pre- and post-synaptic dopamine
receptors: are they different from dopamine receptors in the
central nervous system? commun. psychopharmacol. 1979; 3:
447–51.
8. sibley dr, monsma jr fj. molecular biology of dopamine receptors.
trends pharmacol. sci. 1992; 13: 61–9.
9. panni l, porcella a, gessa g. the role of stress in the pathophysiology
of the dopaminergic system. mo. psychiatry 2000; 14–21.
10. cavero i, thiry c, pratz j, lawson k. characterization of vascular
effects of dopamine receptor agonists in experimental animals. clin. exp.
hypertens. 1987; 9: 931–52.
11. goldberg li, kohli jd. peripheral dopamine receptors: a classification
based on potency series and specific antagonism. trends pharmacol.
sci. 1983; 2: 64–6.
12. ozono r, o’connell dp, vaughan c et al. expression of the
subtype 1a dopamine receptor in the rat heart. hypertension 1996; 27:
693–703.

418

c cavallotti et al.

13. tan lb, littler wa, murray rg. comparison of the hemodynamic
effects of dopexamine and dobutamine in patients with severe congestive heart failure. j. cardiol. 1991; 30: 203–8.
14. rhodin jag. the ultrastructure of mammalian arterioles and precapillary sphincters. j. ultrastruc. res. 1967; 18: 181–223.
15. wamsley jk, palacios jm. apposition techniques of autoradiography
for microscopic receptor localization. in: barker jl, mckelvy jf (eds).
current methods in cellular neurobiology. john wiley and sons, new
york. 1983; 241–68.
16. cheng yc, prussoff wh. relationship between inhibition constant
and the concentration of inhibitor which causes 50% of inhibition
of an enzymatic reaction. biochem. pharmacol. 1973; 22: 3099–108.
17. lowry oh, rosebrough nj, farr al, randall j. protein measurement
with the folin phenol reagent. j. biol. chem. 1951; 193: 265–75.
18. qayyum ma, fatani ja. use of glyoxilic acid in the demonstration of
autonomic nerve profiles. experientia 1985; 41: 1389–90.
19. anonymous. quantimet 500 leica manual. microsystems imaging
solutions ltd, cambridge, uk. 1997.
20. serio a. appunti dalle lezioni di statistica sanitaria. kappa, rome.
1986.
21. castino m, roletto e. statistica applicata. piccin, padova. 1992.

22. gabella g. structure of the autonomic nervous system. chapman &
hill, london. 1976.
23. alexander sph, peters ja in assocation with iuphar. trends in
pharmacological sciences 1998 receptor and ion channel
nomenclature supplement. elsevier, cambridge. 1998.
24. pani l, fratta w. dopamina e depressione. facts news views 2001; 2:
1–5.
25. lokhandwala mf, hegde ss. cardiovascular pharmacology of
dopamine receptor agonists. in: amenta f (ed.). peripheral dopamine
pathophysiology. crc press, boca raton. 1990; 63–77.
26. lachowicz je, sibley dr. molecular characteristics of mammalian
dopamine receptors. pharmacol. toxicol. 1997; 81: 105–13.
27. hussain t, lokhandwala mf. renal dopamine receptor function in
hypertension. hypertension 1998; 32: 187–97.
28. sibley dr, ventura al, jiang d, mak c. regulation of the d1 dopamine
receptor through camp-mediated pathways. adv. pharmacol. 1998; 42:
447–50.
29. umaki i, kobayashi y, shimoura k, hattori k, note s. evidence for
elevated levels of dopamine in the rabbit pulmonary and carotid artery.
j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 1987; 10: 107–12.

