clinical & experimental metastasis 19: 551–559, 2002.
© 2002 kluwer academic publishers. printed in the netherlands.

551

lovastatin alters cytoskeleton organization and inhibits experimental metastasis
of mammary carcinoma cells
hernán g. farina, débora r. bublik, daniel f. alonso & daniel e. gomez
laboratory of molecular oncology, quilmes national university, bernal, buenos aires, argentina
received 14 november 2001; accepted in revised form 22 may 2002

key words: breast cancer, cholesterol, cytoskeleton, lovastatin, metastasis, rho a

abstract
lovastatin is a competitive inhibitor of 3-hydroxy 3-methylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx  reductase, the key regulatory enzyme of
cholesterol biosynthesis. this enzyme catalyzes the formation of mevalonate, which is also the precursor of isoprenoid
moieties, such as  xxxd2085xxx  and geraniol, that are incorporated into several molecules essential for tumor cell signaling.
here, we describe that pretreatment with a non-cytotoxic concentration of lovastatin (10 µm) dramatically inhibited the
metastatic ability of f3ii mammary carcinoma cells in syngeneic balb/c mice. similarly, daily i.p. treatment of animals
with a well-tolerated dose of lovastatin (10 mg/kg/day) significantly reduced the number of experimental lung metastases.
in vitro, incubation of f3ii monolayers in the presence of lovastatin caused a rounded-cell morphology. immunofluorescence analysis revealed a lack of cortical actin organization, micrutubule disruption and inhibition of integrin-mediated
focal contacts in lovastatin-treated cells. exposure of f3ii cells to lovastatin significantly inhibited tumor cell adhesion
and migration, and coincubation with the cholesterol precursor mevalonate prevented these effects. lovastatin reduced
membrane localization of rho protein, a signaling molecule involved in the regulation of actin-based cell motility that
needs geranylation for membrane association and activation. in addition, lovastatin induced a dose-dependent inhibition in
the secretion of urokinase, a key proteolytic enzyme during tumor invasion and metastasis, and a significant increase of
 xxxg1766xxx , a marker of good prognosis in mammary cancer. these data suggest that antimetastatic
properties of lovastatin are strongly associated with alterations in cytoskeleton organization and the consequent modulation
of adhesion, motility and proteolysis.

introduction
an important feature of malignant transformation is loss
of the cholesterol feedback inhibition mechanism that regulates cholesterol synthesis. cancer cells seem to require an
increase in the concentrations of cholesterol and its precursors. therefore, a reasonable assumption is that prevention
of tumor cell growth can be achieved by restricting either
cholesterol availability or cholesterol synthesis [1]. in fact,
in vivo and cell culture experiments have shown that lowering the plasma cholesterol concentration or intervening
in the mevalonate pathway with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
 xxxd1739xxx  (hmg-coa) reductase inhibitors can decrease
tumor growth.
lovastatin is a fungal antibiotic used in the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia that competitively inhibits hmg-coa
reductase, the key regulatory enzyme of de novo cholesterol biosynthesis. this enzyme catalyzes the conversion
of hmg-coa into mevalonic acid [2]. mevalonate is a
precursor of isoprenoid moieties that are incorporated into
correspondence to: dr hernán g. farina, laboratorio de oncologı́a molecular, departamento de ciencia y tecnologı́a, universidad nacional de
quilmes, r. sáenz peña 180, bernal b1876bxd buenos aires, argentina.
fax: +54-11-4365-7132; e-mail: hgfarina@unq.edu.ar

more than a dozen classes of end-products, including sterols,
ubiquinone, dolichol,  xxxd1416xxx , and intracellular messengers such as steroid hormones. therefore, when
mevalonate levels decrease in response to lovastatin, the
metabolic intermediaries that are downstream of this molecule are also affected. among other actions, lovastatin can
alter protein glycosilation via inhibition of dolichol production and block isoprenylation of key signal transduction
proteins (e.g., farnesylation of ras and geranylation of rho),
thus affecting their subcellular localization and function as
signal transducers [3]. in this regard, treatment of cultured
cells with lovastatin impacts cell cycle progression arresting
the cells in g1 phase [4].
breast cancer mortality is strongly related to the capacity
of tumor cells to invade and metastasize. tumor cell invasion
and metastasis involve adherence to the basement membrane, secretion of proteolytic enzymes, and cell migration
into blood vessels or lymphatic tissue, followed by extravasation at distant sites [5]. the extracellular proteolytic
cascade includes mainly the serine proteases plasminogen
activators and plasmin together with matrix metalloproteinases. these enzymes facilitate the metastatic cascade
[6].

552
plasminogen activators are produced by different cell
types and seem to be involved in different functions. there
are two forms of plasminogen activators, the urokinase-type
(upa) and the tissue-type (tpa). upa is a key enzyme in
the breakdown of extracellular matrix components during
both normal and pathological tissue remodeling, while tpa is
mainly involved in intravascular fibrinolysis. up-regulation
of upa or its membrane receptor may lead to enhanced
pericellular proteolysis, changes in signal transduction and
increased migratory behavior, which may result in the acquisition of the invasive phenotype by tumor cells [7]. on the
contrary, tpa is an estrogen-inducible protease considered a
marker of good prognosis in human breast cancer, reflecting
an intact  xxxg730xxx  system in tumor cells [8–10].
many works have shown that lovastatin inhibits the development of solid tumors in animal models of melanoma,
hepatocellular, pancreatic, fibrosarcoma, lung, and central
nervous system tumors [11–16]. previously, we reported
that continued administration of low doses of lovastatin
(1–10 mg/kg/day) prolonged tumor latency and reduced
primary tumor formation in mice inoculated in the subcutis with highly aggressive mammary carcinoma cells [17].
although lovastatin did not significantly decrease tumor
growth rate when administration was started after subcutaneous tumor formation, treatment retarded the progression
of the metastatic disease [17]. in this regard, limited information is available concerning direct effects of lovastatin on
the ability of mammary carcinoma cells to colonize lungs.
in the present work, we evaluated in vivo the capacity of lovastatin to prevent metastatic lung colonization in
syngeneic balb/c mice endovenously inoculated with f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells. we have also investigated the in
vitro effects of non-cytotoxic concentrations of lovastatin on
cytoskeleton organization, tumor cell adhesion, migration
and proteolysis. lovastatin-treated mammary tumor cells
showed a dramatic impairment in their metastatic ability
and daily treatment of animals also reduced experimental
lung metastasis. the in vitro effects of lovastatin on f3ii
cells were associated with disruption of cytoskeletal components and inhibition of integrin-mediated focal contacts. the
compound inhibited tumor cell attachment and motility, and
modified plasminogen activator secretion. in addition, lovastatin clearly reduced membrane localization of rho proteins
in f3ii cells.

h.g. farina et al.
new york) at a final concentration of 0.5% dmso, a level
which had no effect on tumor cells. isopentenyl, farnesyl and
 xxxd2194xxx  were dissolved in the original solvent
methanol/ammonium hydroxide (70:30).
tumor cells and culture conditions
the sarcomatoid mammary carcinoma cell line f3ii is
a highly invasive and metastatic variant established from
a clone of a spontaneous, hormone-independent balb/c
mouse mammary tumor [18]. stock f3ii cells were maintained in mem supplemented with heat-inactivated 5% fetal
bovine serum (fbs), 2 mm glutamine and 80 µg/ml gentamicin in monolayer culture. for harvesting, cells were
trypsinized using standard procedures and incubated in
serum-free mem for 1 h at 37 ◦ c for recovery. quantification of cell number was made by hemacytometer counting.
in all cases, viability was over 90%, as assayed by trypan
blue exclusion test.
experimental lung metastasis assay

materials and methods

specific patogen-free female balb/c inbred mice from
unlp (buenos aires, argentina), with an age of 8–10
weeks and an average weight of 20 g, were used. they were
housed in plastic cages under standard conditions and had
access to rodent chow and water ad libitum. on the designated day 0 of the experiment, f3ii mammary carcinoma
cells were injected into the lateral tail vein of unanesthetized
mice at a concentration of 2 × 105 viable cells/0.3 ml
mem/mouse. at day 21, animals were sacrificed by cervical
dislocation and necropsied. to investigate the presence of
lung metastasis, lungs were removed, fixed in bouin’s solution and the number of surface lung nodules was determined
under a dissecting microscope.
lovastatin dose was selected based upon previous preclinical and clinical studies [19]. to study the effect of
lovastatin on metastatic lung colonization, mice were injected i.p. at daily doses of 10 mg/kg body weight from
days −7 to 4. in another experiment, to study the effect
of the compound on formation and growth of lung nodules,
lovastatin was administered from day −7 until the end of
the experiment. alternatively, to evaluate direct effects of
lovastatin on the metastatic capacity of f3ii cells, monolayers were pretreated in vitro for 24 h at a non-cytotoxic
concentration. tumor cells were then washed, harvested,
and inoculated into the lateral tail vein as indicated above.

compounds

lovastatin in vitro treatment

lovastatin was a kind gift from merck (buenos aires,
argentina). mevalonic acid, lactone,  xxxd2397xxx ,  xxxd2086xxx ,  xxxd2194xxx , and
estradiol-17beta were purchased from sigma (st. louis, missouri). for in vivo studies, lovastatin was sonicated into
suspension in 0.9% saline prior to injection. for cell culture experiments, compounds were dissolved in dimethyl
sulfoxide (dmso) and then diluted into minimal essential
medium 41500 (mem) from gibco brl (grand island,

previous experiments indicated that the lovastatin concentration producing 50% inhibition after a 7-day exposure of f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells was about 5 µm and concentrations less than 1 µm had no growth inhibitory effects on
rapidly growing f3ii cells. the compound had no cytotoxic
effects on f3ii cells when assayed for 24 h on semiconfluent,
slowly growing monolayers at a concentration of 10 µm or
less. similarly, lovastatin had no effect on tumor cell survival when f3ii colonies were treated for 24 h at 5–10 µm

lovastatin alters cytoskeleton organization and inhibits experimental metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells

553

figure 1. effect of lovastatin on f3ii mammary carcinoma cell morphology. monolayers were cultured for 24 h with lovastatin and photographed in a
phase contrast microscope at ×100 magnification. (a) control. (b) lovastatin 10 µm.

followed by 6 days without the compound [17]. therefore,
this range of concentrations was employed in vitro to achieve
maximum levels of drug action consistent with an absence of
cytotoxicity.
tumor cell morphology
to examine the effects of lovastatin on cell morphology,
f3ii monolayers were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h in
the presence of the compound and photographed in a phase
contrast microscope (olympus, tokyo, japan). in some
experiments, mevalonate, isopenteniol,  xxxd2085xxx  or geraniol were also included to investigate the effects of these
cholesterol precursors on lovastatin-treated tumor cells.
adhesion assay
semiconfluent f3ii monolayers were cultured for 24 h in
the presence or absence of lovastatin. control and pretreated tumor cell suspensions were prepared from these
monolayers and seeded at 5–10 × 105 cells/cm2 in mem
plus 5% fbs on wells precoated or not with the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin (2.5 µg/cm2) [20]. after
30–60 min at 37 ◦ c, wells were washed with pbs and adherent cells were counted in 5 different areas on each well
at ×100 magnification using a 0.36 mm2 reticule. complementary, to document effects of lovastatin on cell adhesion
and spreading, representative wells were photographed in a
phase contrast microscope 1–4 h after seeding.
migration assay
tumor cell migration was measured by an in vitro wound
assay [21]. confluent f3ii monolayers were wounded by
scratching 0.5-mm lines with a plastic tip. after washing
with pbs, tumor cells were incubated for 15 h in mem containing 5% fbs, with or without lovastatin, to allow the cells
to migrate into the wound. monolayers were photographed
in a phase contrast microscope and then fixed, stained with
 xxxd2610xxx , and the number of cells that had advanced
into the cell-free space was counted.

immunofluorescence analysis
tumor cells grown on glass coverslips were washed three
times with phosphate-buffered saline (pbs), fixed with 3%
paraformaldehyde in pbs for 15 min, and permeabilized
with 0.1% triton x-100/pbs for 1 min at room temperature.
cells were incubated with nh4 cl 50 mm for 5 min, washed
with pbs and incubated in a solution of 3% bovine serum
albumin (bsa) in pbs for 15 min. cells were then exposed
to the primary anti-alpha and -beta tubulin mouse monoclonal
antibodies dm1a-dm1b diluted 1:70 in 0.1% bsa/pbs
(neomarkers, california) for 1 h at 37 ◦ c. after three washes
in pbs, a secondary fluorescein isothiocyanate (fitc)conjugated goat anti-mouse igg (sigma) diluted 1:70 in
0.1% bsa/pbs was applied. to visualize actin filaments,
cells were stained with fitc-labeled phalloidin (sigma).
coverslips were mounted in pbs/glycerol (4:1), examined in
a microscope equipped for epifluorescense (nikon, tokyo,
japan) and microphotographs were taken with a digital
camera. a similar protocol was used to examine integrinmediated focal adhesion in f3ii cells. cells were exposed
to anti- xxxg836xxx  integrin mouse monoclonal antibodies diluted
1:100 (transduction laboratories, san jose, california) and
then stained using a secondary rhodamine-conjugated goat
anti-mouse igg (sigma) diluted 1:200.
analysis of  xxxg836xxx  integrin and rhoa protein distribution
semiconfluent f3ii monolayers treated or not with lovastatin during 24 h were harvested with a cell scraper in a
pbs solution containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors
(sigma). cell suspensions were disrupted by sonication and
centrifuged at 600 g for 10 min to remove cellular debris.
samples were centrifuged  xxxd1891xxx ,000 g for 10 min at 4 ◦ c
to discard organelles and nucleus, and the supernatants were
then centrifuged at 145,000 g for 1 h at 4 ◦ c to sort out
membrane and cytosolic fractions. proteins contained in the
fractions were separated by electrophoresis and transferred
to an activated pvdf membrane (amersham pharmacia
biotech, buckinghamshire, uk) by electrotransfer. membrane was blocked in 5% casein for 1 h, washed in tbs,
and incubated overnight at 4 ◦ c with mouse anti- xxxg836xxx  integrin monoclonal antibodies diluted 1:2500 (transduction

554

h.g. farina et al.

figure 2. effect of lovastatin on adhesion, spreading and migration of f3ii mammary carcinoma cells. pretreated cells were seeded on uncoated plastic
surfaces and 60 min later adherent cells were photographed in a phase contrast microscope at ×400 magnification (a, b). each inset shows tumor cell
spreading 4 h after seeding under the same experimental conditions. tumor cell monolayers were wounded, incubated for 15 h with or without lovastatin
to allow the cells to migrate into the wound and then photographed at ×100 magnification (c, d). (a, c) control. (b, d) lovastatin 10 µm.

laboratories) or anti-rho a monoclonal antibodies diluted
1:200 (santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz, california).
after intensive washing with tbs containing 0.5% tween
20, a secondary biotinylated goat anti-mouse igg link to
peroxidase was applied at a dilution of 1:500. immunoreactive protein bands were detected using the enhanced
chemoluminiscense method (ecl kit, amersham pharmacia
biotech).
preparation of conditioned media
secreted tumor-derived proteases were investigated in conditioned media, as previously described [22]. semiconfluent
f3ii monolayers were extensively washed in pbs to eliminate serum traces and incubated in serum-free mem for 24 h
with the appropriate concentrations of lovastatin. complementary, conditioned media were obtained after incubation
with estradiol (1 nm-1 µm), in the presence and absence of
lovastatin. samples were individually harvested and stored
at −20 ◦ c until assayed.

zymographic analysis
plasminogen activator forms contained in f3ii conditioned
media were determined in sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, using 9% separating and 4% stacking gels. after
electrophoresis, gels were washed with 2% triton x-100 and
incubated at 37 ◦ c for 24 h at the surface of an agarose
underlay containing 30 mg/ml non-fat dry milk as casein
source and 4 µg/ml purified plasminogen (chromogenix,
mölndal, sweden). underlays were dissected and stained
with coomasie blue, and proteases were detected by negative staining. plasminogen-free underlays were used to test
plasminogen-independent protease activity [23].
radial caseinolytic assay
a radial caseinolytic assay using plasminogen-rich caseinagarose plates was employed to quantify upa and tpa
activities contained in conditioned media, as described in
detail [22, 24]. to assess tpa-dependent activity, amiloride
was added to the substrate at a concentration of 0.2 mm.
this drug selectively blocks upa activity, having no inhibitory activity against tpa or plasmin [25]. the areas of
lytic zones were measured and specific caseinolytic activi-

lovastatin alters cytoskeleton organization and inhibits experimental metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells

555

figure 3. immunofluorescence images of cytoskeleton in f3ii mammary carcinoma cells. filamentous actin or microtubules were detected with
fitc-phalloidin conjugate (a, b) or anti-tubulin antibodies and a secondary antibody conjugated with fitc (c, d), respectively. (a, c) control cells. (b,
d) cells treated with 10 µm lovastatin for 24 h (×400).

ties of tpa or upa were referenced to tpa (0.15 to 40 iu/ml)
or urokinase (0.2 to 50 iu/ml) standard curves, respectively. data were expressed as the percentage of the total
plasminogen-dependent activity.

results
effects of lovastatin on hematogenous metastasis
we investigated the ability of lovastatin to inhibit the formation of lung metastasis after endovenous inoculation of
f3ii cells in syngeneic female balb/c mice. the results are
presented in table 1. in vitro pretreatment for 24 h with a
non-cytotoxic concentration of lovastatin (10 µm) exerted
a dramatic impairment in the metastatic ability of f3ii cells.
daily treatment of mice with lovastatin (10 mg/kg/day) from
7 days before to 4 days after endovenous inoculation of f3ii
cells significantly reduced by about 40% the formation of
metastatic lung colonies. daily administration of lovastatin
until the end of the experiment inhibited lung metastasis to
the same extent. these results indicate the lack of significant
effects of the compound on the growth of metastatic foci.
as expected, lovastatin was well tolerated in adult female
balb/c mice. in all cases, treatment caused no significant
changes in animal weight when compared to the control
group. histological examination of liver, kidney and bone
marrow in mice treated with lovastatin did not reveal any
morphological change with respect to control mice.

effects of lovastatin on tumor cell morphology, adhesion
and motility
exposure of f3ii monolayers to non-cytotoxic concentrations of lovastatin (5–10 µm) for 24 h resulted in cell
retraction from the substratum and cell rounding (figure 1).
this rounded-cell morphology was completely prevented
by the addition of the cholesterol precursor mevalonate at
doses of 50–200 µm, but not by equivalent concentrations of
isopenteniol or  xxxd2085xxx , confirming previous observations
[17]. interestingly, geraniol partially prevented lovastatin
effects on cell morphology (data not shown).
lovastatin pretreatment dramatically inhibited the adhesion of f3ii cells, either to wells coated with fibronectin or
uncoated plastic surfaces, and retarded cell spreading (figures 2a, b). exposure of monolayers to the compound also
significantly reduced tumor cell migration in the wound assay (figures 2c, d). as expected, coincubation with mevalonate prevented lovastatin effects on tumor cell attachment
and motility (table 2).
effects of lovastatin on cytoskeleton
to investigate the mechanisms associated with lovastatininduced morphological change, the effects of lovastatin
on the cytoskeleton architecture of f3ii cells were analyzed. staining of control f3ii cells with fitc-labeled phalloidin showed an actin-rich subplasmalemmal region (cortical actin) that was prominent at the edges of cell clusters

556

h.g. farina et al.
table 1. effects of lovastatin on metastatic lung colonization of f3ii mammary carcinoma cells.
treatment

lung metastasisa
incidence of positive animals (%)
nodules per animal (mean ± sem)

control
lovastatin, in vitro pretreatmentb
lovastatin, days −7 to 4c
lovastatin, days −7 to 21d

100
67
100
100

37 ± 6
2 ± 1∗∗
21 ± 7∗
22 ± 5∗

a on day 0, f3ii cells were inoculated in the lateral tail vein of syngeneic mice. after 21 days, animals were sacrificed

and the number of surface lung nodules was determined. results from two independent experiments are presented
together. treatment groups consist of at least eight animals.
b f3ii monolayers were in vitro pretreated with lovastatin (10 µm) for 24 h and tumor cells were then inoculated.
c lovastatin was injected i.p. (10 mg/kg/day) from days −7 to 4.
d lovastatin was injected i.p. (10 mg/kg/day) from days −7 to 21.
∗∗ p < 0.01 and ∗ p = 0.05 versus control, anova contrasted with dunnett multiple comparisons test.
table 2. effects of lovastatin and coincubation with mevalonate on attachment and motility of
f3ii mammary carcinoma cells.
treatment

tumor cell adhesiona
(cells/mm2 )

tumor cell migrationa
(cells/mm2 )

control
lovastatin 10 µm
lovastatin 10 µm + mevalonate 200 µm

221 ± 19
39 ± 4∗∗∗
232 ± 43

422 ± 14
264 ± 17∗∗∗
392 ± 31

a adhesion was quantified on uncoated plastic surfaces and migration was examined using the

wound assay on confluent monolayers. each value represents mean ± sd of at least nine determinations from three separate experiments. similar results were obtained for tumor cell adhesion
using wells coated with fibronectin.
∗∗∗ p < 0.001 versus the respective control, anova test.

(figure 3a). similarly, staining with anti-tubulin antibodies
showed a well-developed array of microtubules (figure 3c).
on the contrary, tumor cells exposed to non-cytotoxic concentrations of lovastatin during 24 h showed fragmentation
of the cortical actin network (figure 3b) and alterations of
the microtubule meshwork, that appeared disorganized and
abnormally distributed (figure 3d).
inhibition of integrin-mediated focal adhesion by lovastatin
in order to analyze the effect of lovastatin on focal adhesions
of f3ii cells, we have examined  xxxg836xxx  integrin localization by
immunofluorescence. control f3ii cells clearly developed
focal adhesion contacts. on the contrary, lovastatin-treated
cells displayed a spherical shape with a weak and irregular
integrin labeling restricted to the cell periphery (figure 4).
western blot analysis corroborated the reduction of  xxxg836xxx 
integrin expression in membrane fractions from lovastatintreated f3ii cells. as expected, integrins were not detected
in cytosolic fractions (see also figure 4).
reduction of membrane localization of rho proteins by
lovastatin

figure 4. immunofluorescence images of focal contacts and integrin expression in f3ii mammary carcinoma cells. localization of  xxxg836xxx  integrin
was determined with anti- xxxg836xxx  integrin antibodies and a secondary antibody
conjugated with rhodamine. (a) control cells. (b) cells treated with 10 µm
lovastatin for 24 h (×1000). a western immunoblotting of fractions from
control (c) and lovastatin-treated (lst) tumor cells using the enhanced
chemoluminiscense method is shown below.

considering that rho gtpases are involved in actin cytoskeleton organization and they need isoprenylation (geranylation) for membrane association and activation, we
tested the distribution of rho a protein between cytosol
and plasma membrane in f3ii cells after in vitro treatment with lovastatin. semiconfluent, slowly-growing tumor

cell monolayers were incubated during 24 h in the presence of non-cytotoxic concentrations of lovastatin (10 µm)
and membrane and cytosolic fractions were then obtained.
figure 5 shows that treatment clearly reduced membrane localization of rho protein. conversely, an increase of rho

lovastatin alters cytoskeleton organization and inhibits experimental metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells

figure 5. effect of lovastatin on the distribution of rho a protein between
cytosol and plasma membrane in f3ii cells. tumor cell monolayers were
cultured in the presence or absence of a non-cytotoxic concentration of
lovastatin, and membrane and cytosolic fractions were obtained. c, control
cells. lst, cells treated with lovastatin (10 µm) for 24 h.

557

figure 7. effects of lovastatin on plasminogen activators secreted by f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells. quantification of tpa () and upa () was
performed by a radial caseinolytic assay and expressed as % of total plasminogen-dependent activity. control f3ii monolayers produced a total
activity of 20–40 iu/106 cells/24 h. results are expressed as means ± sem
(n = 4). ∗∗∗ p < 0.001 and ∗∗ p < 0.01 vs. the respective control, anova
test.

important to note that lovastatin did not reduce the total
plasminogen activator activity produced by f3ii cells.

discussion
figure 6. zymographic analysis of plasminogen activators secreted by f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells. conditioned media were electrophoresed and
gels incubated at the surface of plasminogen-rich casein agarose underlays,
as described in ‘materials and methods’. lane 1, mouse urine as a source of
murine upa; lane 2, conditioned medium from a control monolayer; lane 3,
from a monolayer treated with 10 µm lovastatin; lane 4, from a monolayer
treated with 10 nm estradiol; lane 5, from a monolayer treated with 10 µm
lovastatin plus 10 nm estradiol. molecular weights were determined using
prestained standards (bio-rad, hercules, california).

protein in the cytosol of f3ii cells was also observed, indicating a restricted availability of geranyl phyrofosfate after
inhibition of  xxxg1060xxx  by lovastatin.
effects of lovastatin on upa and tpa production
zymographic analysis of plasminogen activators contained
in f3ii conditioned media revealed a main band of 45 kda
and a very faint band of 67 kda. these forms were identified
as upa and tpa, respectively, by preincubation with anticatalytic antibodies and western blot, as reported previously
[26]. exposure of f3ii cells to lovastatin induced an enhancement in the tpa band. on the contrary, estradiol neither
modified the secretion of plasminogen activators nor lovastatin effect on tpa (figure 6). similar results (not shown) were
obtained using the antiestrogen tamoxifen. although tpa is
an estrogen-inducible proteolytic enzyme, the present data
suggest that the enhancement of tpa production induced by
lovastatin is independent of steroid hormone modulation in
f3ii mammary carcinoma cells.
as quantified by the radial caseinolytic assay, lovastatin significantly increased tpa and decreased upa secreted
by f3ii cells in a dose-dependent fashion (figure 7). it is

the mevalonate metabolic pathway is necessary for the
synthesis of cholesterol and isoprenoid moieties, such as  xxxd2085xxx  and geraniol, that are incorporated into several molecules essential for tumor cell signaling. lovastatin inhibits
the major regulatory enzyme of this biosynthetic pathway.
in the present work, we showed that non-cytotoxic concentrations of lovastatin (5–10 µm) induced a rounded-cell
morphology in cultures of f3ii mouse mammary carcinoma
cells. this effect was completely prevented by mevalonate
but not by isopenteniol or  xxxd2085xxx . however, lovastatin
effect on tumor cell morphology was partially prevented
by geraniol, another intermediary metabolite that is downstream of mevalonate formation. lovastatin effects on cell
morphology were associated with a disruption of cellular
actin filaments, alterations in the microtubule network and
inhibition of integrin-mediated focal contacts.
as reported by bifulco and coworkers [27], cortical actin
seems to control the shape of epithelial cells, since morphologic changes coincided with fragmentation of cortical actin
in lovastatin-treated cells. likewise, a reversible depolymerization of actin filaments was seen in cells treated with
 xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors [28, 29]. koch et al. [30]
confirmed that after lovastatin treatment filamentous actin
was reduced to about 60% of the initial cellular content. as
a consequence of disruption of cortical actin, microtubules
became ‘unhooked’.
post-translational isoprenylation of cytoskeletal and
cytoskeleton-associated proteins is critical for cytoskeleton
organization and stability. our previous data suggested that
changes in the prenylation status of ras protein are not
likely to be involved in the effects of lovastatin on f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells [17]. among prenylated proteins,
the rho family may constitute another possible mediator of

558
lovastatin effects on tumor cells, being implicated in cell
morphology [31], cell motility [32] and cytokinesis [33].
in this regard, lovastatin clearly inhibited membrane localization of rho proteins, suggesting that the impairment of
isoprenylated rho function is most likely responsible for
lovastatin-induced cytoskeletal changes in f3ii cells. rho
proteins participate in the organization of actin cytoskeleton,
maintaining cell shape and regulating the formation of membrane ruffles, lamellipodia and filopodia [30]. besides, it has
been reported that  xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors cause inhibition of geranylgeranylated rho protein and disruption of
the actin filaments [34, 35].
lovastatin inhibited adhesion and migration of f3ii
mammary carcinoma cells, and these effects were completely prevented by addition of mevalonic acid to the
culture medium. inhibition of tumor cell attachment and
motility, as well as changes in tumor cell shape, could be
subsequent to modifications in cytoskeleton organization.
focal adhesions are characterized by a multiplicity of proteins that mediate interactions of extracellular matrix with
cytoskeleton. in this regard,  xxxg836xxx  integrins have been found on
tumor cell surfaces, where they participate in various aspects
of cell attachment, invasion and metastasis [36]. stable focal
adhesions are often associated with the ends of microtubules,
and it has been suggested that microtubules increase stability of focal adhesions and promote nucleation of actin stress
fibers [27].
taking into account the effect of microtubules and
microtubule-associated proteins on protein secretion, it is
likely that drugs that affect cytoskeleton dynamics can alter not only adhesion and migration but also the proteolytic
digestion of extracellular matrix by aggressive tumor cells.
accordingly, we have reported that plasminogen activator
secretion is tightly linked to microtubule organization and
dynamics in cultured f3ii mammary carcinoma cells [37].
our results showed that in vitro exposure of f3ii cells to
lovastatin significantly decreased upa and increased tpa secretion in a dose-dependent fashion. the upa-dependent
proteolytic activity is directly involved in the degradation
of basement membranes and extracellular matrix during
mammary tumor cell invasion and metastasis [38]. on the
contrary, tpa is an estrogen-inducible protease secreted by
mammary epithelial cells, considered a marker of good prognosis in mammary cancer [9]. the enhancement of tpa
production induced by lovastatin, however, seems to be independent of steroid hormone modulation in f3ii mammary
carcinoma cells.
it is known that cytoskeleton reorganization induces
plasminogen activator gene expression [39, 40]. similarly,
disruption of the cytoskeleton-extracellular matrix linkage
promotes the accumulation of plasminogen activators in
teratocarcinoma cells [41]. other authors reported that lovastatin can induce an increase in tpa secreted by cultured
epithelial cells [34, 35]. they suggested that lovastatin can
modify the fibrinolytic potential of both renal tubules and
endothelia, via inactivation of rho protein and disruption of
the cytoskeleton.

h.g. farina et al.
hematogenous dissemination depends on the ability of
metastatic tumor cells to arrest in the microcirculation,
attach to endothelial cells, digest the subendothelial basement membrane by proteolytic enzymes and migrate through
the vessel wall [5]. since lovastatin blocks these cellular
processes, it is conceivable that the compound can affect
the formation of experimental lung metastases. f3ii mammary carcinoma cells exposed in vitro to a non-cytotoxic
concentration of lovastatin (10 µm) showed a dramatic
impairment in their metastatic ability when inoculated in
syngeneic mice. similarly, an in vivo daily treatment with
a well-tolerated dose of lovastatin (10 mg/kg/day) initiated
before tumor cell inoculation inhibited by about 40% the
formation of metastatic nodules.
we have previously reported that prolonged administration of low doses of lovastatin (1–10 mg/kg/day) retarded
the progression of the metastatic disease in mice bearing
f3ii subcutaneous mammary tumors [17]. in addition, the
antimetastatic properties of lovastatin were reported by jani
and coworkers [13] in an experimental model using b16-f10
melanoma cells in nude mice. lovastatin also reduced human pancreatic cancer cell invasion and metastasis [42], and
inhibited metastasis derived from rat fibrosarcoma and lymphoma cells [16, 43]. taking together, these data strongly
suggest a potential clinical application of a prolonged lovastatin treatment in breast cancer, as well as in other tumor
variants. although higher doses (25–45 mg/kg/day) were
tested in phase i clinical studies [19], preclinical data may
indicate that antitumor activity can be achieved using the
same low doses of lovastatin (1–2 mg/kg/day) that are routinely administered in patients with hypercholesterolemia.
furthermore, these low doses of lovastatin allow attainment
of an in vivo concentration of 10 µm [44], an adequate concentration to alter cytoskeleton, protease secretion, adhesion
and motility of tumor cells and thus reduce their metastatic
ability.
in summary, we concluded that cytoskeleton modification, involving rho a protein distribution, is the key event
exerted by lovastatin on f3ii mammary carcinoma cells.
as a consequence, the main steps of tumor cell invasion
are inhibited, therefore affecting the formation of metastatic
foci.

acknowledgements
we thank dr julio a. aguirre ghiso (mount sinai school
of medicine, new york) for constant support. h.g.f. is
a research fellow and d.e.g. and d.f.a. are members
of the national council for scientific and technical research (conicet, argentina). this work was supported by
quilmes national university and the national agency for
scientific and technological promotion (argentina).

lovastatin alters cytoskeleton organization and inhibits experimental metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells
references
1. kritz h, zielinsky c, sinzinger h. low cholesterol and cancer. j clin
oncol 1996; 14: 3043–8.
2. corsini a, maggi fm, catapano al. pharmacology of competitive
inhibitors of  xxxg1060xxx . pharmacol res 1995; 31(1): 9–27.
3. maltese wa. posttranslational modification of proteins by isoprenoids
in mammalian cells. faseb j 1990; 4(15): 3319–28.
4. rao s, porter dc, chen x et al. lovastatin-mediated g1 arrest
is through inhibition of the proteasome, independent of hydroxymethyl glutaryl-coa reductase. proc natl acad sci usa 1999; 96:
7797–802.
5. fidler ij. cancer metastasis. br med bull 1991; 47: 157–77.
6. mignatti p, rifkin db. biology and biochemistry of proteinases in
tumor invasion. physiol rev 1993; 73(1): 61–95.
7. aguirre ghiso ja, kovalski k, ossowski l. tumor dormancy induced
by downregulation of urokinase receptor in human carcinoma involves
integrin and mapk signaling. j cell biol 1999; 147: 89–104.
8. needham gk, nicholson s, angus b et al. relationship of
membrane-bound tissue type and urokinase type plasminogen activators in human breast cancers to estrogen and  xxxg681xxx 
receptors. cancer res 1988; 48(22): 6603–7.
9. duffy mj, o’grady p, devaney d et al. tissue-tpye plasminogen activator, a new prognostic marker in breast cancer. cancer res 1988;
48: 1348–9.
10. yamashita j, ogawa m, yamashita s et al. differential significance of
tissue-type and  xxxg1767xxx  in human breast
cancer. br j cancer 1993; 68: 524–9.
11. littman ml, taguchi t, mosbach eh. effect of cholesterol-free, fatfree diet and hypocholesteremic agents on growth of transplantable
animal tumors. cancer chemother rep 1966; 50: 25–45.
12. maltese wa, defendini r, green ra et al. supression of murine
neuroblastoma growth in vivo by  xxxd2510xxx , a competitive inhibitor
of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-conezyme a reductase. j clin invest
1995; 76: 1748–54.
13. jani jp, specht s, stemmler n et al. metastasis of b16f10 mouse
melanoma inhibited by lovastatin, an inhibitor of cholesterol biosynthesis. invasion metastasis 1993; 13(6): 314–24.
14. sumi s, beauchamp rd, townsend cm et al. lovastatin inhibits
pancreatic cancer growth regardless of ras mutation. pancreas 1994;
9(5): 657–61.
15. hawk ma, cesen kt, siglin jc et al. inhibition of lung growth in
vitro and mouse lung tumor formation by lovastatin. cancer lett 1996;
109: 217–22.
16. matar p, rozados vr, roggero ea et al. lovastatin inhibits tumor
growth and metastasis development of a rat fibrosarcoma. cancer
biother radiopharm 1998; 13: 387–93.
17. alonso df, farina hg, skilton g et al. reduction of mouse mammary
tumor formation and metastasis by lovastatin, an inhibitor of mevalonate pathway of cholesterol synthesis. breast cancer res treat 1998;
50: 83–93.
18. alonso df, farias ef, urtreger a et al. characterization of f3ii, a
sarcomatoid mammary carcinoma cell line originated from a clonal
subpopulation of a mause adenocarcinoma. j surg oncol 1996; 62:
288–97.
19. thibault a, samid d, tompkins ac et al. phase i study of lovastatin,
an inhibitor of the mevalonate pathway, in patients with cancer. clin
cancer res 1996; 2: 483–91.
20. de lorenzo ms, lorenzano menna p, alonso df et al. in vitro activity
of a solanum tuberosum extract against mammary carcinoma cells.
planta med 2001; 67: 164–6.
21. goodman sl, vollmers hp, birchmeir w. control of the cell locomotion: perturbation with an antibody directed against specific
glycoproteins. cell 1985; 41: 1029–38.
22. alonso df, farias ef, ladeda v et al. effects of synthetic urokinase
inhibitors on local invasion and metastasis in a murine mammary
tumor model. breast cancer res treat 1996; 40: 209–23.
23. alonso df, farias ef, famulari al et al. excessive urokinase-type
plaminogen activator activity in the euglobulin fraction of patients
with alzheimer-type dementia. j  xxxd122xxx  sci 1996; 139: 83–8.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

559

saksela o. radial caseinolysis in agarose: a simple method for detection of plasminogen activator in the presence of inhibitory substances
and serum. anal biochem 1981; 111: 276–82.
vassalli jd, belin d. amiloride selectively inhibits the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator. febs lett 1987; 214: 187–91.
alonso df, skilton g, farina hg et al. modulation of growth and
urokinase secretion by vasopressin and closely related nonapeptides in
metastatic mouse mammary tumor cells. int j oncol 1997; 10: 375–9.
bifulco m, laezza c, aloj sm et al. mevalonate controls cytoskeleton
organization and cell morphology in thyroid epithelial cells. j cell
physiol 1993; 155: 340–8.
fenton rg, kung hf, longo dl et al. regulation of intracellular
actin polymerization by prenylated cellular proteins. j cell biol 1992;
117: 347–56.
ghosh pm, ghosh-choudhury n, moyer ml et al. role of rhoa
activation in the growth and morphology of a murine prostate tumor
cell line. oncogene 1999; 18: 4120–30.
koch g, benz c, schmidt g et al. role of rho protein in lovastatininduced breakdown of actin cytoskeleton. j pharmacol exp ther
1997; 283: 901–9.
chardin p, bocquet p, madaule p et al. the mammalian g protein
rhoc is adp-ribosylated by clostridium botulinum exoenzyme c3
and affects actin microfilaments in vero cells. embo j 1989; 8: 1087–
92.
takaishi k, kikkuchi a, kuroda s et al. involvement of rho p21 and
its inhibitory gdp/gtp exchange protein (rho gdi) in cell motility.
mol cell biol 1993; 13: 72–9.
kishi k, sasaki t, kuroda s et al. regulation of cytoplasmic division
of xenopus embryo by rho p21 and its inhibitory gdp/gtp exchange
protein (rho gdi). j cell biol 1993; 120: 1187–95.
essig m, vrtovsnik f, nguyen g et al. lovastatin modulates in vivo
and in vitro the plasminogen activator/plasmin system of rat proximal
tubular cells: role of geranylgeranylation and rho proteins. j am soc
nephrol 1998; 9(8): 1377–88.
essig m, nguyen g, prie d et al. 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx  reductase inhibitors increase fibrinolytic activity in rat aortic
endothelial cells. role of geranylgeranylation and rho proteins. circ
res 1998; 83: 683–90.
albelda sm. role of integrins and other cell adhesion molecules in
tumor progression and metastasis. lab invest 1993; 68: 4–18.
alonso df, farina hg, arregui c et al. modulation of urokinase-type
plasminogen activator and metalloproteinase activities in cultured
mouse mammary-carcinoma cells: enhancement by paclitaxel and
inhibition by  xxxd2745xxx . int j cancer 1999; 83: 242–6.
rabbani sa, xing rh. role of urokinase (upa) and its receptor
( xxxg1768xxx ) in invasion and metastasis of hormone-dependent malignancies. int j oncol 1998; 12: 911–20.
botteri fm, ballmer-hofer k, rajput b et al. disruption of cytoskeletal structures results in the induction of the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator gene expression. j biochem 1990; 265: 13327–
34.
irigoyen jp, besser d, nagamine y. cytoskeleton reorganization
induces the  xxxg1767xxx  gene via the
ras/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (erk) signaling pathway. j
biol chem 1997; 272: 1904–9.
snyder rw, lenburg me, seebaum at et al. disruption of the
cytoskeleton-extracellular matrix linkage promotes the accumulation
of plasminogen activators in f9 derived parietal endoderm. differentiation 1992; 50: 153–62.
kusama t, mukai m, iwasaki t et al. 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoenzyme a reductase inhibitors reduce human pancreatic cancer cell
invasion and metastasis. gastroenterology 2002; 122: 308–17.
matar p, rozados vr, binda mm et al. inhibitory effect of lovastatin
on spontaneous metastases derived from a rat lymphoma. clin exp
metastasis 1999; 17: 19–25.
macdonald js, gerson rj, kornbrust dj et al. preclinical evaluation
of lovastatin. am j cardiol 1988; 62: 16–27.

