systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
joy a. weydert, md*‡§; thomas m. ball, md, mph*‡; and melinda f. davis, phd*‡
abstract. objective. to conduct a systematic review of evaluated treatments for recurrent abdominal
pain (rap) in children.
methods. online bibliographic databases were
searched for the terms “recurrent abdominal pain,”
“functional abdominal pain,” “children,” or “alternative
therapies” in articles classified as randomized controlled
trials. the abstracts or full text of 57 relevant articles were
examined; 10 of these met inclusion criteria. inclusion
criteria required that the study involve children aged 5 to
18 years, subjects have a diagnosis of rap, and that
subjects were allocated randomly to treatment or control
groups. the methodology and findings of these articles
were evaluated critically, and data were extracted from
each article regarding study methods, specific interventions, outcomes measured, and results.
results. studies that evaluated  xxxd2082xxx , pizotifen,
cognitive-behavioral therapy, biofeedback, and peppermint oil enteric-coated capsules showed a decrease in
measured pain outcomes for those who received the interventions when compared with others in control
groups. the studies that evaluated dietary interventions
had conflicting results, in the case of fiber, or showed no
efficacy, in the case of lactose avoidance.
conclusions. evidence for efficacy of treatment of
rap in children was found for therapies that used  xxxd2082xxx , pizotifen, cognitive-behavioral therapy, biofeedback, and peppermint oil enteric-coated capsules. the
effects of dietary fiber were less conclusive, and the use
of a lactose-free diet showed no improvement. there
seemed to be greater improvement when therapy ( xxxd2082xxx , pizotifen, peppermint oil) was targeted to the
specific functional gastrointestinal disorder (dyspepsia,
abdominal migraine, irritable bowel syndrome). the behavioral interventions seemed to have a general positive
effect on children with nonspecific rap. many of these
therapies have not been used widely as standard treatment for children with rap. although the mechanism of
action for each effective therapy is not fully understood,
each is believed to be safe for use in rap. pediatrics
2003;111:e1–e11. url: http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/
content/full/111/1/e1; recurrent abdominal pain, treatment, children, alternative therapies, systematic review.

from the *department of pediatrics, ‡steele memorial children’s research
center, §program in integrative medicine, university of arizona health
sciences center, tucson, arizona.
this work was completed while dr weydert was a fellow in pediatric
integrative medicine. she now is director of integrative pain management,
children’s mercy hospital, kansas city, missouri.
received for publication jun 12, 2002; accepted sep 30, 2002.
reprint requests to (t.m.b.) department of pediatrics, university of arizona health sciences center, 1501 n campbell ave, box 245073, tucson,
az 85724-5073. e-mail: tball@u.arizona.edu
pediatrics (issn 0031 4005). copyright © 2003 by the american academy of pediatrics.

abbreviations. rap, recurrent abdominal pain; ibs, irritable
bowel syndrome; rct, randomized controlled trial; spc, standard
pediatric care; cbfi, cognitive-behavioral family intervention; bf,
biofeedback; cbi, cognitive-behavioral intervention.

r

ecurrent abdominal pain (rap) in children is a
common disorder that has been estimated repeatedly over the last 4 decades to affect 10%
to 20% of all school-aged children, with a slight
increase in females after 9 years of age.1 rap was
originally defined as a pain syndrome consisting of
at least 3 episodes of abdominal pain over a period of
not less than 3 months and severe enough to affect
activities.2 over time, it has been consistently found
that only 5% to 10% of children with rap have an
underlying organic process that contributes to their
pain. despite its seemingly benign nature, this disorder has been associated with increased school absenteeism, frequent doctor visits, family disruption,
and significant anxiety and depression.3
the current practice of many pediatricians in treating children with rap is that of support and empathy for the family with reassurance that no serious
disease is present; that children likely will outgrow
it; and that the child must learn to cope with it.4 – 6
with this approach, approximately 30% to 40% of
children do have resolution of their pain.7,8 however, the remainder continue to exhibit symptoms
and go on to be adults with abdominal pain, anxiety,
or other somatic disorders.9 pharmaceutical treatments are commonly used in an effort to manage
symptoms despite the lack of data supporting their
efficacy. in fact, a recent systematic review of pharmaceutical therapies for rap done by the cochrane
review10 found only 1 study methodologically
sound enough to warrant inclusion.11 the drug used
in this study, pizotifen, is available worldwide but is
not currently approved for use in the united states.
in an effort to improve our understanding of this
syndrome, a panel of experts on functional gastrointestinal disorders recently proposed classifying children with rap symptoms into 5 subtypes: functional
dyspepsia, irritable bowel syndrome (ibs), functional abdominal pain, abdominal migraines, and
aerophagia.12 it was hoped, as demonstrated in the
adult population, that it would provide a method for
standardizing the clinical definition of functional
gastrointestinal disorders, help various researchers
study the same disorders from different points of
view, and offer clinicians a positive approach for the
treatment of patients.
still there are questions as to the definitive pathophysiological alterations found in these affected chil-

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
pediatrics vol. 111 no. 1 january 2003
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e1

dren. current theories include autonomic nervous
system instability,13,14 visceral hyperalgesia,15,16 gut
dysmotility,17 stressful life events,18 or poor coping
skills,19 to name a few. it is known that both the gut
and the nervous system are derived from the same
tissues embryologically. at the gut level is the enteric
nervous system, which is made up of sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons. neuropeptides and neurotransmitters produced in the gastrointestinal tract regulate gastrointestinal motility,
blood flow, secretion, and absorption.20,21 the enteric
nervous system and central nervous system have
direct effects on each other. for example, stress is
known to aggravate the gastrointestinal tract by
stimulating the release of neuropeptides and neurotransmitters, triggering various gastrointestinal responses. this brain-gut connection seems to be a
mechanism that links the psychoemotional state with
gastrointestinal dysfunction.20 as we develop a better understanding of this brain-gut interaction in
functional gastrointestinal disorders, our emphasis
of treatment will need to move beyond the biomechanical toward a biopsychosocial model.15
reviews of various psychological interventions for
rap have been published in narrative form,19,22 but
to our knowledge, no systematic review of the conventional or alternative medical therapies has been
conducted. alternative therapies are those defined as
“healing philosophies (schools of thought), approaches and therapies that mainstream (conventional) medicine does not commonly use, accept,
study, understand, or make available.”23 we chose to
undertake the review of this literature to help summarize the research that has been done in this field,
to bring about guidelines to assist pediatricians in
their decision making regarding appropriate health
care for their patients, and, last, to list recommendations for additional research strategies in the functional gastrointestinal disorders in children.
methods
we conducted searches on medline database from 1966 –2001,
cochrane clinical trial registry, cochrane database of systematic
reviews, amed, psychinfo, and pubmed via nccam using
medical subject headings and keywords “recurrent abdominal
pain in children” or synonyms, “functional abdominal pain,” “irritable bowel syndrome,” “alternative therapies,” “traditional chinese medicine,” “ayurvedic medicine,” “herbal,” “homeopathy,”
and “osteopathy.” the search was restricted to those classified as
randomized controlled trials (rcts), those conducted on children
to age 18, and those published in english. the content of the
full-text articles or abstracts from these searches were examined to
determine whether they met criteria for inclusion in our review. in
addition, the bibliographies of relevant articles and all selected
articles were hand-searched, in the event that studies were incorrectly classified and not identified in the database, and reviewed
for inclusion.
for inclusion, a study, regardless of sample size, needed to
include children to age 18 with a diagnosis of rap, be classified as
an rct, and show evidence that the children were allocated
randomly to a treatment or control group. crossover trials were
included when all subjects crossed over and were exposed to both
treatment arms. excluded were studies on something other than
functional gastrointestinal disorders, studies that included adults
(⬎18 years), studies that lacked a control group, or those that were
not randomized.
the quality of included trials was assessed by examining not
only the description of randomization but also the adequacy of
case definitions and blinding methods. a standardized case defi-

e2

nition allows for the comparison of similar trials and enhances the
generalizability of the results.24 in studies on children with rap,
the case definition has generally been considered as 3 or more
episodes of abdominal pain occurring over a minimum of 3
months and severe enough to interfere with normal activities.2
these studies were assessed for their adherence to this definition.
we considered a trial to be adequately blinded when it was
conducted in such a manner that there was no reason to assume
that those responsible for outcomes assessment would be able to
distinguish between the active or control interventions.
principle outcomes of interest were the decrease or elimination
of pain episodes or pain intensity and the methods in which they
were determined, use of medication, use of medical services, and
functional disability. also considered were measures of change in
anxiety or depression.
each study was assessed for its design, the participants’ characteristics and heterogeneity (gender, age, socioeconomic status,
source of referral), the details of the intervention, and the outcome
definitions. each study was also noted for its handling of missing
data, principle measure of effect, and statistical methods.

results

fifty-seven articles were identified. the most common reason for exclusion were 1) study of something
other than rap25–28; 2) treatment was compared
with another treatment rather than control29 –31; and
3) treatment allocation was not randomized,32–34 case
series without controls,35–37 or case studies.38 – 40 the
vast majority of publications identified were reviews
or descriptions of rap rather than interventional
studies. ten rcts met inclusion criteria (table 1). of
these, 2 were studies of pharmaceutical interventions, 4 studied dietary interventions, 2 studied behavioral interventions only, 1 involved behavioral
intervention with dietary fiber as the control phase,
and 1 evaluated a botanical intervention. there was
a wide variation of outcome measures used within
the various studies, making comparisons between
trials difficult. all studies stated that they were randomized and blinded, although this was difficult to
verify as details of allocation concealment and blinding were insufficient in some of the studies.
pharmaceuticals

of the 2 studies that evaluated the use of pharmaceuticals, 1 examined the use of  xxxd2082xxx  for the
treatment of functional abdominal pain with dyspepsia and the other tested pizotifen for the treatment of
abdominal migraines. although the use of other
pharmaceuticals, such as anticholinergics, antiemetics, antidepressants, and simethicone, have been
commonly used by clinicians to manage symptoms
associated with childhood rap, no studies identified
tested their efficacy for the treatment of functional
abdominal disorders in children.10
 xxxd2082xxx 

 xxxd2082xxx , an h2-receptor antagonist, was tested
on 25 children in a double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover trial.1 each child was given 0.5 mg/kg/
dose twice daily (maximum: 40 mg/d) or placebo for
a 3-week treatment period (treatment period 1) then
switched to the other treatment for 3 weeks (treatment period 2).
inclusion criteria

children who were eligible for the study were 5 to
18 years of age, had a minimum of 3 episodes of

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e3

3–15

⬎3 y

n ⫽ 31
n ⫽ 15
n ⫽ 16
n ⫽ 38
n ⫽ 21 lac intol
n ⫽ 17 lac tol
n ⫽ 39
n ⫽ 21
n ⫽ 18
n ⫽ 16
n⫽8
n⫽8

christiansen48

lebenthal49

dearlove et al50

sanders et al51

sanders et al4

humphreys and
gevirtz52

kline et al54

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

4–18

n ⫽ 61
f ⫽ 15
f⫹bf ⫽ 15
f⫹bf⫹cbi ⫽ 16
f⫹fb⫹cbi
⫹ parent ⫽ 15
n ⫽ 42
n ⫽ 21
n ⫽ 21
manning/rome,
pain ⫻ 2 wk

diagnosed rap

apley

10 g f (control)
⫻ 8 wk
f⫹bf
f⫹bf⫹cbi
f⫹bf⫹cbi⫹parent
peppermint oil ⫻ 2 wk

⬍8, ⬍30 kg,
medications, chronic
disease

cognitive/behavioral vs
spc

330 g vs 10 g f
⫻ 7 wk
lactose-free vs
lactose-containing
formula
lactose-free vs lactosecontaining formula
cognitive/behavioral vs
wait-list

10 g f ⫻ 6 wk

pizotifen ⫻ 2 mo

 xxxd2082xxx  ⫻ 3 wk

none listed

major surgery,
organic disease, lac
intol, constipation/
diarrhea, psychiatric
disorder/dd
major surgery,
organic disease,
medication, lactose
intol, const/diarrh,
psychiatric
disorder/dd

none listed

abnl labs

abnl labs, weight
loss, devel/behav/
emotional problems
organic dz

diarrhea, constipation
ibs/blood, psych/gu,
abnl labs,
medication
abnl labs, abnl
physical exam

exclusion

intervention

gi symptom rating scale
severity of symptoms—(1–5)
change symptoms—(1–5)
daily pain diaries
other life variables

patient pain diary (vas)
parent pain observation
teacher pain observation
parent/patient interaction
observation
patient pain diary (vas)
parent pain observation
maternal care giving
child self-coping/adjustment
missed activities
treatment expectancy
measure of relapse
parent satisfaction
child pain diary
parent pain observation
medications
medical serices
school attendance

global assessment

parent pain diary

parent pain diary

50% decrease in pain
frequency, intensity of pain

index of severity, index of
total misery, weight

abdominal pain score
⫽ pfs⫹pss⫹pis
global assessment

outcome measured

none

none

cbcl

 xxxg1938xxx ,
ctrs

none

none

none

none

none

none

psychiatric
measures

ibs

rap

rap

rap

rap

rap

rap

rap

abdominal
migraine

dyspepsia/
fap

subgroup of
gi disorder

tertiary care

general public

tertiary care
and
psychology

primary
general public

primary care

tertiary care

primary care

primary care

primary care

12

⁄ primary care
⁄ tertiary care
12

referral
source

gi indicates gastrointestinal; ibs, irritable bowel syndrome; gu, genitourinary; abnl, abnormal; pfs, pain frequency score; pss, pain severity score; pis, peptic index score; ha, headache; f, fiber; lac intol, lactose intolerance;
lac tol, lactose tolerance; dd, developmental delay; vas, visual analog scale; bf, biofeedback; cbi, cognitive behavioral intervention;  xxxg1938xxx , revised behavioral problems checklist; cbcl, child behavior checklist; ctrs,
conner’s teacher rating scale.

8–12

7–14

n ⫽ 44
n ⫽ 22
n ⫽ 22

6–12

apley

rap

8

n ⫽ 52
n ⫽ 26
n ⫽ 26

feldman et al46

3

6–14

abdominal pain ⫻6
mo, occurring
2⫻/mo, lasting
2 h, facial pallor,
relative with
ha/migraines
⬎2 mo
1⫻/wk, affect
activities
2 pain episodes
in 6 wk
diagnosed rap

2
5–13

see et al1

1

apley, dyspepsia

inclusion

study criteria

n ⫽ 14
crossover design

control

age
range
(years)

symon and
russell11

treatment

no. of subjects

5–18

author

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain in children

n ⫽ 25
crossover design

study

table 1.

abdominal pain severe enough to affect activity for at
least 3 months’ duration, and had dyspeptic symptoms.
exclusion criteria

children were excluded when they had abnormal
stooling patterns; evidence of a gastrointestinal disorder on history and physical examination; overt
psychological, genitourinary, or other systemic problems; any abnormal laboratory results (complete
blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, biochemical profile, and liver function tests); positive
stool examination for ova and parasites or giardia
antigen; occult blood in the stool; or received acid
suppressive therapy for the month before beginning
the trial.
outcomes measured

two primary outcome measures were used to assess the therapeutic outcome, a quantitative scoring
system and a global assessment. the quantitative
scoring system, termed abdominal pain score, was
obtained by patient report and composed of 3 separate subscores: pain frequency score, pain severity
score, and the peptic index score. the peptic index
score consisted of such symptoms as nausea, vomiting, chest pain, epigastric pain, decreased appetite,
weight loss, and nocturnal wakening. these were
obtained at baseline, after treatment period 1, and at
the end of treatment period 2. this scoring system
apparently had not been validated for this use in this
population. the global assessment was completed by
asking each patient at the end of each treatment
phase of the study, “since the trial began, have you
felt: better/not better/worse?”
results

 xxxd2082xxx  was found to be superior to placebo by
the global assessment, with 68% of children reporting improvement after  xxxd2082xxx  and only 12% of
placebo-treated children reporting improvement
(mcnemar ratio for improvement: 5.67; 95% confidence interval: 1.64 –30.18). however, when the preand posttreatment abdominal pain scores were compared, there was no statistically significant difference
between the 2 treatment groups ( xxxd2082xxx  versus
placebo: 3.37 ⫾ 3.53 vs 1.66 ⫾ 2.7; p ⫽ .16 by paired
t test). because this medication was hypothesized to
have its therapeutic effect primarily on the dyspeptic
symptoms, a third, post hoc analysis was completed
by comparing the change in the peptic index subscore by treatment group among children with high
peptic index scores at baseline. within this subgroup
was a significant decrease in the peptic index score
among children who received  xxxd2082xxx  compared
with placebo (p ⫽ .01).

ertheless, has found this drug to be effective for
migraine in children.43 because of these clinical findings, this study was undertaken to evaluate its effectiveness in preventing abdominal migraines in children. pizotifen was tested on 14 children in a
randomized, double-blind, crossover trial.11 the
child was initially given 5 ml (0.25 mg) of pizotifen
twice daily or the placebo for 1 month. if no improvement of symptoms were reported, then the frequency
was increased to 3 times a day for the second month.
crossover occurred without a washout period in the
third and fourth months.
inclusion criteria

children who were eligible for the study were 5 to
13 years of age, had recurrent central abdominal pain
with radiation present for at least 6 months, had pain
occurring at least twice monthly, with attacks lasting
at least 2 hours. in addition, abdominal pain had to
be accompanied by facial pallor, and the patient had
to have either 1 first-degree relative or 2 seconddegree relatives with a history of migraine or recurrent throbbing headache. there were no features to
suggest structural disease.
exclusion criteria

children were excluded when there were any abnormal laboratory results (complete blood count,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, biochemical screen,
urine culture) or findings on physical examination.
outcomes measured

two primary indices were used to assess the effects of the drug on the severity of the pain attacks:
the index of severity and the index of total misery.
the index of severity was calculated by assigning 1
point for a “mild attack,” 2 points for a “moderate
attack,” or 3 points for a “severe attack.” this index
was the summation for all attacks during the treatment trial. the index of total misery was the product
of the severity index and the duration of the pain
attacks totaled over the duration of the treatment
trial.
results

patients who received pizotifen had fewer days of
abdominal pain (4.29 vs 12.5; t ⫽ 3.37, p ⬍ .005), a
lower index of severity (7.29 vs 23.5; t ⫽ 3.4, p ⬍
.005), and a lower index of misery (25.43 vs 81.5; t ⫽
3.19, p ⬍ .007) as compared with placebo. the only
side effects noted while taking pizotifen were slight
drowsiness and slight weight gain (1.25 kg vs 0.38 kg
placebo; p ⫽ .039).
conclusion

these findings suggest that  xxxd2082xxx  may be
effective in children with rap, especially when dyspeptic symptoms dominate the clinical presentation.

despite the small sample size, these finding suggest that pizotifen might be an effective treatment
when used prophylactically in children specifically
with abdominal migraine. pizotifen, available worldwide but not approved for use in the united states,
has known side effects of drowsiness, change in appetite, and gastrointestinal disturbances.10

pizotifen

diet

pizotifen, a serotonin antagonist, has been found
to be effective in migraine prophylaxis in studies on
adults.41 although these results have not been duplicated in studies on children,42 clinical practice, nev-

four studies that used dietary interventions as
treatment for children with rap were identified.
two assessed the effectiveness of added fiber, and 2
assessed the effects of a lactose-free diet. studies

conclusion

e4

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

have shown that adults with ibs tend to experience
relief of symptoms when on a high-fiber diet.44
symptom resolution was not guaranteed, however,
for those placed on a lactose-free diet,45 thus the
interest in evaluating these therapies in children.
dietary fiber: feldman et al

the addition of 10 g of insoluble dietary corn fiber
in a cookie form was tested on 52 children in a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.46
children received either the 5-g high fiber cookie or
a placebo cookie twice daily for 6 weeks.
inclusion criteria

children who were eligible for the study were
between 5 and 15 years of age, had at least 1 attack of
unexplained abdominal pain per week over at least 2
months, and had pain that was severe enough to
affect activity.
exclusion criteria

a child was excluded when there had been weight
loss since the onset of pain; the child had abnormal
laboratory results (hemoglobin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urinalysis); or the child had obvious
developmental, emotional, or behavioral problems.
outcomes measured

the primary outcomes measured were the frequency of pain attacks—specifically, a 50% decrease—and change in pain intensity as rated on a
5-point scale.
results

feldman et al46reported that their results showed a
significant difference between the fiber and placebo
groups. the percentage of those with the fiber intervention having at least a 50% decrease of pain episodes was 50% compared with only 27% in the placebo group (p ⬍ .05). less severe pain was noted in
the fiber group; however, the differences between
the 2 groups were not significant. the degree of
compliance and incidence of side effects between the
2 groups were similar. although not mentioned in
the original study, it was recently reported that the p
value was calculated from a 1-sided statistic.47 reanalysis of the same data found no difference between the 2 treatment groups.
dietary fiber: christiansen

forty children received either ispaghula husks or
placebo, given in the form of cereal, 250 g twice daily
for 7 weeks.47,48 the ispaghula husks had a fiber
content of 66% (165 g per serving), and the placebo
had only 2% (5 g per serving). this was stated to be
a randomized, double-blind, controlled study, although randomization was not clear.
inclusion criteria

children who had recently been discharged from
the hospital with a diagnosis of rap and were aged
3 to 15 years were included. they had had at least 2
pain episodes in the preceding 6 weeks sufficient
enough to affect activity.
exclusion criteria

those children evaluated and found to have an
organic disease.

outcomes measured

the primary outcome measured was the number
of pain episodes, as reported by parents, in the final
6 weeks of the 7-week intervention.
results

thirty-one children completed the investigation:
15 in the active group and 16 in the placebo group.
nine were excluded for failure to complete the interventions or the outcome data. the mean number of
pain episodes in the active group was 13.5 during
those 6 weeks and 13 in the placebo group. no
standard deviations or baseline data were reported,
limiting comparisons in this study.
conclusion

the evidence supporting the use of fiber in rap is,
at best, weak and, at worse, inconclusive. nevertheless, the addition of fiber each day seems to be a
simple and inexpensive intervention that might benefit some children with rap. furthermore, insoluble
fiber can be obtained through the diet with high-fiber
cereals; bran muffins; whole-grain products; and
fruits, vegetables, and legumes to approximate 10
g/d.
lactose avoidance: lebenthal et al

sixty-nine children who had a diagnosis of rap
and had lactose tolerance testing were admitted to
the diet trial that consisted of 3- to 6-week segments.49 subjects completed these 3 trials in a random order: trial 1, normal diet that included lactose
(considered baseline); trial 2, lactose-free diet plus
400 ml/d a lactose-containing formula; and trial 3,
lactose-free diet plus 400 ml/d lactose-free formula.
in addition, many of these children were maintained
on a lactose-free diet for 12 months and followed to
assess for ongoing pain.
inclusion criteria

children who were aged 6 to 14 years and of
anglo-saxon, irish, italian, and polish extraction
were included in the study. diagnosis of rap was
determined by the history of intermittent episodes of
abdominal pain of at least 4 months’ duration, severe
enough to interfere with activities, and no evidence
of organic disease.
exclusion criteria

evidence of abnormal laboratory tests: hemoglobin, urinalysis with culture, sedimentation rate, stool
for occult blood.
outcomes measured

pain episodes, as recorded by the parents, were
recorded for each 6-week period with baseline being
the trial of normal eating patterns. the frequency of
abdominal pain was considered increased when the
number of episodes was 20% greater than the baseline value.
results

only 38 subjects completed the study satisfactorily; 31 had been eliminated because of poor compliance. of those 38, 21 were identified by lactose tolerance testing as being lactose malabsorbers and 17
as lactose absorbers. ten (47.6%) of the 21 malabsorbers reported increased pain with the lactose formula,
and 7 (33.3%) of 21 reported increased pain with the

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e5

nonlactose formula. in the lactose absorbers, 4
(23.5%) of 17 reported increased pain with lactose
formula, and 4 (23.5%) of 17 reported increased pain
with the nonlactose formula. for those who were
followed for 12 months on a lactose-free diet, 6 (40%)
of 15 malabsorbers were pain-free and 5 (38%) of 13
lactose absorbers were pain-free.
lactose avoidance: dearlove et al

a total of 2 g/kg lactose or placebo tonic were
given to 21 children for 2 weeks.50 this followed a
2-week baseline period of the child’s regular diet and
a 2-week period of a lactose-free diet, which was
maintained during the intervention. the lactose and
placebo were allocated at random using a doubleblind, single crossover design. eighteen children
with rap received no intervention and served as
controls.
inclusion criteria

children who were older than 3 years and had
abdominal pain more than once every 4 days for at
least 3 months were included.
exclusion criteria

none listed.
outcomes measured

global outcome was assessed after 3 months to the
question of whether the child’s symptoms were better, worse, or the same. children in the intervention
group were categorized as lactose intolerant or lactose tolerant and compared with children in the control group.
results

during the diet trials, there were no differences in
the number of children who claimed relief, whether
they were lactose intolerant or tolerant or whether
they received lactose or lactose-free tonic. after 3
months, 9 (44%) of 21 children in the intervention
group improved and 8 (44%) of 18 in the control
group improved.
conclusion

there seems to be no association between recurrent abdominal pain in children and lactose intolerance, and a lactose-free diet is unlikely to improve
the symptoms of rap.
behavioral interventions only

behavioral techniques have been used with the
idea that pain behaviors produce secondary gain
(special attention, school avoidance, etc.) that reinforces the pain behaviors.4 two methodologically
strong studies evaluated the use of cognitive-behavioral interventions among children with rap.4,51
both studies were completed by the same group of
researchers and used a similar intervention. the first
study used a smaller sample size and a wait-list
control group, whereas the second study included a
larger sample size and compared the intervention
with standard pediatric care (spc).
cognitive-behavioral therapy: sanders et al first study

a multicomponent treatment program was used
on 16 children and consisted of reinforcement of well
behavior, distraction, and cognitive coping skills
e6

training (self-efficacy statements, self-induced relaxation, self-administration of rewards).51 this was
done in a randomized, wait-list control trial that
lasted 8 weeks. the control group was asked to manage the child’s pain complaints in their usual manner. no methods of blinding or the attempts thereof
were mentioned in the study.
inclusion criteria

children who were 6 to 12 years of age, had periodic abdominal pain of ⬎3 episodes during 3
months’ time, and had pain severe enough to interfere with the child’s daily activities were included in
the study. each child was evaluated, but none met
the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, third edition, criteria for major psychopathology, ie, major depression, anxiety disorder, conduct
disorder, or specific learning disabilities.
exclusion criteria

children were excluded when they had had major
surgery, a major medical illness, lactose intolerance,
constipation, a recent viral illness, or persistent diarrhea.
outcomes measured

daily pain diaries done by the patient were used to
assess pain frequency, and a visual analog scale was
used to measure pain intensity. parent pain observation recorded the presence or absence of pain behavior while the child was at home. a teacher’s pain
observation diary recorded the child’s verbal complaints of pain while the child was at school. parentchild interactions were observed by researchers in
the home to assess oppositional child behavior and
aversive parent behavior. the revised behavioral
problem checklist and conner’s teacher’s rating
scale were also used.
results

a decrease in pain reports of the treatment group
was significant for both the child’s reports (f[1,12] ⫽
8.57; p ⬍ .01) and parent observation (f[1,12] ⫽ 5.53;
p ⬍ .04) when compared with the treatment group at
the end of the treatment phase. there continued to be
a significant decrease of pain reports by the child at
2 weeks posttreatment (f[1,12] ⫽ 6.47; p ⬍ .02). at
posttreatment, the number of pain-free children in
the treatment group was 75%, which increased to
87.5% by follow-up 3 months later. the corresponding figures for the control group were 25% and
37.5%. furthermore, teachers observed an improvement in the treatment group at the 3-month follow-up in comparison with pretreatment measures
and noted a slight deterioration in the control group
(f[1,13] ⫽ 5.21; p ⬍ .05). parent-child interaction,
problem behaviors in the revised behavioral problem checklist, and teachers’ ratings on the conner’s
teacher’s rating scale showed no significant differences between groups. there was no evidence that
this treatment resulted in any negative side effects.
cognitive-behavioral therapy: sanders et al second study

cognitive-behavioral family intervention (cbfi)
was compared with spc in 44 children who were
randomly allocated to these 2 groups and followed
over time.4 the cbfi in this study included 6 ses-

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

sions with a practitioner who provided an explanation of rap with rationale for pain management
procedures, contingency management training for
parents, and self-management training for children.
spc consisted of 4 to 6 sessions with a physician to
develop a caring, supportive therapeutic relationship
and to offer reassurance that no serious organic disease was present even though the pain was real; that
most children grow out of it; and that children must
learn to cope with the pain themselves. no mention
of attempts for blinding was mentioned.
inclusion criteria

children who were eligible for the study were 7 to
14 years of age and had paroxysmal abdominal pain
that occurred at least 3 times during a 3-month period with pain severe enough to interfere with the
child’s daily activities.
exclusion criteria

children were excluded when they had had major
surgery or a major medical illness; were on medication or receiving medical treatment elsewhere; or
had lactose intolerance, constipation, a recent viral
illness, persistent diarrhea, or a diagnosis of a specific learning disability. also excluded were those
who met diagnostic criteria for affective disorder,
conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, psychosis, or developmental disorder or those who were
suspected of being sexually abused and had been
assessed via a structured intake interview. none of
the children who were referred to the project was
excluded on these grounds.
outcomes measured

the main outcomes measured in this study were
the patient’s report of pain intensity using a visual
analog scale recorded on a daily diary, parent observation of pain behavior, assessment of maternal caregiving, assessment of children’s self-coping, measures of child adjustment, measures of treatment
expectancies of the parent, measures of relapse, and
measures of parent satisfaction with the treatment.
each was measured at pretreatment, posttreatment
(which was approximately 8 weeks), and follow-up
at 6 months and 12 months.
results

a total of 55% of the cbfi children were pain-free
compared with only 23.8% in the spc group at posttreatment (␹2[1,n ⫽ 39] ⫽ 4.02; p ⫽ .04) with those
percentages increasing to 66.7% and 27.8%, respectively, at the 6-month follow-up (␹2[1,n ⫽ 39] ⫽ 5.31;
p ⫽ .02). on the parent observation report of pain
behavior, there were significantly more pain-free
children in the cbfi group (70%) compared with
spc (38.1%) at posttreatment (␹2[1,n ⫽ 38] ⫽ 3.87;
p ⫽ .05) and at 12 months (82.4% vs 42.1%; ␹2[1,n ⫽
36] ⫽ 5.96; p ⫽ .01). in terms of expectancies for
change, mothers in both groups were moderately
confident of a favorable outcome. a 2 ⫻ 2 analysis of
variance showed no significant differences in mothers’ expectations. mothers in the cbfi group had a
significantly higher rating of both the quality of service received (t[22] ⫽ ⫺2.34; p ⫽ .02) and overall
satisfaction (t[22] ⫽ ⫺2.36; p ⫽ .03) than mothers in
the spc group. children and parents in the cbfi

group reported lower levels of relapse (child: p ⫽ .03;
parent: p ⫽ .05) and pain interfering with child’s
daily activity (child: p ⫽ .003; parent: p ⫽ .04) when
compared with the spc group at the 12-month follow-up.
conclusion

these results show the value of using cognitivebehavioral therapy to reduce or eliminate pain in
children with rap. it also highlights the usefulness
of involving the parent in supporting their child’s
self-management behavior. furthermore, there were
no negative side effects or symptom substitution
with these interventions.
behavioral intervention with fiber control

one study used behavioral interventions along
with fiber as the control. because dietary fiber had
been shown to be more effective than placebo in a
previous study,46 a fiber-only comparison group was
used as the minimal treatment condition (control).
behavioral intervention

a total of 61 children were randomized into 1 of 4
groups: 1) fiber only—10 g/d— control group; 2)
fiber plus biofeedback (bf); 3) fiber, bf, and cognitive-behavioral intervention (cbi); or 4) fiber, bf,
cbi, and parental support.52 the treatment period
was for 8 weeks. cbi included relaxation training,
self-management techniques, and coping skills, and
parental support included distraction techniques and
caregiving strategies.
inclusion criteria

eligible children were between 4 and 18 years of
age and had the medical diagnosis of rap—not specifically characterized to a functional gastrointestinal
disorder outlined by rome ii.
exclusion criteria

anyone unwilling to take the 10 g/d dietary fiber.
no other exclusion criteria were mentioned.
outcomes measured

the main outcome measures included self-reported pain, parent observation, medication use,
health care utilization, and school attendance. these
were measured at baseline (pretreatment) and at the
end of the treatment period.
results

the main effects for pre- versus posttreatment
were found for self-reported pain (f[1,43] ⫽ 117.19;
p ⬍ .001), parent’s observation of the child asking for
help (f[1,43] ⫽ 7.64; p ⬍ .01), child’s report of pain to
parents (f[1,43] ⫽ 22.83; p ⬍ .001), rap medication
reduction use (f[1,43] ⫽ 11.86; p ⬍ .001), and school
absences (f[1,43] ⫽ 8.53; p ⬍ .01) indicating improvement in all groups. comparisons were then done
between the combination treatment groups and the
fiber-only group to evaluate the effects of active
treatment versus control. the combined groups
showed more improvement than the fiber-only
group on self-reported pain (f[1,59] ⫽ 10.20; p ⫽
.002). a total of 72% of the treatment participants
reported elimination of pain compared with only 7%
in the fiber-only comparison group.

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e7

conclusion

results

the results of this study suggest that the combination of self-regulation and cognitive-behavioral therapies along with fiber intervention may be more
effective for treating rap rather than using fiber
alone.
botanicals

one study evaluated the use of peppermint oil for
the treatment of ibs. other studies in the literature
have assessed the benefits of botanicals in functional
gastrointestinal disorders30,53; however, this was the
first conducted in children.
peppermint oil

peppermint oil in the form of a ph-dependent,
enteric-coated capsule was used against placebo in a
randomized, double-blind, controlled trial in 50 children with ibs.54 each capsule contained 187 mg of
peppermint oil. subjects ⬎45 kg were given 2 capsules of either the peppermint or placebo 3 times a
day for 2 weeks. for those children 30 to 45 kg, only
1 capsule was given 3 times a day.
inclusion criteria

all children had a previous diagnosis of ibs by
either the manning or rome criteria and were 8 to 12
years of age with symptoms and pain in the preceding 2 weeks before entering the study.
exclusion criteria

outcomes measured

the primary outcome was to assess changes in the
severity of symptoms that included abdominal pain,
stool patterns, abdominal rumbling, gas, nausea,
belching, urgency for defecation, heartburn, and abdominal distention. a change of symptom scale from
“much worse” to “no effect” to “much better” was
used to rank these symptoms. pretreatment and
posttreatment measures of symptoms using this
scale and daily pain diaries were obtained and compared.

the use of a ph-dependent peppermint oil capsule
seemed to reduce the pain that children experienced
during the acute phases of rap/ibs. the mechanism
of action is thought to be from the menthol component of peppermint that causes inhibition of smooth
muscle contractions by blocking calcium channels.55
peppermint also has a mild  xxxd305xxx  affect
and so, presumably, reduces pain locally as it is
released and coats the lower intestine.54

we calculated effect sizes for four double-blinded,
placebo-controlled trials (table 2). effect size is an
important tool for judging the effectiveness of a therapy. it tells us the standardized mean difference
between the treatment and control groups. the
larger the effect size, the greater the difference between the 2 groups. we chose these studies because
all of the information needed for effect size calculations was available. the 13 outcomes in these studies
were coded for outcome type (frequency of pain,
intensity of pain, or medical occurrences) and rater
(parent, child, or clinician). intensity of stomach pain
was used as the outcome measure more than half of
the time. of the 13 outcomes, 3 were reported as
nonsignificant. for summary statistics, we estimated

effect sizes for randomized placebo-controlled studies

first author intervention treatment control effect
sample
sample size
size
size
feldman
feldman
kline
kline
kline
kline
kline
see
see†
see
symond
symond
symond

conclusion

effect sizes

children were excluded when they were younger
than 8 years, weighed ⬍30 kg, had another chronic
disease, or were on medication for ibs or one that
could potentially affect abdominal symptoms.

table 2.

of the 50 recruited, 42 completed the study. reasons for withdrawal were travel limitations, use of
erythromycin, and inability to swallow pills. at the
conclusion of the 2-week trial, 76% of patients who
received peppermint oil reported decreases in the
severity of symptoms compared with only 19% who
received placebo (␹2[6, n ⫽ 42] ⫽ 12.6; p ⬍ .001).
improvements in the change of symptom scale were
reported in 71% of the peppermint oil group versus
43% in the placebo group (␹2[6, n ⫽ 42] ⫽ 9.5; p ⬍
.002). the daily pain diaries recorded by the patients
showed that the mean severity of pain was significantly lower for the peppermint oil group than for
the placebo group (t[60] ⫽ 1.99; p ⬍ .03). the peppermint oil did not alter other symptoms, eg, heartburn, gas, stool patterns, consistency.

fiber
fiber
peppermint
peppermint
peppermint
peppermint
peppermint
 xxxd2082xxx 
 xxxd2082xxx 
 xxxd2082xxx 
pizotifen
pizotifen
pizotifen

26
26
21
21
21
21
21
25
13
25
14
14
14

26
26
21
21
21
21
21
25
13
25
14
14
14

0.55
ns
1.31
1.08
ns
2.25
ns
0.54
0.99
0.42
0.90
0.91
0.85

method

frequency
intensity
intensity
intensity
intensity
intensity
medical
frequency and intensity
frequency and intensity
intensity
frequency
intensity frequency
frequency and intensity

rater

child
child
clinician
clinician
clinician
child
child
parent and
parent and
child
parent and
parent and
parent and

outcome*

child
child
child
child
child

frequency of pain
intensity of pain
change in severity of symptoms
change of symptom scale
gsrs
severity of pain symptoms
life variables
change in abdominal pain score
change in abdominal pain score
global improvement outcome
frequency of pain
intensity of pain
index of misery

gsrs indicates gi symptom rating scale.
* each study had more than 1 outcome variable.
† subset of children with high pis.

e8

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

these nonsignificant effect sizes at 0. the average
effect size for the 13 outcome measures in the 4
double-blinded, placebo-controlled studies was 0.75
(standard deviation: 0.62). we also estimated outcomes for the studies without placebo control groups
and found a similar effect size.
discussion

this literature review identified a small number of
methodologically sound investigations of various
therapies for children with functional gastrointestinal disorders. it is interesting that the types of interventions found to be efficacious varied widely, including histamine and serotonin antagonists, dietary
management, behavioral interventions, and botanicals. although the underlying biological mechanism
for each therapy is not fully understood, each mechanism is likely different from one another.
the studies that had the largest effect sizes were
those therapies that targeted specific functional gastrointestinal disorders ( xxxd2082xxx  for dyspepsia,
pizotifen for abdominal migraine, peppermint oil for
ibs). the patients in the dietary and behavioral studies were not fully characterized by symptoms, but it
is likely that the studies had a mixture of the various
subgroups of functional gastrointestinal disorders in
their study populations, thereby imparting more
generalized effects. identifying specific functional
disorders using the rome ii classifications may be
helpful to clinicians who treat children with rap by
targeting therapy that is most effective for their
symptoms.
the behavioral studies reviewed used self-monitoring, relaxation training, coping skills, and positive
imagery skills that benefited children with rap.
from what we now know about the brain-gut interactions, it makes sense that “mind-body” therapies—
those therapies that encourage self-regulation—
could be efficacious in the treatment of rap. mindbody therapies have been found to be beneficial in
children with other chronic disorders, such as migraine, pain associated with medical procedures, and
cystic fibrosis.56 –58 one recent case series described
the successful use of self-hypnosis in 4 of 5 children
with functional abdominal pain.35 nevertheless,
such techniques have not been vigorously tested in
large numbers of children with functional abdominal
disorders.
cbis, with and without dietary management, were
found to be beneficial in the treatment of children
with rap. these studies, published in psychological
journals, likely were not read by practicing pediatricians as a means to expand their repertoire of treatments for rap. this is important because a recent
survey of practicing pediatricians found that pediatricians rarely consulted mental health professionals
in the management of rap.5 the primary reasons
cited for the lack of referrals were concerns about
cost, family resistance, and personal beliefs about the
natural course of the disorder. unfortunately, these
barriers could potentially impede the process of finding appropriate and cost-effective therapy for children with rap. there is evidence in the adult literature that management of functional disorders by the

physician in collaboration with a mental health professional may reduce health care costs.59 incorporating mental health evaluations and treatments early in
the management of children with rap could facilitate symptom resolution by integrating the coping
and self-management skills with other interventions,
such as dietary, pharmaceutical, or botanical therapies.
completing a systematic review of therapies for
rap was challenging because of few rcts, the lack
of standardization of inclusion/exclusion criteria
used for the studies, and varying criteria for ruling
out organic disease. rather than strictly using apley’s criteria, various interpretations of the definition
and classification of rap also lead to discrepancies
in sample selections across studies. more good quality studies with larger populations need to be conducted to further our understanding and thus treatments of rap. using the recommendations outlined
in rome ii may help in the design of future research
studies so as to bring clarity to the selection of subjects, target therapies that would be more specific to
the functional groups, and facilitate the formulation
of more specific measures of outcomes.
having multiple outcomes measured in the various studies was an additional challenge to doing this
review. thirty-nine treatment outcomes were reported in the 10 articles included in this review.
having standardized outcomes would lend itself to
understanding the effects of various interventions
used in studying rap so that one could more effectively compare treatments across studies. although
the rome ii panel identified the need for standardized outcome measures, they could not agree on
what specific outcomes should be used.60 nevertheless, they did agree that outcomes should be reported
by the patient rather than by the clinician or the
researcher; a standardized scale should be used to
measure pain episodes; and a predefined criterion of
clinical significance should be used with efficacy on
the basis of the percentage of patients who meet that
criterion. in addition, because apley’s original definition of rap referred to painful episodes that interfere with normal activities, we believe that some
measure of disability, such as school absences,
should also be reported. the majority of the studies
reviewed here did not include a measure of disability.
despite the many outcomes measured in these
reviewed studies, there also was a general lack of
psychological measures, which was surprising given
previous studies that show children with rap, when
compared with well children, have higher levels of
anxiety, depression, and somatization symptoms.3,61,62 these comorbid states need to be consistently evaluated in an objective way in children with
rap as these states might affect the response to
therapy and vice versa.
despite these identified methodologic challenges,
evidenced-based therapies, although weak as a result
of the small numbers, were identified for rap. the
rather diverse group of therapies most likely reflects
the heterogeneous group of functional disorders that
present as recurrent abdominal pain during child-

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e9

hood. it is expected that greater use of the rome ii
diagnostic criteria will help with the diagnosis as
well as the treatment of this disorder. it is also apparent that pediatricians will probably be required to
expand their comfort level beyond the use of conventional modalities to care optimally for this group
of children.
acknowledgment
this work was supported by the national center for complementary and alternative medicine grant nih 5 p50-at00008.

references
1. see mc, birnbaum ah, schechter cb, goldenberg mm, benkov kj.
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of  xxxd2082xxx  in children with
abdominal pain and dyspepsia. dig dis sci. 2001;46:985–992
2. apley j, naish n. recurrent abdominal pains: a field survey of 1000
school children. arch dis child. 1958;33:165–170
3. garber j, zeman j, walker ls. recurrent abdominal pain in children:
psychiatric diagnoses and parental psychopathology. j am acad child
adolesc psychiatry. 1990;29:648 – 656
4. sanders mr, shepherd rw, cleghorn g, woolford h. the treatment of
recurrent abdominal pain in children: a controlled comparison of cognitive-behavioral family intervention and standard pediatric care. j
consult clin psychol. 1994;62:306 –314
5. edwards mc, mullins ll, johnson j, bernardy n. survey of pediatricians’ management practices for recurrent abdominal pain. j pediatr
psychol. 1994;19:241–253
6. mcgrath pj, feldman w. clinical approach to recurrent abdominal pain
in children. j dev behav pediatr. 1986;7:56 – 61
7. croffie jm, fitzgerald jf, chong skf. recurrent abdominal pain in
children: a retrospective study of outcome in a group referred to a
pediatric gastroenterology practice. clin pediatr. 2000;39:267–274
8. christensen mf, mortensen o. long-term prognosis in children with
recurrent abdominal pain. arch dis child. 1975;50:110 –114
9. campo jv, dilorenzo c, chiappetta l, et al. adult outcomes of pediatric recurrent abdominal pain: do they grow out of it? pediatrics.
2001;108(1). available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/108/
1/e1
10. huertas-ceballos a, macarthur c, logan s. pharmacological interventions for recurrent abdominal pain (rap) in childhood. cochrane database syst rev. 2002;(1):cd003017
11. symon dn, russell g. double-blind placebo-controlled trial of pizotifen syrup in the treatment of abdominal migraines. arch dis child.
1995;72:48 –50
12. rasquin-weber a, hyman pe, cucchiara s, et al. childhood functional
gastrointestinal disorders. gut. 1999;45(suppl ii):ii60 –ii68
13. kline js, hodges vk, cameron a, barbero j. rectal tonometry in recurrent abdominal pain of childhood. am j gastroenterol. 1979;72:337
14. chelimsky g, boyle jt, tusing l, chelimsky tc. autonomic abnormalities in children with functional abdominal pain: coincidence or etiology? j pediatr gastroenterol nutr. 2001;33:47–53
15. hyams js, hyman pe. recurrent abdominal pain and the biopsychosocial model of medical practice. j pediatr. 1998;133:473– 478
16. dilorenzo c, youssef nn, sigurdsson l, scharff l, griffiths j, wald a.
visceral hyperalgesia in children with functional abdominal pain. j pediatr. 2001;139:838 – 843
17. youssef nn, dilorenzo c. the role of motility in functional abdominal
disorders in children. pediatr ann. 2001;30:24 –30
18. robinson jo, alvarez jh, dodge ja. life events and family history in
children with recurrent abdominal pain. j psychosom res. 1990;34:
171–181
19. scharff l. recurrent abdominal pain in children: a review of psychological factors and treatment. clin psychol rev. 1997;17:145–166
20. wood jd, alpers dh, andrews plr. fundamentals of neurogastroenterology. gut. 1999;45(suppl ii):ii6 –ii16
21. mcmillin dl, richards dg, mein ea, nelson cd. the abdominal brain
and enteric nervous system. j altern complement med. 1999;5:575–586
22. janicke dm, finney jw. empirically supported treatments in pediatric
psychology: recurrent abdominal pain. j pediatr psychol. 1999;24:115–127
23. national center for complementary and alternative medicine, national institutes of health. nccam home page; definition of complementary and alternative medicine. available at: nccam.nih.gov

e10

24. hyams kc. developing case definitions for symptom-based
conditions:; the problem of specificity. epidemiol rev. 1998;20:148 –156
25. casswall th, alfven g, drapinski m, bergstom m, dahlstrom ka.
one-week treatment with omeprazole, clarithromycin, and metronidazole in children with h. pylori infection. j pediatr gastroenterol nutr.
1998;27:415– 418
26. chan kl, zhou h, ng dkk, tam  xxxg1720xxx . a prospective study of a
one-week nonbismuth quadruple therapy for childhood helicobacter
pylori infection. j pediatr surg. 2001;36;1008 –1011
27. shamaly h, berkowitz d, rosenthal e, naveh y. efficacy of bismuthbased triple therapy in children with abdominal pain and helicobacter
pylori gastritis. j pediatr gastroenterol nutr. 2000;30:198 –200
28. shashidhar h, peters j, lin ch, rabah r, thomas r, tolia v. a prospective trial of  xxxd2444xxx  triple therapy for pediatric h. pylori infection. j pediatr gastroenterol nutr. 2000;30;276 –282
29. grillage mg, nankani jn, atkinson sn, prescott p. a randomised,
double-blind study of mebeverine versus dicyclomine in the treatment
of functional abdominal pain in young adults. br j clin pract. 1990;44:
176 –179
30. westphal j, horning m, leonhardt k. phytotherapy in functional upper
abdominal complaints. phytomedicine. 1996;2:285–291
31. worawattanakul m, rhoads jm, lichtman sn, ulshen mh. abdominal
migraine: prophylactic treatment and follow-up. j pediatr gastroenterol
nutr. 1999;28:37– 40
32. edwards mc, finney jw, bonner m. matching treatment with recurrent
abdominal pain symptoms: an evaluation of dietary fiber and relaxation
treatment. behav ther. 1991;22:257–267
33. finney jw, lemanek kl, cataldo mf, katz hp, fuqua rw. pediatric
psychology in primary health care: brief targeted therapy for recurrent
abdominal pain. behav ther. 1989;20:283–291
34. gremse da, nguyenduc gh, sacks ai, dipalma ja. irritable bowel
syndrome and lactose maldigestion in recurrent abdominal pain in
childhood. south med j. 1999;92:778 –781
35. anbar r. self-hypnosis for the treatment of functional abdominal pain
in childhood. clin pediatr. 2001;40:447– 451
36. berger hg, honig pj, liebman r. recurrent abdominal pain: gaining
control of the symptom. am j dis child. 1977;131:1340 –1344
37. singh sb, nigam a, srivastava jr. abdominal pain: behavioral approach. indian j clin psychol. 1986;13:107–110
38. miller aj, kratochwill tr. reduction of frequent stomach complaints by
time out. behav ther. 1979;10:211–218
39. sank li, biglan a. operant treatment of a case of recurrent abdominal
pain in a 10 year old boy. behav ther. 1974;5:677– 681
40. linton sj. a case study of the behavioral treatment of chronic stomach
pain in a child. behav change. 1986;3:70 –73
41. symon dnk. pizotifen. in: gallai v, guidetti v, eds. juvenile headache:
etiopathogenesis, clinical diagnosis and therapy. amsterdam, the
netherlands: elsevier science; 1991:405– 408
42. gillies d, sills m, forsythe i. pizotifen (sanomigran) in childhood
migraine. eur  xxxd122xxx . 1986;25:32–35
43. symon dnk, russell g. the general paediatrician’s view of migraine: a
review of 250 cases. in: lanzi g, balottin u, cernibori a, eds. headaches
in children and adolescents. amsterdam, the netherlands: elsevier
science; 1989:61– 66
44. manning ap, heaton kw, harvey rf. wheat fibre and irritable bowel
syndrome: a controlled trial. lancet. 1977;2:417– 418
45. tolliver ba, jackson ms, jackson kl, et al. does lactose maldigestion
really play a role in the irritable bowel? j clin gastroenterol. 1996;23:
15–17
46. feldman w, mcgrath p, hodgeson c, ritter h, shipman rt. the use of
dietary fiber in the management of simple, childhood, idiopathic, recurrent abdominal pain. am j dis child. 1985;9:1216 –1218
47. huertas-ceballos a, macarthur c, logan s. dietary interventions for
recurrent abdominal pain (rap) in childhood [cochrane review]. in:
the cochrane library; issue 2; 2002
48. christensen mf. recurrent abdominal pain and dietary fiber. am j dis
child. 1986;140:738 –739
49. lebenthal e, rossi tm, nord ks, branski d. recurrent abdominal pain
and lactose absorption in children. pediatrics. 1981;67:828 – 832
50. dearlove j, dearlove b, pearl k, primavesi r. dietary lactose and the
child with abdominal pain. bmj. 1983;286:1936
51. sanders mr, rebgetz m, morrison m, et al. cognitive behavioral treatment of recurrent nonspecific abdominal pain in children: an analysis of
generalization, maintenance, and side effects. j consult clin psychol.
1989;57:294 –300
52. humphreys pa, gevirtz rn. treatment of recurrent abdominal pain:
component analysis of four treatment protocols. j pediatr gastroenterol
nutr. 2000;31:47–51

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

53. bensoussan a, talley nj, hing m, menzies r, guo a, ngu m. treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with chinese herbal medicine. jama.
1998;280:1585–1589
54. kline rm, kline jj, dipalma j, barbero g. enteric coated, ph dependent
peppermint oil capsules for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome
in children. j pediatr. 2001;138:125–128
55. hills jm, aaronson pi. the mechanism of action of peppermint oil in gi
smooth muscle. gastroenterology. 1991;101:55– 65
56. olness k. hypnotherapy: a cyberphysiologic strategy in pain management. pediatr clin north am. 1989;36:873– 884
57. zeltzer lk, fanurik d, lebaron s. hypnosis and nonhypnotic techniques for reduction of pain and anxiety in children and adolescents
with cancer. j pediatr. 1989;101:1032–1035

58. belsky j, khanna p. the effects of self-hypnosis for children with cystic
fibrosis: a pilot study. am j clin hypn. 1994;36:282–292
59. smith gr, monson ra, ray dc. psychiatric consultation in somatization disorder. n engl j med. 1986;314:1407–1413
60. whitehead we. definition of responder in clinical trials for functional
gastrointestinal disorders: report on a symposium. gut. 1999;45(suppl
ii):ii78 –ii79
61. hodges k, kline jj, barbero g, woodruff c. anxiety in children with
recurrent abdominal pain and their parents. psychosomatics. 1985;26:
859 – 866
62. walker ls, greene jw. children with recurrent abdominal pain and
their parents: more somatic complaints, anxiety, and depression than
other patient families? j pediatr psychol. 1989;14:231–243

http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/111/1/e1
downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

e11

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
joy a. weydert, thomas m. ball and melinda f. davis
pediatrics 2003;111;e1
doi: 10.1542/peds.111.1.e1
updated information &
services

including high resolution figures, can be found at:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/111/1/e1.full.htm
l

references

this article cites 57 articles, 11 of which can be accessed free
at:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/111/1/e1.full.htm
l#ref-list-1

citations

this article has been cited by 15 highwire-hosted articles:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/111/1/e1.full.htm
l#related-urls

subspecialty collections

this article, along with others on similar topics, appears in
the following collection(s):
gastroenterology
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/gastroenter
ology_sub

permissions & licensing

information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,
tables) or in its entirety can be found online at:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/site/misc/permissions.xht
ml

reprints

information about ordering reprints can be found online:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml

pediatrics is the official journal of the american academy of pediatrics. a monthly
publication, it has been published continuously since 1948. pediatrics is owned, published,
and trademarked by the american academy of pediatrics, 141 northwest point boulevard, elk
grove village, illinois, 60007. copyright © 2003 by the american academy of pediatrics. all
rights reserved. print issn: 0031-4005. online issn: 1098-4275.

downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

systematic review of treatments for recurrent abdominal pain
joy a. weydert, thomas m. ball and melinda f. davis
pediatrics 2003;111;e1
doi: 10.1542/peds.111.1.e1

the online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
located on the world wide web at:
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/111/1/e1.full.html

pediatrics is the official journal of the american academy of pediatrics. a monthly
publication, it has been published continuously since 1948. pediatrics is owned,
published, and trademarked by the american academy of pediatrics, 141 northwest point
boulevard, elk grove village, illinois, 60007. copyright © 2003 by the american academy
of pediatrics. all rights reserved. print issn: 0031-4005. online issn: 1098-4275.

downloaded from pediatrics.aappublications.org at ucsf kalmanovitz library & ckm on december 27, 2014

