blackwell science, ltdoxford, ukbjubju international1464-4096bju internationalmarch 2003
915
update article
pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction
f. montorsi
et al.

pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction
f. montorsi, a. salonia, f. deho', a. cestari, g. guazzoni, p. rigatti and c. stief*
departments of urology, university vita-salute san raffaele, milan, italy and *university of hannover school of medicine, hannover, germany

summary
erectile dysfunction (ed) is a common medical
condition that affects the sexual life of
millions of men worldwide. many drugs
are now available for treating ed; oral
pharmacotherapy represents the first-line
option for most patients with ed. sildenafil,
an inhibitor of the enzyme phosphodiesterase
type 5, is currently the most widely prescribed
oral agent and has a very satisfactory
efficacy-safety profile in all patient
categories. apomorphine sl is a dopamine
d1- and d2-receptor agonist which has
recently been approved for marketing in
europe. it is best selected for treating patients
with mild to moderate ed. vardenafil and
tadalafil are new phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitors which are expected to be approved
this year. both of them have significant
positive efficacy-safety profiles. patients who
do not respond to oral pharmacotherapy or
who cannot use it are good candidates for
intracavernosal and intraurethral therapy.
alprostadil is the most widely used drug, both
for injection therapy and for the intraurethral
route. the efficacy of second-line treatment is
high but the attrition rate remains significant.

introduction
the initial management of patients with
erectile dysfunction (ed) is to identify medical
and psychological factors associated with the
disorder in each man. assessment includes a
medical and psychosexual history, and a
physical examination that includes both a
detailed evaluation of the genital area and the
determination of systemic blood pressure. the
number of routine laboratory tests varies but
the first international consultation on
erectile dysfunction recommended testing for
fasting glucose or glycosylated haemoglobin,
a blood lipid profile and serum testosterone
levels [1]. young patients, who might benefit
from surgery aimed to resolve their ed, may
require a detailed diagnostic investigation, as
may those not responding to a conservative
therapeutic approach. nonetheless, the fuller
evaluation of the patient with ed may reveal
underlying unrecognized medical conditions,
446

e.g. hypertension, diabetes and prolactinomas,
or indicate appropriate further evaluations to
exclude occult cardiac disease.
for all patients, good medical practice
recognises the potential value of altering
modifiable risk factors as a first therapeutic
step, even though this may not be sufficient
to reverse ed completely. potentially
modifiable risk factors include lifestyle and
psychosocial factors, factors related to sexual
technique and information, and iatrogenic
causes. most patients with ed will require
some treatment and the patient and his
partner (if possible) should be informed about
the available and acceptable treatment
options for this clinical condition [2]. current
therapies may be grouped within four general
categories, i.e. psychosexual counselling and
education, pharmacological, mechanical and
surgical. the aim of this review is to
summarize the current knowledge on the
pharmacological management of ed.

promotes and amplifies the relaxation of
cavernosal smooth muscle that occurs after
sexual arousal, thereby facilitating the erectile
response. clinical trials establishing the
efficacy and safety of sildenafil as a treatment
for ed have been conducted worldwide. all of
these studies were double-blind, placebocontrolled trials with treatment periods of
8–12 weeks that evaluated flexible doses of
sildenafil (25, 50 or 100 mg) in men with ed of
a broad spectrum of origin. there was a
significant treatment effect in all these trials
for sildenafil compared with placebo, and
treatment responses were similar across all
trials [3]. some practical issues are important
to optimize the use of sildenafil.

sildenafil

the absorption of the drug is reduced after
fatty meals and a 2-h fasting state is usually
necessary to obtain the best response. as with
the other oral agents, sexual stimulation with
subsequent release of  xxxd2738xxx  is necessary
to achieve the erectogenic effect of sildenafil.
this drug reaches is maximum plasma
concentration within an hour after
administration and it is usually suggested to
engage in sexual activity then; however,
significant clinical results have been reported
as soon as 30 min to 4–6 h after
administration. the starting dose is 50 mg
although patients aged >65 years and with
severe renal or hepatic impairment should
start treatment with the 25 mg dose. this is
also true for patients on treatment with drugs
such as inhibitors of proteases used by hivpositive patients, cimetidine, erythromycin
and  xxxd2422xxx . the patient should use the
starting dose at least four times, to evaluate
precisely the real efficacy and tolerability of
the drug. if the starting dose is considered
insufficient to obtain a satisfactory sexual
performance, the patient should titrate to the
higher dose. dose-finding studies have shown
clearly that there is dose-response curve with
sildenafil, and the best results in terms of
improvement of erections have been obtained
with the maximum dose (100 mg) [4].

sildenafil is an orally active inhibitor of
phosphodiesterase type 5, and therefore
promotes erection by inhibiting the
degradation of cgmp. increasing cgmp levels

the unique contraindication to sildenafil use
is the concomitant administration of nitrates
in any form, as this might cause a sudden
decrease in systemic blood pressure. pre-

pharmacological treatment for ed includes
the oral, sublingual, intracavernosal and
intraurethral administration of erectogenic
drugs. first-line therapy includes orally and
sublingually administered drugs, while
intracavernosal and intraurethral treatments
are considered second-line therapy and are
usually indicated for patients who fail to
respond to first-line therapy or for those who
cannot use the least invasive forms of
pharmacotherapy. we consider the various
drugs already available on the market and
review what has been published to date on
the best known investigational drugs,
approval for which is expected later this year.

oral drugs
drugs officially approved and
available on the market

©

2 0 0 3 b j u i n t e r n a t i o n a l | 9 1 , 4 4 6 – 4 5 4 | doi:10.1046/j.1464-4096.2003.04093.x

pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction

marketing studies included all patient groups
that a urologist could encounter during
routine practice, including patients with
depression, hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, renal
failure, parkinson's disease, spina bifida and
transplant recipients. in these studies patients
representative of all the various severities of
ed, as defined by the international index of
erectile function (iief) [5], and all the various
causes, as defined by the investigators, were
included. results in terms of efficacy were
evaluated by considering the various domains
of the iief (which includes erectile function,
orgasm, ejaculation, desire and intercourse
satisfaction), in particular questions 3 and 4
of the iief which evaluate the capacity of the
patient to penetrate his partner and to
maintain an erection during coitus, and often
represented the primary endpoints of these
studies. in addition, a general assessment
question investigating the ability of the drug
to improve the patient's erections was always
used as a secondary endpoint. penetration
during sexual intercourse was generally
achieved in at least half of the attempts for
>70% of a broad spectrum of patients
complaining of ed. sildenafil improved the
erections of 50–80% of the patients included
in these studies, with differences seen
according to the various aetiological classes.
a recent meta-analysis of the overall efficacy
rate of sildenafil showed that all doses were
significantly better than placebo for obtaining
an erection sufficiently rigid for penetration
and followed by successful intercourse [6].
in three studies 48% of men had ≥60% or
≥40% successful attempts at sexual
intercourse, compared with 11% with placebo
[6]. typically, patients with psychogenic ed
would report greater improvements in
erection rate than would those with severely
organic ed [7]. a category of patients of
particular interest for urologists is that
comprising men undergoing radical
prostatectomy. as noted earlier, the release
of  xxxd2738xxx  is necessary to allow sildenafil
to act.  xxxd2738xxx  is mainly released from
cavernosal nerve terminals and thus a
beneficial effect of sildenafil should be
expected only in patients treated by a nervesparing radical prostatectomy. several
authors have shown clearly that sildenafil is
significantly effective in men who have
undergone a nerve-sparing procedure and
several predictors of success have been
outlined. these include the patient's age
(i.e. the younger the patient the better the

©

2003 bju international

response to sildenafil) and the bilateral
preservation of the cavernosal nerves [8].
from a practical perspective those patients
who report some degree of spontaneous
penile tumescence and elongation after a
nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy are most
likely to respond to sildenafil. in addition,
some time after surgery is needed to obtain
the best response to sildenafil [9]. this finding
is related to the neuropraxia that almost
inevitably develops after surgery, even in the
best surgeon's hands. patients in this group
should be informed that treatment with
sildenafil might take 12–18 months to
produce erections sufficient for satisfactory
sexual activity. the 100 mg dose is usually
necessary in this particular group, although it
has been also suggested that the use of the
off-label 150 and 200 mg doses of sildenafil
might salvage patients not responding to
the approved maximum dose [10]. sildenafil
is also effective in patients using
intracavernosal injection therapy, the first
option for most patients with ed before
sildenafil was available. overall, almost
70% of the patients successfully using
intracavernosal injections of alprostadil or
multidrug combinations elected to use
sildenafil, as they were able to obtain a
satisfactory effect that was clearly associated
with easier use [11]. there are patients who
would prefer to use sildenafil and injections
alternatively, according to their specific
conditions and demands [12]. this reinforces
the concept of the absolute need for extensive
patient counselling about all the available
therapies for ed.
the safety and tolerability of sildenafil have
been confirmed in many studies. adverse
events are usually minor and transitory;
discontinuation of sildenafil therapy because
of adverse events is very low [13]. the most
frequently reported adverse events after
sildenafil use include: headache, flushing
(caused by vasodilatation) and dyspepsia
(caused by relaxation of the smooth muscle of
the gastro-oesophageal sphincter with
reflux). transient visual symptoms, mainly
disturbances of colour vision, were reported
predominantly at the 100 mg dose and
temporally related to the peak plasma levels.
the visual symptoms are almost certainly a
result of transient inhibition of cgmp-specific
phosphodiesterase-6, which is present in the
rods and cones of the retina. the relationship
between sildenafil and cardiac function has
been studied extensively. very recent studies
show clearly that sildenafil does not worsen

the cardiac profile of patients with ischaemic
heart disease undergoing stress exercises [14].
in addition, sildenafil also increases the time
to angina in symptomatic patients with
ischaemic heart disease undergoing a
treadmill test [15]. none of the orally available
drugs is absolutely contraindicated for
patients with cardiovascular disease (except
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors for patients
using nitrates). however, it has been clearly
stated that every patient with cardiovascular
disease should be carefully evaluated before
commencing any form of treatment, to verify
his capacity to undergo increased physical
activity (i.e. sexual activity). an issue which
has not yet been resolved is related to the
overall withdrawal rate from treatment with
sildenafil, which has been reported as
significant [16]. patients who interrupt
treatment with sildenafil include those who
are cured by the drug and no longer need it,
patients who do not respond to the drug, and
patients whose sexual interest declines with
time.
apomorphine sublingual (sl)
apomorphine is an agonist of the d-1 and d2 postsynaptic receptors for dopamine, which
are mainly located in the paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus. oxytocinergic
neurones at this location are rich in these
receptors and the administration of
apomorphine activates them, which
subsequently induces a cascade of events that
reach the periphery and cause penile erection.
it has been suggested that  xxxd2738xxx  acts as
a cofactor at the level of the paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus for activating
the oxytocinergic neurones. the presence of
 xxxd2738xxx  is thus mandatory to allow the
action of apomorphine [17]. apomorphine sl
has recently been approved for marketing
in europe at doses of 2 and 3 mg. the
pharmacokinetics of apomorphine are the
main reason for the interest in this drug.
apomorphine is administered sublingually
and reaches its maximum plasma
concentration in 15–20 min. the erectogenic
effects are usually seen 20 min after
administration, provided there is adequate
sexual stimulation. the patient must drink
some water before placing apomorphine
under the tongue, to wet the mucosa of the
throat and facilitate dissolution of the tablet
(a process which takes 10 min). there is no
interaction of apomorphine with food or
alcohol, but the concomitant use of alcohol
should be discouraged, as it is known to
447

f. m o n to r s i et al.

reduce erectile capacity. apomorphine has
been assessed in a broad range of patients
representative of those routinely seen in
clinics. patients included in most of the
studies conducted with apomorphine were
requested to show some residual erectile
function on evaluation with the rigiscan
device for nocturnal erections. however,
patients with ed of all severities were
included in the pre-marketing trials with
apomorphine. two double-blind, placebocontrolled crossover studies of 10–12 weeks'
duration evaluated apomorphine sl at a dose
of 2 mg in 252 patients with ed; 10% more
patients in the apomorphine sl group
achieved erections firm enough for
intercourse than in patients receiving placebo
(p < 0.001). the intercourse rate was also
higher in the apomorphine than in the
placebo group [18]. in a double-blind
randomized crossover study, dula et al. [19]
investigated the efficacy of apomorphine
3 mg and placebo in patients with ed of
various causes and severity. apomorphine
3 mg was significantly more effective than
placebo (p < 0.001) for the endpoints of
erections firm enough for intercourse (49.9%
vs 32.3%) and intercourse rate (48% vs 34%),
as reported by the patient. a dose-response
effect was clear in a double-blind doseescalation study [20] in 507 patients
randomized to receive escalating doses of
apomorphine vs placebo during 8 weeks; 41%
of patients who received the 3 mg dose
achieved successful intercourse in half or
more of the attempts, compared with only
33% of those who received apomorphine
2 mg. increasing the dose to 4 mg appeared
to provide no additional efficacy. dula et al.
[21] compared the 3 and 4 mg doses in a
double-blind crossover study but found no
statistically significant difference in either the
proportion of erections firm enough for
intercourse (49.4% vs 50.2%; p > 0.4) or
intercourse rate (48.4% vs 49.6%; p > 0.4).
however, a marked increase in the incidence
of treatment-related emergent nausea at the
higher dose, from 3.3% to 14.1%, showed
clearly that the overall benefit-risk effect
favoured the 3 mg dose. data from patients
enrolled in long-term extension studies show
that, among those who received apomorphine
2 or 3 mg and who stayed in the study for
≥6 months, 92% of the attempts at
intercourse produced sufficiently firm
erections after 1 month of treatment, with a
corresponding value of ª90% after 6 months.
the best results in terms of efficacy were
reported in patients with mild or moderate
448

ed. the present authors consider that this
drug will find its role in this specific group of
patients. to minimize the risk of adverse
events, patients should always start treatment
at the 2 mg dose and use it twice before
titrating up to the 3 mg dose if needed.
heaton et al. [20] recently suggested that to
maximize the efficacy the final dose should be
used in at least eight attempts. if the dose is
optimized then nausea, headache and
dizziness are well below the 5% limit. there
are no specific contraindications to
apomorphine use, including the concomitant
use of nitrates [21]. direct comparisons of
apomorphine sl and sildenafil are ongoing
and it will soon be possible to compare the
efficacy and safety of these two drugs.
however, it is currently thought that
apomorphine sl is best for patients with some
residual erectile function at the time of
diagnosis, in younger patients and those with
mild to moderate ed.
drugs not yet officially approved nor
available on the market
vardenafil
vardenafil is a novel inhibitor of
phosphodiesterase type 5 currently under
evaluation by regulatory authorities, to obtain
approval for marketing in europe and the
usa. vardenafil is characterized by a very
high potency in vitro (50% inhibitory
concentration, 0.6 nmol/l). pharmacokinetic
data for vardenafil were obtained in two
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
studies with a single oral dose of 10, 20 or
40 mg. the time to maximum plasma
concentration of vardenafil was 0.7–0.9 h. as
with sildenafil, the absorption of vardenafil is
delayed if taken after a meal containing
>30% fat. thus, practically, patients should be
advised to use vardenafil with an empty
stomach, to maximize its efficacy [22,23]. the
efficacy of vardenafil was evaluated by using
the real-time monitoring technique with the
rigiscan device. there were significant
differences in rigidity at the base of the penis
between placebo and vardenafil at all doses,
but there was no significant difference
between 20 and 40 mg of vardenafil [23]. the
duration of penile rigidity after administering
vardenafil at all doses was also significantly
greater than with placebo, but again there
was no significant difference between the 20
and 40 mg dose. the efficacy and safety of
vardenafil when used at home was reported
by porst et al. [24] in a large group of patients.

only patients with spinal cord injury, diabetes
mellitus and after radical prostatectomy were
excluded from that study. vardenafil was
administered at the 5, 10 and 20 mg doses,
and all doses gave significantly better results
than placebo in terms of successful attempts
at intercourse (70.9–74.6% with vardenafil vs
39.5% with placebo) and of improvement in
erectile function (66–80% with vardenafil vs
30% with placebo). flushing was the most
frequent side-effect (10.2–11.3% of patients).
phase iii studies with vardenafil initially
concentrated on diabetic patients and those
after prostatectomy. more than 450 patients
with diabetes mellitus (mostly with type ii)
and mild to severe ed participated in a
double-blind placebo-controlled multicentre
study evaluating the efficacy and safety
of vardenafil. there was a significant
improvement in erections in 57% of patients
treated with the 10 mg dose and in 72% when
treated with the 20 mg dose, compared with
13% of those treated with placebo. adverse
events included flushing, headache and
rhinitis, were rare and transient, and caused
discontinuation of treatment in 3% and 4%
of the patients using, respectively, the 10
and 20 mg dose. more recently, a large
multicentre trial comparing vardenafil 20 mg
and placebo in patients with ed after a nervesparing prostatectomy also confirmed the
efficacy and safety of this drug in this difficult
category of patients. the best response was in
patients who had had a bilateral nervesparing procedure and in the younger group.
from a practical perspective vardenafil shares
many similarities with sildenafil and it will
certainly have a role in treating patients with
ed of various causes. the potency and
selectivity of the drug are somewhat superior
to sildenafil but at present it is not known
whether these data will translate into major
benefits over sildenafil when managing
patients with ed [25].
tadalafil
this is another novel phosphodiesterase type
5 inhibitor currently under evaluation for
possible approval for marketing in europe and
the usa. tadalafil has a maximum serum peak
of 2.0 h and a half-life of 17.5 h. the latter
value clearly distinguishes tadalafil from the
other inhibitors of the same enzyme. tadalafil
was initially studied using a formulation
which was different to the current one [26].
early studies evaluated tadalafil at doses of up
to 100 mg, while currently the most
frequently studied doses are 10 and 20 mg.

©

2003 bju international

pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction

phase 2b studies in europe and north
america, in patients with mild to severe ed,
showed a significantly better improvement of
erections with all doses of tadalafil than with
placebo [27]. of particular interest was a
study with 3 weeks of daily dosing of tadalafil
compared with placebo; patients treated
with 10, 25, 50 and 100 mg of tadalafil
showed that consistently >80% of patients
reported improvements in erection [28].
patients included in these studies reported
headache, dyspepsia and back pain as the
most frequent adverse events. these adverse
events tended to reduce significantly after
several doses of the drug. a large phase iii
study was devoted to patients with diabetes
mellitus (mostly type ii). an improvement in
erections was reported by 56% and 64% of
patients treated with tadalafil 10 and 20 mg,
respectively; this was significantly better
than with placebo (improvement of erections
in 25% of patients) [29]. data with patients
after radical prostatectomy have been scarce
to date, but a specifically designed study
aimed at evaluating the effect of the drug
in patients treated by a bilateral nervesparing prostatectomy is currently
underway and will clarify the role of
tadalafil in this critical group. some
peculiarities of tadalafil related to its
pharmacokinetics deserve some attention.
the long half-life has been associated with an
erectogenic potential of the drug lasting for
24 h. the advantage of this is related to the
possibility for a patient to engage in sexual
activity more than once after a single
administration of tadalafil. in addition, it is
clear that there is no interaction between
food and alcohol on the absorption of
tadalafil [30]. it would be expected that these
findings might contribute to a better
spontaneity during sexual activity when using
tadalafil. when a large group of patients with
ed of mild to moderate severity was asked to
use tadalafil as soon as they wanted to, it
became evident that tadalafil was able to
cause erections sufficient for penetration in
half the patients by 30 min after
administration [31].

intracavernosal and intraurethral
drugs
patients who do not respond to oral therapy
are considered for second-line treatments,
which include the intraurethral and
intracavernosal administration of vasoactive

©

2003 bju international

drugs. it is rare to prescribe one of the
second-line therapies when choosing initial
treatment; this used to happen when
sildenafil was the only oral drug on the
market, because patients using nitrates had
a definite contraindication to the use of
sildenafil. a second patient category might be
those requesting a fast response, which
cannot be obtained by sildenafil; however,
apomorphine sl has a fast onset of action
and may be an effective solution for these
patients. in conclusion, intraurethral and
intracavernosal therapy are currently used
almost exclusively in patients who do not
respond to oral therapy. however, when
counselling the patient with ed on the
treatment options available, every alternative
should be extensively detailed at the first visit.
the topical administration of vasoactive
agents represents a potentially reliable option
that would certainly be appealing for many
patients, because it works directly on the
penis, thus lacking any systemic influence,
and it is easy to use [32]. any effective drug
with an adequate system of administration
has the potential to become a first-line
therapy for ed.

intracavernosal injection therapy
the pharmacological erection programme
when a patient is considered as a potential
candidate for vasoactive injection therapy, the
characteristics, potential limitations and
adverse effects of the treatment are
extensively explained to the patient. the
patient is asked to read and sign a detailed
informed consent. patients with a history of
haemoglobinopathy, bleeding diathesis,
peyronie's disease, or idiopathic priapism are
excluded from treatment. in addition, patients
with poor manual dexterity, poor visual acuity,
or morbid obesity, or those in whom a
transient hypotensive episode may have a
deleterious effect (e.g. unstable
cardiovascular disease and transient
ischaemic attack) are not ideal candidates for
this treatment. finally, patients with serious
psychiatric disorders or who might misuse or
abuse this therapy should be excluded from
treatment.
the first phase of the programme consists of
the dose titration of the drug or mixture used
for injections. patients are seated on the
examination couch during each injection and
kept in this position for 30 min. systemic

blood pressure is recorded at baseline in the
event of syncope and to check for
hypertension. the right side (lateral aspect) of
the penis is cleaned with an  xxxd102xxx . the
first injection is then delivered with a very
small amount of either the drug or the
mixture. three versions of a four-drug
mixture (papaverine,  xxxd2914xxx ,
alprostadil and  xxxd247xxx ) are used
more often and more widely; 0.05 ml is
usually injected first [33]. the needle is
inserted using a quick entry up to the hilt of
the needle, so that the tip reaches the centre
of the right corpus cavernosum. injections
must not be given on the dorsal and ventral
aspects of the penis, to avoid damage to the
dorsal neurovascular bundle of the penis and
urethra, respectively.
immediately after injection, the base of the
penis is squeezed firmly between the right
thumb and index finger, while the accessible
portion of the penis is massaged for up to
5 min by squeezing it laterally along the
length of the shaft between the left thumb
and index and middle fingers, thus
distributing the drug throughout the
pendulous shaft. patients are then left alone
to watch an erotic video, and are asked to
masturbate without ejaculation, to optimize
sexual stimulation. the erectile response is
then assessed by the physician and patient.
the dose of the injected drug or mixture is
considered adequate when it produces an
erection that is equal to 50–75% of the
maximum erectile response reported by the
patient. if a patient reaches a maximal rigid
erection during the titration phase in the
clinic, a lower dose is suggested for home use,
as the erectile effect induced by the drug or
mixture during sexual activity is usually
greater than that under laboratory conditions.
if the first injection does not produce a
satisfactory erectile response (i.e. less than
half the maximum potential response), the
patient is re-injected after at least 24 h and
the dose slightly increased (at our clinic we
use 0.05 ml increments). the titration process
proceeds until the optimum dose is identified
or the maximum injected volume (at our
clinic, 0.5 ml) is reached.
if after the injection a full rigid erection
persists for >1 h, 20–40 mg of adrenaline is
injected intracorporeally to obtain complete
detumescence. appropriate
electrocardiographic and blood pressure
monitoring is used during this procedure.
patients are contacted by telephone the
449

f. m o n to r s i et al.

next day to verify the persistence of
detumescence.
after the correct dose of the drug or mixture
has been determined, patients watch a
thorough demonstration of both a
conventional insulin syringe and an
automatic self-injection system (disetronic
pen, medis, milan, italy) with which many
injections can be given, thus avoiding the
manoeuvres needed before each injection
with the insulin syringe (preparation of the
syringe, needle and the appropriate amount
of the drug) [34]. the pen consists of a capsule
that is screwed together with the adapter
after inserting the filled glass cartridge. the
needle is then screwed into the adapter. the
glass cartridge consists of a rubber piston
and a cone in front, which is closed with a
cap. the cartridge set contains a pull-rod and
a needle in addition to the glass cartridge
(fig. 1). to fill the cartridge, the pull-rod is
screwed into the thread of the rubber piston
and, after removing the cap, the needle is
stuck on the cone. the glass cartridge volume
is 3 ml. at our clinic the cartridge is filled with
the four-drug vasoactive mixture mentioned
above, described in detail below. because the
average volume of mixture used at each
injection by our patients is <0.2 ml, every
cartridge has a drug load sufficient for 8–10
injections; we supply 29 g needles for
injections.
patients are instructed to limit the use of
injection to three times a week, with no more
than one injection in any 24-h period. they
are also taught to inject the right and left
cavernosal body alternately. patients are then
warned to return immediately to the
emergency department if an erection persists
for >3 h. patients are also told to refrigerate
the drug or mixture if it contains
 xxxd124xxx  ( xxxd124xxx ) and to examine the
drug or solution for changes in colour or the
formation of a precipitate.
patients are reassessed once a month for the
first 2 months and subsequently every
3 months. at each follow-up visit, injection
frequency, duration and consistency of
erections, and patient satisfaction, are
recorded. the penis is carefully examined for
nodules, haematomas or areas of induration.
liver function test results are assessed every
6 months, as the long-term use of papaverine
may cause hepatic abnormalities. penile
ultrasonography is used to verify any clinical
findings on digital palpation of the penis.
450

disetronic pen in detail

plunger rod

fig. 1.
dosage knob self-injection system
released (disetronic pen) in use at
dosage knob
locked our institution.
red start button
display

cartridge
plunger
cartridge head
plastic cone

threaded rod

cartridge cap
window
cartridge
compartment
filling
attachment

adaptor
injection needle

adaptor
(from pen)
needle cover
filling needle

needle cover

results and complications of
vasoactive intracavernosal injection
therapy
the follow-up of ª4000 patients treated
worldwide with papaverine alone or
combined with  xxxd2914xxx  was published
previously [35], and long-term results with
intracavernosal injection therapy based on
 xxxd124xxx  have been reported [36]. reported
adverse effects include haematomas, burning
pain after injection, urethral damage,
cavernositis or local infections, fibrotic
changes of the corpora cavernosa, curvature,
and prolonged erections or priapism. the two
most important complications are prolonged
erections and localized fibrotic changes of the
corpora cavernosa. prolonged erections are
usually encountered during the dose-titration
phase and have been reported in 2–15% of
patients treated. the development of painless
fibrotic nodules within the corpora cavernosa
may lead to penile curvature. this problem
has been reported in 1.5–60% of patients
treated for 1 year [37]. we consider that
most of the fibrotic nodules occur in patients
who inject themselves very frequently
(multiple trauma to the corporeal tissue)

pen cap

and who do not compress the injection
site for sufficient long enough, with the
subsequent development of intracavernosal
haematomas.
the increase in the frequency of spontaneous
erections and the decreased need for
treatment are common findings during the
follow-up of intracavernosal vasoactive
injection therapy. the long-term use of  xxxd124xxx 
intracavernosal injections can markedly
improve cavernosal artery function, as shown
by colour doppler ultrasonography [38]. the
improved haemodynamic response seen in
patients injecting themselves regularly may
be explained at the microvascular level. the
long-term administration of vasoactive
agents in monkeys caused hypertrophy of the
sinusoidal smooth muscle at the
ultrastructural level. both papaverine and
 xxxd124xxx  lead to a hypertrophic response, but
papaverine results in a combination of
hypertrophy, atrophy and fibrosis, whereas
with  xxxd124xxx , the normal cellular architecture is
preserved. with the sinusoidal muscle ‘toned’
after long-term self-injection with  xxxd124xxx , the
efficiency of sinusoidal smooth muscle action
may improve, leading to the observed increase

©

2003 bju international

pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction

in cavernosal artery flow. in addition, it has
been shown that  xxxd124xxx  may improve the
haemodynamic response partly by promoting
neovascularization. this issue remains
controversial because wespes et al. [39] were
unable to detect any significant changes of
intracavernosal structure after long-term
treatment with intracavernosal alprostadil. in
this study, 10 patients had a biopsy of the
corpora cavernosa taken before and after a
3-year treatment with alprostadil (overall,
150–250 injections per patient). there was no
histological difference apparent with classical
staining methods. there was a reduction in
the percentage of intracavernosal smooth
muscle after treatment in two of five patients
on the side of injection, but there was no
difference with the other corpus cavernosum.
there was no difference in the percentage of
intracavernosal smooth muscle between both
corpora in the five patients with biopsies
taken only after treatment. recently, brock et
al. [40] reported on the return of spontaneous
erections during long-term intracavernosal
alprostadil treatment. in this study, 70 men
with a stable heterosexual partner entered the
titration phase, and the effective alprostadil
dose was determined before entry into the
12-month self-treatment home phase. duplex
ultrasonography was used to measure the
peak systolic velocity and diameter of the
cavernosal arteries throughout the study. an
effective dose was established for 67 (96%) of
the 70 men (median dose of alprostadil,
15 mg). during the home phase, 94% of men
responded to alprostadil and the median dose
remained unchanged. complete duplex
ultrasonographic data were obtained for 38
men and showed significant increases in peak
systolic velocity after injection in both
cavernosal arteries (p < 0.001 at 12 months)
and between the cavernosal arterial diameters
before and after injection (p < 0.001)
compared with baseline. reports of a return
of spontaneous erections increased
throughout the study compared with baseline
(37%, 26 of 70) and were confirmed by
interview for 46 (85%) of 54 men with
available data overall. the issue of the curative
effects of intracavernosal injection therapy
remains controversial, as in another study
nocturnal penile tumescence activity
remained unchanged after the long-term use
of intracavernosal injections [41]. in that
study, 19 men with organic ed underwent
nocturnal penile tumescence testing before
and after alprostadil-based intracavernosal
injection therapy of ≥6 months' duration. a
five-item questionnaire was used to assess

©

2003 bju international

subjective changes in erectile activity over
time. in that study, the mean time of
intracavernosal injection therapy was
2.4 years and the mean injection frequency
3.7 times/month. nine patients believed
that unaided erection improved after
intracavernosal injection, and six achieved
intercourse with no injection, having been
unable to do so before injection. however,
there were no statistically significant changes
in any of the five objectively measured
nocturnal penile tumescence variables. these
authors suggested that a potential
explanation of these results relates to the
method used to evaluate ed. because sexually
stimulated erectile function was not
measured, it is possible that the patients
enrolled in this study regained some
functional erectile capability which was not
detected by nocturnal penile tumescence
testing. indeed, the same authors also
underlined that nocturnal penile tumescence
testing assumes that nocturnal penile
erection develops according to the same
physiological mechanisms as sexually
stimulated erection, which has not been
reliably shown to be the case. whatever, it
seems difficult to believe that a biological and
functional curative effective might derive
from a psychological action simply produced
by the intracavernosal injection. an
interesting issue relates to those not
responding to sildenafil. shabsigh et al. [42]
assessed patients who did not respond to an
open-label trial of sildenafil of up to 100 mg.
these patients entered an  xxxd124xxx 
‘in-office’ titration phase to determine the
optimal dose of the drug (up to 40 mg) which
was then used during a 6-week home trial.
the  xxxd124xxx  use at home resulted
in improvements in the responses to
questions 3 and 4 of the iief in 90% and 85%
of patients, respectively. the most common
adverse effect seen with  xxxd124xxx 
use was penile pain (29.4%). this study
showed clearly that most patients in whom
sildenafil fails can be salvaged by
intracavernosal alprostadil therapy.
intraurethral therapy
a novel approach derived from transdermal
application is transurethral drug delivery,
which allows the transfer of drugs from the
urethra directly into the corpora cavernosa. in
a retrograde urethrogram study using
contrast media with the proximal urethra
constricted, vardi and saenz de tejada [43]
showed vascular communications between

the spongiosal and cavernosal compartments.
their study documented the ability to transfer
the drug by vascular communication from the
corpora spongiosa (urethra) to the cavernosal
spaces. all the intraurethral drugs for erection
are postulated to work by this transfer
mechanism.
intraurethral alprostadil
intraurethral alprostadil has been developed
and marketed by vivus (menlo park,
california). the medicated transurethral
system for erection (muse™) consists of a
polypropylene applicator with a hollow stem
3.2 cm long and 3.5 mm in diameter. the tip (3
or 6 mm long) contains a semisolid pellet of
medication that is available in four doses, i.e.
125, 250, 500 and 1000 mg. alprostadil is
administered while the subject is seated or
standing, by fully inserting the stem of the
applicator into the distal urethra. a button is
depressed to deposit the pellet. a gentle
sideways oscillation of the applicator
separates the medicated pellet from the
applicator tip. the patient should urinate
immediately before administration, because
the medicated pellet has been developed
specifically to dissolve in the small quantity of
urine that remains in the urethra after
urination. after removing the applicator,
massaging the penis for 30–60 s allows the
compound to distribute and be absorbed
fully.
the mechanism of action of transurethral
alprostadil is based on its absorption from the
urethra and transport throughout the erectile
bodies by communicating vessels between the
corpus spongiosum and the corpora
cavernosa. initial clinical studies showed that
>60% of men using muse in the office
achieved erections rigid enough for
penetration [44]. results with home use were
defined as a successful penetration occurring
at least once during the trial; this occurred in
65–70% with muse and 10–20% with
placebo. most of the patients used the 500
and 1000 mg doses, and it was suggested that
treatment start with the 500 mg dose. when
special patient categories were evaluated, e.g.
those with spinal cord injury and after radical
prostatectomy, muse achieved erection rates
that were lower than those seen in the
general population. in some of these patients,
a constrictive band placed at the base of the
penis facilitated blood entrapment within the
penis, resulting ultimately in better erections.
an interesting application for muse was the
451

f. m o n to r s i et al.

treatment of the ‘soft glans’ syndrome in
patients with a penile implant. williams et al.
[45] showed that the resumption of sexual
activity with muse led to an improvement in
several important quality-of-life domains in
patients and their partners.
in these studies penile pain was the most
frequent adverse effect, occurring in ª10% of
patients. interestingly, fulgham et al. [46]
followed the algorithm recommended by the
manufacturer and used muse in the office in
115 consecutive men with ed. by using a fivepoint scale to measure penile rigidity, they
achieved a maximum score of 4–5 in 13.2% of
patients using the 500 mg dose and in 30% of
patients using the 1000 mg dose. a significant
proportion of these patients showed some
decrease of both systolic and diastolic blood
pressure after the administration of muse. in
all, 20% of patients experienced at least one
adverse event. the authors concluded that
<30% of patients at any given time using any
dose achieved erections sufficient for
intercourse during in-office testing. notably,
because of this limited efficacy, discomfort,
pain and burning associated with treatment,
and the cost, >80% of patients did not
continue to use muse at home. the latter
study seems be to confirmed by mydlo et al.
[47], who showed that most patients who did
not respond to muse responded to sildenafil,
whereas <1% of patients in whom sildenafil
failed responded to muse. the same authors
[48] also showed that a significant proportion
of patients who did not respond to either
intraurethral alprostadil or sildenafil
monotherapy responded to the combination
of the two drugs. indeed, 60 of 65 patients
stated that they were satisfied with
combination therapy. questionnaire scores for
erectile function were significantly different
(p < 0.05). patients with a higher education,
greater persistence and more realistic
expectations were more satisfied with
combined therapy.
trials comparing intracavernosal and
intraurethral therapy
intracavernosal injection therapy with
alprostadil seems to offer a better efficacy
profile than the intraurethral route with the
same drug. shabsigh et al. [49] conducted a
crossover, randomized, open-label,
multicentre study in 111 patients with ed of at
least 6 months' duration, and that compared
the efficacy, safety and patient preference of
intracavernosal injections of alprostadil
452

alfadex vs muse plus the optional actis
penile ring (i.e. a penile constriction device).
the study showed that more alprostadil
alfadex than muse administrations resulted
in an erection sufficient for sexual intercourse
(82.5% vs 53.0%) and that significantly more
patients using  xxxd124xxx  achieved at
least one erection sufficient for sexual
intercourse (92.6% vs 61.8%, p < 0.001).
patient's and partner's satisfaction was
greater with  xxxd124xxx , whereas
overall adverse events were similar with both
treatments. porst [50] reported similar results
in 103 unselected patients treated with muse
of up to 1000 mg and intracavernosal
alprostadil up to 20 mg. there was a
significant difference in cavernosal artery
end-diastolic velocity on duplex
ultrasonography after administering either
intraurethral or intracavernosal alprostadil,
showing that the former treatment was
unable to induce complete smooth muscle
relaxation. interestingly, adverse effects, i.e.
penile pain, were greater in the muse-treated
patients. the finding that intracavernosal
alprostadil can produce erections with better
rigidity than intraurethral alprostadil has also
been shown by other investigators. however,
muse has been reported to be effective in
58% of patients who did not previously
respond to intracavernosal injections of
alprostadil [51].

intraurethral administration of alprostadil
seems to have a limited role in the future,
because of the contemporary introduction of
new extremely safe and effective oral drugs,
although combination therapy may be
promising [52]. topical agents remain a very
attractive option, with the potential to
become the preferred first-line treatment if
an effective system to facilitate skin and
tunica permeation is found.

references
1

2

3

4
conclusions
5
at present, oral pharmacotherapy represents
the first-line option for most patients with ed.
sildenafil citrate is clearly very effective and
safe over a 4-year experience worldwide.
apomorphine sl is a useful adjunct to the
physician's choices, particularly for patients
with mild to moderate ed who report some
kind of residual erectile function when
starting therapy. vardenafil and tadalafil are
new drugs expected to be approved and
available on the market soon; they are both
effective and safe, and will clearly increase the
overall number of responders to oral
pharmacotherapy. patients who do not
respond to oral therapy or those who are not
eligible for this treatment are considered for
second-line treatments, which include
intracavernosal injections, intraurethral
suppositories, or topical agents. currently,
intracavernosal injection therapy is the most
effective within this group, but the major
limitation of this approach is represented by
its high attrition rate. in addition, the

6

7

8

9

meuleman e, broderick g, meng tan h et
al. clinical evaluation and the doctorpatient dialogue. in jardin a, wagner g,
khouri s, giuliano f, padma nathan h,
rosen r eds, erectile dysfunction.
plymouth uk: health publication ltd,
2000: 115–38
jardin a, wagner g, khouri s et al.
recommendations of the 1st
international consultation on erectile
dysfunction. in jardin a, wagner g,
khouri s, giuliano f, padma nathan h,
rosen r eds, erectile dysfunction.
plymouth uk: health publication ltd,
2000: 709–26
hatzichristou dg. sildenafil citrate:
lessons learned from 3 years of clinical
experience. int j impot res 2002; 14
(suppl. 1): s43–s52
steers w. viagra after one year. urology
1999; 54: 12–7
rosen rc, riley a, wagner g. the
international index of erectile function
(iief): a multidimensional scale for
assessment of erectile dysfunction.
urology 1997; 49: 822–30
moore ra, edwards je, mcquay hj.
sildenafil (viagra) for male erectile
dysfunction. a meta analysis of clinical
trial reports. mbc urol 2002; 2: 6
guay at, perez jb, jacobson j, newton ra.
efficacy and safety of sildenafil citrate
for treatment of erectile dysfunction
in a population with associated
organic risk factors. j androl 2001; 22:
793–7
zippe cd, jhaveri fm, klein ea et al. role
of viagra after radical prostatectomy.
urology 2000; 55: 241–5
hong ek, lepor h, mccullough ar. time
dependent patient satisfaction with
sildenafil for erectile dysfunction (ed)
after nerve-sparing radical retropubic
prostatectomy. int j impot res 1999; 11
(suppl. 11): s15–s22

©

2003 bju international

pharmacological management of erectile dysfunction

10 lowentritt bh. sildenafil citrate after
radical retropubic prostatectomy. urology
2000; 55: 241–5
11 giuliano f, montorsi f, mirone v, rossi d,
sweeney m. switching from
intracavernous  xxxd124xxx 
injections to oral sildenafil citrate in
patients with erectile dysfunction. results
of a multicenter european study. j urol
2000; 164: 708–11
12 hatzichristou dg, apostolidis a, tzortzis v,
ioannides e, yannakoyorgos k, kalinderis
a. sildenafil versus intracavernous
injection therapy. efficacy and preference
in patients on intracavernous injection for
more than 1 year. j urol 2000; 164: 1197–
200
13 moreira sg, brannigan re, spitz a,
orejuela fj, lipshultz li, kim ed. sideeffect profile of sildenafil citrate (viagra)
in clinical practice. urology 2000; 56:
474–6
14 arruda-olson am, mahoney dw, nehra a,
leckel m, pellikka pa. cardiovascular
effects of sildenafil during exercise in men
with known or probable coronary artery
disease. jama 2002; 287: 719–25
15 fox k, thadani u, ma pts, nash sd, keltai
m. time to onset of limiting angina during
treadmill exercise in men with erectile
dysfunction and stable chronic angina:
effect of sildenafil citrate. circulation
2001; 104 (suppl. ii): 601
16 paige nm, hays rd, litwin ms, rajfer j,
shapiro mf. improvement in emotional
well being and relationships of users of
sildenafil. j urol 2001; 166: 1774–8
17 rampin o. mode of action of a new oral
treatment for erectile dysfunction:
apomorphine sl. bju int 2001; 88 (suppl.
3): 22–4
18 mirone vg, stief cg. efficacy of
apomorphine sl in erectile dysfunction.
bju int 2001; 88 (suppl. 3): 25–9
19 dula e, bukofzer s, perdok r, george m.
double-blind, crossover comparison of 3
mg apomorphine sl with placebo and
with 4 mg apomorphine sl in male
erectile dysfunction. eur urol 2001; 39:
558–64
20 heaton jp, dean j, sleep dj. sequential
administration enhances the effect of
apomorphine in men with erectile
dysfunction. int j impot res 2002; 14: 61–
4
21 buvat j, montorsi f. safety and tolerability
of apomorphine sl in patients with
erectile dysfunction. bju int 2001; 88
(suppl. 3): 30–5

©

2003 bju international

22 stark s, sachse r, liedl t et al. vardenafil
increases penile rigidity and tumescence
in men with erectile dysfunction after a
single oral dose. eur urol 2001; 40: 181–
90
23 klotz t, sachse r, heidrich a et al.
vardenafil increases penile rigidity and
tumescence in erectile dysfunction
patients: a rigiscan and pharmacokinetic
study. world j urol 2001; 19: 32–9
24 porst h, rosen r, padma-nathan h et al.
the efficacy and tolerability of vardenafil,
a new, oral selective pde-5 inhibitor, in
patients with erectile dysfunction: first
at-home clinical trial. int j impot res
2001; 13: 192–9
25 pryor jp. vardenafil: update on clinical
experience. int j impot res 2002; 14
(suppl. 1): s65–s69
26 padma-nathan h, rosen rc, shabsigh r,
saikali k, watkins v, pullman w. cialis
( xxxd3272xxx ) provides prompt response and
extended period of responsiveness in the
treatment of men with erectile
dysfunction (ed). j urol 2001; 165
(suppl): a923
27 padma-nathan h, mcmurray jg, pullman
we et al. on demand  xxxd3272xxx  (cialis)
enhances erectile function in patients
with erectile dysfunction. int j impot res
2001; 13: 2–9
28 porst h. daily  xxxd3272xxx  treatment of ed.
int j impot res 2000; 12 (suppl. 3): s76,
a–b13
29 saenz de tejada i, emmick j, anglin g,
fredlund p, pullman w. the effect of asneeded tadalafil ( xxxd3272xxx ) treatment of
erectile dysfunction in men with diabetes.
int j impot res 2001; 13 (suppl. 4):
a128
30 patterson b, bedding a, jewell h, payne c,
mitchell m. the effect of intrinsic and
extrinsic factors on the pharmacokinetic
properties of tadalafil ( xxxd3272xxx ). int j impot
res 2001; 13 (suppl. 4): a120
31 porst h.  xxxd3272xxx  (tadalafil, cialis): update on
clinical experience. int j impot res 2002;
14 (suppl. 1): s57–s64
32 montorsi f, guazzoni g, rigatti p, pozza g.
pharmacological management of
erectile dysfunction. drugs 1995; 50:
465–79
33 montorsi f, guazzoni g, bergamaschi f.
four-drug intracavernous therapy for
impotence due to corporeal venoocclusive dysfunction. j urol 1993; 149:
1291–5
34 montorsi f, guazzoni g, bergamaschi f.
intracavernous vasoactive

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

pharmacotherapy. the impact of a new
self-injection device. j urol 1993; 150:
1829–32
zentgraf m, baccouche m, junemann kp.
diagnosis and therapy of erectile
dysfunction using papaverine and
 xxxd2914xxx . urol int 1988; 43: 65–8
leungwattanakij l, flynn v, hellstrom
wjg. intracavernosal injection and
intraurethral therapy for erectile
dysfunction. urol clin n am 2001; 28:
343–54
montorsi f, salonia a, zanoni m et al.
current status of local penile therapy.
int j impot res 2002; 14 (suppl. 1):
s70–s81
marshall ga, breza j, lue tf. improved
hemodynamic response after long-term
intracavernous injection for impotence.
urology 1994; 43: 844–7
wespes e, sattar aa, noel jc. does
 xxxd124xxx  therapy modify the
intracavernous musculature? j urol 2000;
163: 464–6
brock g, mai tu l, linet o. return of
spontaneous erection during long-term
intracavernosal alprostadil ( xxxd124xxx )
treatment. int j impot res 2001; 57: 536–
41
maniam p, seftel a, corty e. nocturnal
penile tumescence activity unchanged
after long-term intracavernous injection
therapy. j urol 2001; 165: 830–3
shabsigh r, padma nathan h, gittleman
m. intracavernous  xxxd124xxx  is
effective and safe in patients with erectile
dysfunction after failing sildenafil.
urology 2000; 55: 477–80
vardi y, saenz de tejada i. functional and
radiologic evidence of vascular
communication between the spongiosal
and cavernosal compartments of the
penis. urology 1997; 49: 749–52
lewis r. review of intraurethral
suppositories and iontophoresis therapy
for erectile dysfunction. int j impot res
2000; 12 (suppl. 4): s86–s90
williams g, abbou cc, amar et. efficacy
and safety of transurethral alprostadil
therapy in men with erectile dysfunction.
br j urol 1998; 81: 889–94
fulgham pf, cochran js, denman jl.
disappointing initial results with
transurethral alprostadil for erectile
dysfunction in a urology practice setting.
j urol 1998; 160: 2041–6
mydlo jh, volpe ma, macchia rj. initial
results utilizing combination therapy for
patients with a suboptimal response to
453

f. m o n to r s i et al.

either alprostadil or sildenafil
monotherapy. eur urol 2000; 38: 30–4
48 mydlo jh, volpe ma, macchia rj. results
from different patient populations using
combined therapy with alprostadil and
sildenafil: predictors of satisfaction. bju
int 2000; 86: 469–73
49 shabsigh r, padma nathan h, gittleman
m. intracavernous  xxxd124xxx  is
more efficacious, better tolerated, and
preferred over intraurethral alprostadil
plus optional actis: a comparative,
randomised, crossover, multicenter study.
urology 2000; 55: 109–13

454

50 porst h. transurethral alprostadil with
muse (vs intracavernous alprostadil – a
comparative study in 103 patients with
erectile dysfunction. int j impot res 1997;
9: 187–92
51 shokeir aa, alserafi ma, mutabagani h.
intracavernosal versus intraurethral
alprostadil: a prospective randomised
study. bju int 1999; 83: 812–5
52 nehra a, blute ml, barrett dm, moreland
rb. rationale for combination therapy of
intraurethral  xxxd124xxx  and
sildenafil in the salvage of erectile
dysfunction patients desiring non-

invasive therapy. int j impot res 2002; 14
(suppl. 1): 38–42
correspondence: prof. f. montorsi,
department of urology, university vita-salute
san raffaele, via olgettina 60, 20132 milan,
italy.
e-mail: montorsi.francesco@hsr.it
abbreviations: ed, erectile dysfunction; iief,
international index of erectile function; sl,
sublingual;  xxxd124xxx ,  xxxd124xxx .

©

2003 bju international

