aliment pharmacol ther 2003; 17: 733–750.

doi: 10.1046/j.0269-2813.2003.01495.x

review article: pancreatic function testing
r. s. chowdhur y & c. e. forsma rk
division of gastroenterology, hepatology, and nutrition, university of florida, gainesville, fl, usa
accepted for publication 29 december 2002

summary

pancreatic function tests are most commonly used to
diagnose chronic pancreatitis. these tests include tests
which document exocrine or endocrine gland insufficiency and tests which instead measure gradations of
decreased secretory capacity. the tests in the former
category generally become abnormal when advanced,
longstanding chronic pancreatitis is present. tests in the
latter category, however, have the potential to detect

introduction

tests that measure pancreatic function are most
commonly performed to diagnose chronic pancreatitis,
although they can also be used to determine the severity
of the disease. the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis is
most reliably made by histological examination. unfortunately, as the pancreas is a deep-seated retroperitoneal organ with a high incidence of complications
following biopsy, pancreatic histology is rarely available
to clinicians. the diagnosis is suspected on the basis of
compatible signs and symptoms and most often confirmed by imaging studies or pancreatic function tests.
a wide variety of imaging tests (tests of pancreatic
structure) and pancreatic function tests are available to
clinicians. there are some general observations that
apply to all of these tests. like all diagnostic tests, they
are most accurate in advanced disease. chronic pancreatitis is, in most patients, a slowly progressive
correspondence to: dr c. e. forsmark, university of florida college of
medicine, box 100214, room hd-602, 1600 sw archer road,
gainesville, fl 32610-0214, usa.
e-mail: forsmce@medicine.ufl.edu
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd

chronic pancreatitis at an earlier stage than other
available diagnostic tests, including commonly used
imaging tests such as computed tomography and
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. this
potential advantage of diagnostic sensitivity is, however,
counterweighed by the fact that these tests which
measure stimulated secretory capacity are only available
at a very few referral centres. this article will review the
variety of pancreatic function tests and describe their
rationale, accuracy, cost, and clinical usefulness.

disease. over years of ongoing disease, the gland
becomes progressively more damaged. evidence of this
damage becomes increasingly obvious over time. as the
disease progresses, damage to the pancreatic duct and
parenchyma becomes easier to visualize with imaging
studies, such as transabdominal ultrasound, computed
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging with cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic ultrasonography and
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. a
dilated and irregular main pancreatic duct, diffuse
pancreatic calcifications and pancreatic atrophy are
some of the structural abnormalities which develop in
more advanced chronic pancreatitis, and are easily
detected by the above tests. in less advanced disease,
these changes are more subtle or absent, limiting the
diagnostic accuracy of these tests of pancreatic structure. similarly, as chronic pancreatitis progresses,
disorders of pancreatic function begin to develop. these
abnormalities of function include exocrine insufficiency
(steatorrhoea) and endocrine insufficiency (diabetes
mellitus). like diffuse pancreatic calcifications or a
markedly abnormal pancreatic duct, these functional
abnormalities may take years to develop.
733

734

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

the rate at which these structural and functional
abnormalities develop is variable and may depend on
the aetiology of chronic pancreatitis. in one large
natural history study, those with alcoholic chronic
pancreatitis developed exocrine insufficiency, endocrine
insufficiency and diffuse pancreatic calcifications at
median times of 13.1 years, 19.8 years and 8.7 years,
respectively.1 for early-onset idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, the timing was substantially different, with
median times of 26.3 years, 27.5 years and 24.9 years,
respectively. whilst the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis
may be obvious at the time of presentation in some
patients, one can see from these estimates that substantial periods of time may need to pass before many
diagnostic tests become highly accurate.
there are also tests of pancreatic function which do
not measure the presence of functional gland failure
(exocrine or endocrine insufficiency), but instead
attempt to measure moderate decreases in stimulated
secretory capacity. these tests, unlike those outlined
above, have the potential to detect damage to the
pancreas that is less obvious and less advanced. it is
within this context that one can put into perspective the
variety of tests of pancreatic function which are
available.
an understanding of normal pancreatic function is
necessary to comprehend the rationale for different
pancreatic function tests. the pancreas combines critical exocrine and endocrine functions and has complex
regulatory mechanisms. the secretions of the exocrine
pancreas, approximately 1 l/day, consist of water,
bicarbonate and digestive enzymes. digestive enzymes
are primarily secreted in inactive or zymogen form (all
proteases in particular) by pancreatic acinar cells.
pancreatic ductal cells secrete bicarbonate. once pancreatic juice reaches the duodenum, the pro-enzyme
trypsinogen is activated to trypsin by the brush border
enzyme enterokinase. trypsin is then able to activate
the other proteases to their active form. both vagal and
hormonal pathways mediate the secretion of enzymes
by acinar cells. vagal input initiates pancreatic secretion in the cephalic phase of eating. continued prandial
and post-prandial pancreatic enzyme secretion is mediated by cholecystokinin (pancreozymin), acting primarily through vagal afferents. secretion of bicarbonate is
under the control of the hormone secretin, released in
response to duodenal acidification. in advanced chronic
pancreatitis with exocrine or endocrine insufficiency,
tests of pancreatic function are used to document the

presence of insufficiency. other tests of pancreatic
function, however, attempt to measure stimulated
pancreatic secretory capacity using one of the two
secretagogues (cholecystokinin or secretin) involved in
normal pancreatic secretion. this type of testing has the
potential advantage of detecting chronic pancreatitis at
a somewhat earlier stage, prior to the development of
end-stage exocrine or endocrine insufficiency.
the concept of the differentiation of chronic pancreatitis into more advanced and less advanced disease has
clinical utility. those with advanced disease, often
called ‘big-duct’ disease due to the presence of significant abnormalities of pancreatic structure, are easy to
diagnose, often have associated exocrine or endocrine
insufficiency and most commonly have alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. those with less advanced disease, often
called ‘small-duct’ or ‘minimal change’ chronic pancreatitis, less commonly have associated exocrine or
endocrine insufficiency, more commonly suffer from
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and can be difficult to
diagnose. this concept will be used to discuss the utility
of tests of pancreatic function.
tests of pancreatic function are based on either the
direct measurement of pancreatic secretion (bicarbonate
and/or digestive enzymes) or the measurement of the
secondary effects resulting from the lack of digestive
enzymes. historically, exocrine pancreatic function tests
have also been classified as direct or indirect.2–7 the
determination of whether a test is ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’
has not been strictly defined and some tests might
theoretically fit into both descriptions. we use ‘direct’ to
imply either a collection of pancreatic secretions for
analysis or a measurement of a pancreatic enzyme level
in blood or stool. we use ‘indirect’ to include all tests
that attempt to measure the function of the pancreas by
measuring the effect of inadequate digestive enzymes,
bicarbonate or insulin. in addition, we divide the tests
into those which are invasive (require a tube placed into
the duodenum or an endoscope) and those which are
not (‘tubeless’). this organization is presented in
table 1.

direct tests of pancreatic function

direct tests of pancreatic secretory capacity
the principle of invasive direct pancreatic function
testing is to collect and measure pancreatic secretions
and determine pancreatic secretory capacity. as basal
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing
table 1. pancreatic function tests
direct
invasive
secretin test
secretin–cholecystokinin test
secretin– xxxd464xxx  test
secretin– xxxg977xxx  test
intraductal secretin test
75
se-methionine test
serum  xxxg1823xxx 
lundh test

indirect (all are tubeless)
pancreolauryl test
 xxxd301xxx  test
dual-label schilling test
quantitative faecal
fat excretion
triglyceride breath test
faecal fat analysis
serum glucose level

non-invasive (tubeless)
serum trypsin assay
faecal chymotrypsin
amino acid consumption test
faecal  xxxg429xxx 

pancreatic secretion is highly variable, it is necessary to
stimulate the pancreas with a secretagogue, either
secretin or cholecystokinin (or one of its analogues).
the pancreatic secretions are collected by a tube placed
into the duodenum and maintained under suction. the
concept of direct pancreatic function testing using the
hormone secretin as a secretagogue was first described
by lagerloef 60 years ago.8 since that time, a variety of
modifications have been made in collection time,
secretagogue and timing.9–12 despite (or because of)
these modifications, there is no unanimously accepted
well-standardized direct pancreatic function test.
attempts to standardize these tests have been undertaken by the japanese society of gastroenterology.13, 14
consensus was reached and a standardized test was
recommended.14 this test format has become accepted
in japan as the ‘gold-standard’ for the evaluation of
exocrine pancreatic function, for monitoring its clinical
course and for distinguishing between pancreatic and
intestinal steatorrhoea.12 the european pancreatic club
also tried to standardize the test procedures in a
multicentre study, but a wide variation in the results
of the enzyme measurement led to a lack of consensus
and no single test protocol was adopted.7, 11 no such
attempts at standardization have occurred in the usa
and only a few specialized centres perform the test. each
centre has developed its own protocol and has had to
define the test performance characteristics (normal
ranges, sensitivity, specificity) individually.
all of these tests begin with the stimulation of
pancreatic secretion. the stimulation can be achieved
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

735

either by a test meal or by a secretagogue. the use of a
physiological stimulus (a meal) is the basis of the lundh
test.7, 15 a tube is placed in the duodenum for the
aspiration of duodenal contents. the patient is given a
300-ml test meal of 5% protein, 6% fat and 15%
carbohydrate in liquid form; the duodenal contents are
then aspirated for 2 h and trypsin, lipase or amylase
output is measured.16, 17 the sensitivity of the lundh
test ranges from 66% to 94%.17, 18 in one comparison,
a supra-physiological stimulus with a secretagogue
(secretin and cholecystokinin) was more sensitive and
specific than the lundh test.19, 20 this finding has led to
the abandonment of the lundh.
there has been much debate about which secretagogue should be used to maximize the sensitivity of
direct pancreatic function testing. different investigators
have used secretin alone, cholecystokinin alone and
secretin plus cholecystokinin (or one of the cholecystokinin analogues, such as  xxxd464xxx  or  xxxg977xxx ).
bicarbonate and volume output are usually measured if
secretin is used as the secretagogue; enzyme output is
usually measured if cholecystokinin or one of its
analogues is used. both bicarbonate and enzyme output
are measured when the two are used together. depending on the centre, secretin and cholecystokinin are
administered at different doses, by different routes and
in different orders of administration. secretin has been
given at doses of 0.5–4.0 cu/kg body weight.21–30
studies have used bolus intravenous injection,24, 25
subcutaneous injection26 or continuous intravenous
infusion.27, 28 in one study, there was no difference
between bolus intravenous injection and continuous
drip infusion in 20 healthy volunteers.23 in another
study, however, bolus intravenous injection of secretin
and cholecystokinin showed greater diagnostic sensitivity (94%) than the continuous infusion method
(84%).29 one comparative study measured the response
to a standard (1 u/kg) dose and augmented dose
(4–5 u/kg) of secretin in healthy volunteers and in
patients with chronic pancreatitis.30 this study concluded that the standard dose is sufficient for the diagnosis
of well-established pancreatitis, whilst the augmented
dose is of particular value when the response to the
usual dose is equivocal, as a higher stimulation may
unmask the deficiency of stimulated secretory capacity.
there have been few comparative studies of the
cholecystokinin dosage or the accuracy of cholecystokinin analogues. similar to secretin, cholecystokinin can
be administered as a single intravenous dose31–33 or as

736

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

a continuous intravenous infusion.34 when combined
with secretin, cholecystokinin can be administered
before,31 concomitant with32 or after33 secretin. it can
also be used without secretin.35, 36 cholecystokinin has
also been replaced by  xxxd464xxx  (a synthetic form) to test
the exocrine function of the pancreas.37 finally, the
intravenous infusion of  xxxg977xxx  has been found to
stimulate pancreatic secretion, amylase and trypsin
concentration, but not bicarbonate.38 it is not known
whether one method or secretagogue is superior to
another. only one trial has attempted to compare
secretin with secretin plus cholecystokinin.39 this trial
showed no significant difference in secretory volume,
maximal bicarbonate concentration or amylase output,
with similar sensitivity and specificity, amongst healthy
japanese controls.39 this study has not been confirmed
in patients with chronic pancreatitis.
biological porcine secretin was in widespread use until
a shortage developed a few years ago. synthetic porcine
secretin40 and recombinant human secretin41 subsequently became available for research purposes, and
comparison studies between all three secretin preparations revealed no statistically significant differences in
the accuracy for the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.40, 41 a synthetic porcine secretin preparation has
now been approved by the food and drug administration and is available for commercial use.
the two major technical problems in the measurement of pancreatic juice volume and bicarbonate and
enzyme contents after stimulation of the pancreas are
the prevention of contamination by gastric juice and of
the loss of duodenal contents into the jejunum or by
reflux into the stomach.7, 16 a separate tube or
separate tube port is placed within the stomach to
aspirate gastric contents and minimize contamination
of the duodenal collections. the tube most commonly
used has separate gastric and duodenal ports. placing
the gastric port in the antrum can ensure near
complete aspiration of the gastric contents, and the
amount of duodeno-gastric reflux is negligible in most
instances.42–44 different methods have been employed
for the collection of the duodenal fluid sample containing pancreatic secretions. the goal is to maximize
collections of all pancreatic secretions and to avoid
significant downstream losses of fluid that reaches the
jejunum beyond the tube. to ensure the complete
collection of both gastric and duodenal juice, tubes with
balloons for the occlusion of both the pylorus and the
distal duodenum have been used.45, 46 this technique

has not proven to be useful, as balloon inflation to
occlude the lumen is painful and may additionally alter
small bowel motility with a secondary effect on
pancreatic secretions.4 a second method to gauge the
adequacy of collections is to use non-absorbable
perfusion markers, such as  xxxd2982xxx  or
57
co-labelled vitamin b12.47–49 these markers can be
placed in the stomach to measure contamination by
gastric fluid, or placed in the duodenum to gauge the
adequacy of collection of fluid. the data for marker
recovery using these agents differ considerably and,
unfortunately, are almost impossible to compare, as the
methods of intubation, position of patients, markers
used, their concentration and infusion rate vary from
study to study.49 using  xxxd2982xxx  as a
marker, recovery was very high in some studies,44, 50–52 but only 40% in others.53, 54 it is now
widely accepted that a recovery rate of ‡ 85%, as
determined by marker perfusion, indicates a satisfactory
collection.7, 16 as it is almost impossible to control
for the adequate mixing of markers and duodenal
secretions, however, a low recovery rate of marker does
not necessarily indicate high losses of duodenal juice.7
if peak bicarbonate concentration, rather than total
bicarbonate output or volume, is used as the primary
parameter, no perfusion markers are generally required
as the concentration of bicarbonate should not vary
tremendously.40, 41 in this situation, a double-lumen
tube with one port in the antrum and the second port in
the duodenum is adequate. when the total output of
bicarbonate, total volume output or total output of
enzymes is used as the diagnostic parameter, complete
collection of the pancreatic juice is necessary and the
use of a marker technique is advised. bicarbonate
concentration may be measured by back titration (as
used in the author’s laboratory) or on standard
laboratory auto-analysers, provided that the measurement is performed rapidly to minimize the loss of
bicarbonate. our laboratory uses peak bicarbonate
concentration as the primary test variable, and total
volume output and total bicarbonate output are
only employed for equivocal results of bicarbonate
concentration.
one of the most difficult problems in standard direct
pancreatic function testing is to ensure that the
collection tube is placed correctly and that the patient
can tolerate it for the 1-h collection period usually
required. one attempted modification of the collection
technique has been to collect pure pancreatic secretions
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

through pancreatic duct cannulation at the time
of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography,
rather than duodenal tube intubation and collection of
duodenal juice after stimulation. this so-called ‘intraductal’ secretin test is much shorter than the conventional test using duodenal tubes. the intraductal
secretin test uses three 5-min collections. the first
sample is discarded; bicarbonate concentration is measured in the subsequent two 5-min samples. only a few
published studies are available regarding the intraductal
secretin test.55–57 denyer and cotton found it to be
ineffective in distinguishing between patients with early
chronic pancreatitis and those in the normal or
advanced chronic pancreatitis groups.55 however, ochi
et al. found the intraductal secretin test to be useful as a
standard intraduodenal secretin test, and reported that
the best discriminatory parameters were the secretory
volume, bicarbonate output and lipase output.56
although the intraductal secretin test is rapid and
obviates the concern about the adequacy of collection of
pancreatic juice, it is quite brief. some studies have
shown that the measurement of later time points
improves the diagnostic accuracy. in one study, the
decrease in enzyme output in chronic pancreatitis was
significantly more abnormal in the final 30-min collection of a  xxxd464xxx –secretin test, compared with the first
30 min.37 our own laboratory has also shown that the
peak bicarbonate concentration often occurs as late as
45–50 min after stimulation.58 in one comparison
between standard intraduodenal pancreatic function
testing and intraductal pancreatic function testing,
there was significant disagreement between the two
tests. depending on the centre, intraductal secretin
testing can vary widely in terms of the methods of
stimulation, patient characteristics, time of collection
and parameter used. further standardization is required
to determine the accuracy of intraductal function
testing.59
the aspiration of duodenal juice can also be performed
by a polyethylene tube passed through the biopsy
channel of a standard gastroscope, after stimulation
with either secretin or secretin– xxxd464xxx . a catheter
can be used with an occlusion balloon, with or without
simultaneous balloon occlusion of the proximal duodenum by a balloon attached at the distal end of the
endoscope.60, 61 good correlation (10 of 11 patients)
was found in one small study between the maximal
enzyme output and maximal bicarbonate concentration
in this type of endoscopic secretin test and the result of a
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

737

standard secretin–cholecystokinin test.60 this needs to
be confirmed in a larger number of patients.
controversy also exists with regard to which parameter of pancreatic secretion should be used as the test
outcome parameter. as mentioned earlier, total volume
output, bicarbonate output and bicarbonate concentration have been used in centres in which secretin alone is
employed as the secretagogue. the activity of various
enzymes can be measured when cholecystokinin is
used, alone or in combination with secretin. the best
correlation has been found between the histological
grading of chronic pancreatitis and maximal bicarbonate secretion, followed by amylase output and total
volume, when the cholecystokinin–secretin test is
compared with histology.62 the estimation of bicarbonate secretion after secretin stimulation has also been
found to have maximum sensitivity in the detection of
chronic pancreatitis.63 it is unclear whether the simultaneous measurements of three (trypsin, amylase and
lipase) or more enzymes provide further information
compared with the measurement of a single enzyme
(usually trypsin). when three enzymes (trypsin, amylase and lipase) have been measured, it has been shown
that only 72% of patients with chronic pancreatitis
have an impaired secretion of all three, but that 90%
of patients with chronic pancreatitis may show an
impairment in the secretion of at least one of these three
enzymes.37
as there is no unanimously accepted method of direct
pancreatic stimulation testing, various centres have
standardized their own method. the direct pancreatic
stimulation test, using secretin as the secretagogue and
the peak bicarbonate concentration as the diagnostic
parameter, has been used in our laboratory for many
years and the technique is summarized in table 2.
direct pancreatic function testing using a hormonal
secretagogue appears to be the most sensitive test for
the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. determining the
sensitivity and specificity of a test for chronic pancreatitis can be difficult given the lack of a useful gold
standard. the accuracy of the secretin–cholecystokinin
test has, however, been compared with histology in a
few studies.62, 64, 65 in one study, the sensitivity of the
secretin–cholecystokinin stimulation test was 67% in
39 patients with histologically confirmed chronic pancreatitis of all grades, the specificity was 90% in 69
patients without chronic pancreatitis and the efficacy
was 81%.62 in this study, there was a nearly linear
relationship between the severity of histological damage

738

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

table 2. method of the secretin stimulation test used in the pancreas research center of the university of florida, gainesville, fl, usa
secretin testing is performed following a 12-h fast
position of the patient: sitting
anaesthesia: local anaesthetic spray of the oro-pharynx [4%  xxxd2482xxx  (lidocaine) solution and 20%  xxxd305xxx ]
intubation: the oesophagus is orally intubated with a double-lumen, weighted tube (dreiling tube) pre-loaded with a radio-opaque
guide wire. the tube is then advanced under fluoroscopic guidance so that the proximal aspiration ports are positioned in the
stomach and the distal ports are positioned in the second and third portion of the duodenum. after removal of the guide wire,
the proximal end of the tube is taped to the subject’s face to prevent migration and each lumen is connected to separate flasks
to which constant suction (3–5 mmhg) is applied. the suction is periodically released to prevent clogging of the aspiration ports
with gastric or duodenal mucosa
dose of secretin: following a 15-min baseline collection, 1 cu/kg of porcine secretin is administered intravenously as a
0.1-ml test dose infused over 1 min, followed by infusion of the remainder of the dose over another minute if no adverse reaction
is noted with the test dose
collection of the aspirates: the duodenal aspirates are then collected in 15-min aliquots over 1 h
measurement of the parameters:
the total volume of each sample
ph of each sample
bicarbonate concentration (using back titration) of each sample
the volume per kilogram body weight
the total bicarbonate output for each 15-min duodenal collection
normal range:
peak bicarbonate (80–130 meq/l)
vol/kg (1.5–5.7 ml/kg)
total output (10.1–37.0 meq/h)

and the mean peak bicarbonate output. in the group of
patients with moderate to severe histological chronic
pancreatitis, the sensitivity of the direct pancreatic
function test was 79%, compared with 66% for
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. in
other words, the direct pancreatic function test detected
some patients with chronic pancreatitis who did not (or
not yet) have abnormalities of the pancreatic duct
visible on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. this study used a very high threshold for an
abnormal test (decrease in peak bicarbonate concentration, volume and amylase output). using the criteria in
place at our laboratory, the sensitivity of the test would
have been much higher, although obviously the
specificity would have decreased. in another study
involving 25 surgically resected specimens of chronic
pancreatitis patients, 22 of 25 patients had a statistically significant correlation between the secretin–
cholecystokinin test and histological changes.64 the
remaining three patients with normal secretin test
results were found to have minimal histological
changes. another study compared both the secretin
test and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with histology in patients with chronic pancreatitis.65 this study found that the secretin test was

somewhat better than endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, as it missed only four of 24 (16%)
patients with a histological diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, whereas endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography missed seven (30%).65
many studies have compared the direct hormonal
stimulation test with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, without using a histological gold
standard. in these studies, the sensitivity for direct
pancreatic function studies lies in the range 72–94%,
with a specificity of 80–90%.66–75 direct pancreatic
function testing agrees with endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography in about three-quarters of
patients. most studies have found that endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography and pancreatic
function testing are complementary, in that patients
with chronic pancreatitis can be identified by both tests.
most of these studies have identified patients with
discordant test results: patients with abnormal hormonal stimulation tests and normal endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography, and vice versa. the percentage of patients with an abnormal hormonal stimulation
test and normal endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography lies in the range 3–20%.68, 71–73, 75 two
small studies have followed patients whose diagnosis
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

was based solely on an abnormal hormonal stimulation
test, and both found that chronic pancreatitis developed
on follow-up in 90%.72, 76 these data suggest that
direct pancreatic function testing appears to be able to
identify a group of patients with chronic pancreatitis
who have functional abnormalities of stimulated secretion, but who do not yet have structural abnormalities
identifiable at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. conversely, these studies also document
patients with normal direct pancreatic function testing
and abnormal endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. long-term follow-up shows that chronic
pancreatitis develops in 0–26% of these patients.71–76
these are all relatively small studies and are not
sufficient to be definitive. it seems likely, based on the
data that we have, that many patients develop detectable abnormalities of stimulated secretory capacity prior
to identifiable abnormalities of pancreatic structure
detected by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, although the reverse is also possible.
direct hormonal testing has also been compared with
endoscopic ultrasonography. in preliminary studies,
direct pancreatic function testing appears to be
somewhat more sensitive than endoscopic ultrasonography in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, and
‘small-duct’ chronic pancreatitis in particular, although
discordant test results have also been documented in
these studies.77–79
like all diagnostic tests, direct pancreatic function
studies are most sensitive in advanced chronic pancreatitis and less sensitive in less advanced disease. some
experts have estimated that 30–50% damage to the
gland is necessary before these tests are reliably positive.
most studies suggest that direct pancreatic function
tests are more sensitive than other, more widely
available, diagnostic tests. direct pancreatic function
testing is most useful in patients with presumed chronic
pancreatitis (based on symptoms) who do not have
easily identifiable structural and functional abnormalities on more widely available diagnostic tests,
such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic ultrasonography or computed
tomography.5, 80
despite being the most sensitive test for the diagnosis of
chronic pancreatitis, direct pancreatic function testing
using a hormonal secretagogue has a number of
important limitations: (i) the test has not yet been
standardized in the usa; (ii) the normal ranges for the
test need to be established at each centre performing the
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

739

test; (iii) the test is only available in a few referral
centres; (iv) there have been difficulties in the availability of porcine secretin; (v) the test is unpleasant for
patients; and (vi) false positive results have been
reported in patients with diabetes, billroth 2 gastrectomy, coeliac sprue, cirrhosis and those recovering from
an attack of acute pancreatitis.
direct tests of pancreatic synthetic capacity
radio-labelled amino acids given intravenously are
rapidly taken up by pancreatic acinar cells and
subsequently incorporated into newly synthesized pancreatic digestive enzymes. based on this principle, the
use of 75se-methionine as a test of pancreatic function
and as a method to visualize the pancreas by scintigraphy was introduced many years ago.81, 82
75
se-methionine is given as an intravenous bolus
injection, followed by pancreatic stimulation.82–84 the
protein-bound radioactivity in the duodenal aspirates is
used as an index of pancreatic exocrine function. some
studies reported a good separation of healthy controls
and patients with chronic pancreatitis,82, 83 whereas
more recent studies failed to show a sufficient sensitivity
for this test.84–86 the sensitivity and specificity of this
test are both considerably less than those of the
secretin–cholecystokinin stimulation test, despite being
an equally invasive procedure requiring duodenal
intubation and exposure to radioactive substances.4
direct tests of pancreatic metabolic activity
a proposed method for the measurement of pancreatic
function is to measure pancreatic metabolic activity.
the pancreas is one of the largest protein-synthesizing
organs in the body and, following stimulation, amino
acids have been shown to be taken up by the pancreas
with a decrease in the amino acid pool in the serum.
theoretically, a diseased pancreas would be less able to
extract amino acids from the serum and the measured
decrease in amino acids would be less. based on this
concept, plasma levels of amino acids were measured
before and after stimulation of the pancreas with
secretin and cholecystokinin in control subjects and
chronic pancreatitis patients.87, 88 at a cut-off limit of
< 12% for the decrease in total amino acids (measured
by the ninhydrin method), mild exocrine insufficiency
was identified with a sensitivity of 67%, whereas
moderately to severe pancreatic functional impairment

740

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

was detected in every case (overall sensitivity, 91%).
other studies, however, have found the amino acid
consumption test to be of limited specificity (21%) such
that it could not discriminate between patients with
normal pancreatic function and those with impaired
function.89, 90 the lack of specificity has led to the
abandonment of this test for clinical purposes.
measurements of pancreatic enzymes in serum
serum levels of amylase or lipase have no relationship
to pancreatic function. in contrast, very low levels of
serum trypsinogen (also called serum trypsin) can be
seen in some patients with advanced chronic pancreatitis. overall, serum trypsinogen is insensitive as a
diagnostic test, with a sensitivity in the range
33–65%.91–93 this wide range of variation is due to
the fact that serum trypsinogen levels are in the normal
range in most patients with less advanced chronic
pancreatitis. only a very low level of serum trypsinogen
(< 20 ng/ml) is reasonably specific for chronic pancreatitis,91 but levels that low are only seen in advanced
chronic pancreatitis with steatorrhoea. a very low level
of serum trypsinogen is therefore a marker of severely
deranged pancreatic function (exocrine insufficiency).
false positive results do not occur in patients with nonpancreatic steatorrhoea, making  xxxg1852xxx  suitable
screening test in patients with steatorrhoea of pancreatic origin. the test is inexpensive, widely available and
risk free. false positive results have been reported in
patients with pancreatic ductal obstruction secondary
to cancer, recent acute pancreatitis, pancreatic pseudocyst, renal failure and diabetes mellitus.94–97
similar to serum trypsinogen, abnormalities in serum
concentrations of  xxxg1823xxx  have been
proposed as a function test in chronic pancreatitis.
 xxxg1823xxx  is a hormone found in high
concentration in the endocrine cells as well as the
exocrine tissue of the pancreas.2 protein ingestion and
cholecystokinin administration normally induce secretion of this peptide. a subnormal rise in plasma
 xxxg1823xxx  after stimulation with a proteinrich meal or secretin infusion has been proposed as an
indicator of chronic pancreatitis.98–100 a number of
studies, however, have noted poor correlation between
plasma  xxxg1823xxx  following a meal and
pancreatic exocrine function, and have concluded that
the test is insensitive for the detection of chronic
pancreatitis,101, 102 at least in its earlier stages.103

pancreatic proteases in stool
the reduced output of pancreatic proteases may be
reflected in a decreased concentration of these proteases
in stool. trypsin activity was measured in the stool of
patients with pancreatic insufficiency, but was found to
be both insensitive and non-specific.104 proteolytic or
autocatalytic degradation of this protease during intestinal transit was presumed to be the reason for the
unsatisfactory accuracy of the faecal trypsin assay.
chymotrypsin appears to be more stable than trypsin,
avoiding this degradation, due in large measure to its
ability to bind to cellular material and other insoluble
debris present in the stool sample.105 the faecal
chymotrypsin assay has been used as a pancreatic
function test for many years. it is invariably decreased
below the lower reference value in patients with
pancreatic steatorrhoea and shows significant negative
correlation with faecal fat excretion.105 the sensitivity
of the faecal chymotrypsin assay as a diagnostic test
for chronic pancreatitis has been reported to range from
0% to 100%, with most studies reporting values of
72–90%.106–116 in one study of 69 patients, with 20
having chronic pancreatitis of varying severity, the
stool chymotrypsin assay showed a sensitivity of 0% for
mild disease and 57% for moderate to severe disease.106
studies comparing the results of the faecal chymotrypsin assay with those of a secretin– xxxd464xxx  test showed
that the faecal chymotrypsin assay can diagnose 86% of
patients with severe disease, 50% of patients with
moderate disease and 25% of patients with mild
disease.108, 116 the specificity reported ranged from
49% to 100%, depending on the selection of the
control subjects studied. the measurement of faecal
chymotrypsin can also be used to detect pancreatic
insufficiency in children with cystic fibrosis with
80–90% certainty.117, 118
the faecal chymotrypsin assay is a reliable test for
advanced chronic pancreatitis, but is very unreliable for
early disease. the test, however, has some advantages
compared with the measurement of other proteases in
stool. the test is very simple, using an inexpensive
commercial kit and an automatic titrator. the correlation between the values in random samples vs. those
collected over 24 h has been shown to be satisfactory.104, 119 thus, a small stool sample is all that is
required, obviating the need for 72-h faecal fat collection. the sample is stable over a number of days at room
temperature, so that it can be mailed to diagnostic
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

centres. finally, the measurement of faecal chymotrypsin in patients with known pancreatic insufficiency
treated with pancreatic supplements can reveal whether
the therapy is adequate or not by documenting
adequate levels of exogenous chymotrypsin.105 the test
is used in europe, but not in the usa.
additional pancreatic enzymes have been measured in
stool. pancreatic  xxxg429xxx  has been isolated and
characterized as a pancreas-specific protease in humans
that undergoes minimal degradation during intestinal
transit; it is approximately six-fold enriched in faeces
compared with duodenal juice.120–123  xxxg429xxx  can be
measured in stool using a sensitive enzyme-linked
immunoabsorbent assay with monoclonal antibodies.121, 122 excellent correlation has been found between
the faecal  xxxg429xxx  level and duodenal juice amylase,
lipase and trypsin values in both controls and chronic
pancreatitis patients.124, 125 several studies have been
published comparing faecal  xxxg429xxx  and faecal chymotrypsin assays in patients diagnosed with chronic
pancreatitis of varying severity based on morphological
tests and/or pancreatic function tests.106, 124–128 the
results of these studies vary widely. the sensitivity of
 xxxg429xxx  in mild chronic pancreatitis is in the range
0–65%, and in moderate to severe disease is 33–100%.
the specificity of faecal  xxxg429xxx  varies between 29%
and 95%. steatorrhoea of non-pancreatic origin may
artificially lower faecal  xxxg429xxx  concentration, presumably due to dilutional effects from diarrhoea.126
studies with the best sensitivity have shown a better
sensitivity for the  xxxg429xxx  than the chymotrypsin
assay, and have suggested that it is a better test
for the detection of moderate to severe pancreatic
insufficiency.125, 129 other studies have not found
this advantage for faecal  xxxg429xxx ,126, 128, 130, 131
although the majority of studies suggest a higher
sensitivity for faecal  xxxg429xxx  than faecal chymotrypsin. the disadvantages of the  xxxg429xxx  test compared
with the chymotrypsin assay are the higher cost and the
inability to assess the response to pancreatic supplement
therapy (as  xxxg429xxx  remains low in stool despite
pancreatic supplements).124
faecal  xxxg429xxx  and faecal chymotrypsin are useful
in the diagnosis of advanced chronic pancreatitis. both
have an acceptable sensitivity for the detection of
moderate to severe chronic pancreatitis, but are
inaccurate in early chronic pancreatitis.126 the test
for faecal  xxxg429xxx  is now available through reference
laboratories in the usa.
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

741

indirect tests of pancreatic function

given the complexity of invasive direct pancreatic
function tests, together with their widespread lack of
availability, much effort has been devoted to the
development of simpler tests to assess pancreatic
function. more than 100 studies have been published
over recent decades describing a bewildering variety of
indirect pancreatic function tests. the basic principle of
indirect pancreatic function tests is the measurement
of the effects of pancreatic enzymes in the intestine. this
can include the measurement of undigested food
particles in the stool (fat) or of by-products of digestion
by pancreatic enzymes in the blood or urine. as these
tests measure the adequacy of digestion, they are only
reliably positive when maldigestion has developed.
pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, resulting in maldigestion, is a late event in the natural history of chronic
pancreatitis, occurring 10–20 years after disease onset.
as such, these indirect tests are likely to be accurate in
long-standing and advanced disease and insensitive in
early or less advanced disease.
faecal fat excretion
the simplest measurement of pancreatic enzyme action
is that of faecal fat excretion. maldigestion of fat only
occurs after ‡ 90% of  xxxg1789xxx  secretory
capacity is lost.132 a 72-h collection of stool whilst
the patient is on a diet of 100 g/day of fat provides the
best evidence of fat maldigestion. faecal fat quantities of
‡ 7 g/day are considered to be abnormal. a variety of
other gastrointestinal diseases are accompanied by
steatorrhoea. quantitative faecal fat analysis is neither
sensitive nor specific for exocrine pancreatic function.
moreover, it is difficult to perform this test outside a
general clinical research centre, as the patient must be
on a high-fat diet (with a precisely known fat content)
for at least 2 days before the collection and for the
3 days of the collection. qualitative evidence of faecal
fat, using a sudan stain of stool, does not prove fat
malabsorption, but can be used as part of the diagnostic
evaluation in patients with presumed steatorrhoea,
provided that the test is performed on a high-fat diet.
 xxxd301xxx  test
the  xxxd301xxx  test is one of the best-studied indirect
pancreatic function tests. the  xxxd301xxx  test is also

742

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

known as the n-benzoyl-l-tyrosyl-paraaminobenzoic
acid (nbt-paba) test. it involves the ingestion of
 xxxd301xxx , which is split by pancreatic chymotrypsin,
thus liberating p-aminobenzoic acid (paba). free paba
is absorbed in the small intestine, conjugated in the liver
and excreted in the urine. a 6-h urine collection is
obtained to determine the concentration of paba
conjugates. the recovery of 50% or more of the
administered dosage in the urine during a 6-h collection
time is considered to be normal.4
previous gastric surgery, small bowel disease, liver
disease, renal insufficiency, the use of certain drugs
[acetaminophen,  xxxd305xxx , chloramphenicol,  xxxd2482xxx  (lidocaine), phenacetin, procaine, sulphonamide,
sulphonylurea and thiazides] and certain foods (prunes
and cranberries) may interfere with the completeness of
collection or with the accuracy of measurement.3
a broad range of sensitivities have been reported for
the nbt-paba test. in patients with severe pancreatic
insufficiency and malabsorption, the sensitivity is
80–90%.133–137 in those with mild to moderate
functional impairment, the sensitivity is as low as
37–46%.138–140 in order to improve the specificity,
several modifications of the nbt-paba test have been
described. the administration of free paba on separate
days (to gauge the adequacy of absorption, conjugation
and excretion to establish a baseline) and of 14c-paba
simultaneously with nbt-paba may identify an
abnormal nbt-paba test result caused by reasons
other than pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.4 the
substrate to perform the  xxxd301xxx  test is not
currently available in the usa.
fluorescein dilaurate (pancreolauryl) test
the principle underlying this test is the same as that for
the  xxxd301xxx  test. fluorescein dilaurate, the oral
substrate in this test, is hydrolysed by specific pancreatic
arylesterases to  xxxd1921xxx  and free fluorescein. the
fluorescein is absorbed in the small intestine, conjugated
in the liver and excreted in the urine. urine is collected
for 10 h and free fluorescein excreted in the urine is
measured. to evaluate the subject’s baseline absorption,
conjugation and excretion, the test is repeated 2–3 days
later with free fluorescein. the recovery rates on both
days are expressed as a ratio.
recent studies have shown a sensitivity in the range
75–100% and a specificity of 50–100%.141–152 these
rather impressive results can only be obtained in patients

with advanced chronic pancreatitis. when the test is
compared with a direct pancreatic function test (secretin–
 xxxd464xxx  test), the sensitivity is in the range 76–83% in
advanced chronic pancreatitis, but decreases to 39–70%
in mild to moderate chronic pancreatitis.4, 141, 142
vitamin b12 and  xxxd3255xxx  treatment may interfere
with the measurement. the presence of biliary disease
may produce false positive results, as bile salts are
required for the optimal action of pancreatic esterases.4
this test is not available in the usa.
dual-label schilling test
malabsorption of vitamin b12 has been observed in
30–50% of adult patients with pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency.153–155 vitamin b12 malabsorption occurs
in pancreatic insufficiency due to the impaired degradation of r-proteins bound to dietary vitamin b12.156–158
r-proteins are non-intrinsic factor cobalamin-binding
proteins present in saliva and gastric juice, and
pancreatic proteases degrade r-proteins and allow
intrinsic factor to bind to vitamin b12. a deficiency
of pancreatic proteases can prevent the cleavage of
r-protein from vitamin b12 and thus the binding of
vitamin b12 to intrinsic factor. this observation is the
basis of the exploration of this test as a pancreatic
function test.
the dual-label schilling test for pancreatic exocrine
function is based on the relative absorption of
r-protein–cobalamin and intrinsic factor–cobalamin.
during the test, the following are given orally to the
test subject:157, 158 (i) [57co]cobalamin–intrinsic factor;
(ii) [58co]cobalamin–r-protein; (iii) cobinamide, a
cobalamin analogue that binds only to r-protein and
serves to saturate endogenous r-protein and prevent it
from competing for [57co]cobalamin–intrinsic factor;
and (iv) excess intrinsic factor to bind to [58co]cobalamin after the removal of r-protein. following ingestion, urine is collected for 24 h and a ratio is calculated
of [58co] to [57co]. in pancreatic insufficiency, the ratio
is low as [58co]cobalamin attached to r-protein is not
liberated and cannot be bound to intrinsic factor for
absorption.157, 158 in one study, this test showed
abnormal results in 66% of patients with mild exocrine
dysfunction and in 83% of patients with severe
dysfunction in comparison with  xxxd464xxx –secretin
stimulated bicarbonate secretion.157 one subsequent
study, however, showed poor sensitivity,159 and the test
was abandoned.
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

triglyceride breath tests
breath tests are used in a variety of different gastrointestinal diseases. several variations of breath tests with
labelled carbon atoms in the fatty acid triglyceride have
been developed to measure intraluminal fat digestion by
 xxxg1789xxx .160–170 the exhalation of 14co2 is
measured after the ingestion of 14c-labelled triglycerides, which are usually given together with a standard
breakfast. these different tests vary in terms of the
substrate, the standard with which the results are
compared and the use of radioactive or non-radioactive
material.
in one study of these breath tests, breath excretion of
14
co2 was compared with quantitative faecal fat
excretion.160 three different triglycerides were used:
14
c-labelled trioctanoin, tripalmitin and triolein. the
triolein breath tests provided the most impressive
results, with 100% sensitivity and 96% specificity for
the detection of pancreatic steatorrhoea. the trioctanoin and tripalmitin breath tests were sensitive, but
lacked specificity (69% and 58% false positive results,
respectively). other studies using 13c-trioctanoin,
161 13
c-triolein162 and 13c-hiolein163 revealed a sensitivity range of 92–100% for fat malabsorption. all of
these tests are quite good at diagnosing fat malabsorption and steatorrhoea, but are unable to differentiate
between pancreatic steatorrhoea and other forms of fat
malabsorption.164, 165 the metabolism of triglycerides
to co2 depends not only on hydrolysis by pancreatic
esterase, but also on intestinal absorption, hepatic
metabolism and ventilation, and diseases of the small
bowel, liver and lungs can interfere with the accuracy of
these breath tests.
various modifications have been described to improve
the specificity of breath tests for pancreatic function. a
cholesterol octanoate breath test has been examined in
chronic pancreatitis patients of varying severity.165, 166
it showed normal or near normal co2 excretion in
patients with chronic pancreatitis without steatorrhoea,
but grossly abnormal co2 excretion in chronic pancreatitis patients with steatorrhoea. the addition of a
pancreatic enzyme supplement to the test meal
increased the co2 output in all patients with moderate
to severe steatorrhoea, suggesting that the steatorrhoea
was of pancreatic origin. this modification has improved
the specificity of this test, but not the sensitivity.
another modification attempted to correct for variations
in intestinal absorptive capacity by using the simulta 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

743

neous ingestion of radioactive triglyceride and fatty
acid.167 fatty acid absorption is independent of intraluminal lipase activity. in this test, 14c-labelled triolein
and 3h-labelled  xxxd2777xxx  were given orally, simultaneously, and the radioactive metabolites were measured
in the serum.167 although not strictly a ‘breath test’,
this test uses a similar rationale. the absorption of
radio-labelled triolein, but not the absorption of oleic
acid, should depend on the intraluminal concentration
of lipase. the ratio between the absorption of 14clabelled triglyceride and 3h-labelled  xxxd2777xxx  should
therefore reflect the activity of intraluminal lipase. nonpancreatic factors altering the absorption or metabolism
of triglyceride or  xxxd2154xxx  should alter the level of both
triglyceride and fatty acid and thus should not affect the
ratio. the serum activities of 14c and 3h measured 2 h
after oral ingestion showed a high degree of sensitivity
and specificity.167 all patients studied, however, had
advanced disease with steatorrhoea. another recent
modification involves the introduction of a mixed
triglyceride that consists of one medium-chain fatty
acid in position 2 and two  xxxd2154xxx  in the
1 and 3 positions.168–170 the rationale of the test is that
the two stearyl groups have to be split off the glycerol by
lipase before 13c-octanoyl monoglyceride, a mediumchain fatty acid, is absorbed and rapidly metabolized.
the rate-limiting step in the oxidation to 13co2 is the
hydrolysis of the  xxxd2154xxx  in the 1 and 3 positions of
the mixed triglyceride. one study of patients with
advanced chronic pancreatitis showed a sensitivity of
89% and a specificity of 81% for the diagnosis of
pancreatic steatorrhoea, and excellent correlation was
found between the lipase output in the duodenum and
the 6-h cumulative 13co2 excretion in breath.169 the
same test was applied to patients with chronic pancreatitis of variable severity, and was found to have
excellent sensitivity (100%) and specificity (85%) in
severe chronic pancreatitis, but only 46% sensitivity
and 69% specificity in mild chronic pancreatitis.170
breath tests have not received much recent attention
and are not available for clinical use.
clinical use of pancreatic function tests

it is obvious that a wide variety of pancreatic function
tests are available to clinicians. whilst clinicians might
consider using these tests to diagnose chronic pancreatitis, to determine the severity of pancreatic insufficiency or to follow patients over time to determine the

744

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

table 3. summary of the costs, sensitivity and risk of currently available diagnostic tests for chronic pancreatitis

test

sensitivity in advanced
chronic pancreatitis (%)*

sensitivity in less advanced
chronic pancreatitis (%)

cost ($)à

risk

secretin test
serum trypsin
faecal elastase
ercp
eus
ct
us

95
90
90
95
95
90
80

70–80
50
50–60
60–70
unknown
50–60
50

400
100
100
1000
800
536
194

none
none
none
5–10% complications
0.1% complications
rare allergic reactions
none

ct, computed tomography; ercp, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; eus, endoscopic ultrasonography; us, ultrasound.
these estimates reflect the authors’ best judgement based on the literature currently available.
* defined here as ‘big-duct’ disease and/or steatorrhoea.
defined here as ‘small-duct’ disease and the absence of steatorrhoea.
à costs of endoscopic and radiological procedures and secretin test are estimates based on medicare reimbursement at the university of florida,
combining both professional and facility costs. costs of serum trypsin and serum elastase are average patient charges, as medicare does not
reimburse for these laboratory tests.

progress of chronic pancreatitis, the most common
reason by far is diagnosis. the diagnosis of chronic
pancreatitis can also be made by a variety of imaging
tests, such as transabdominal ultrasound, computed
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, endoscopic
ultrasonography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. choosing a test or tests wisely
requires an understanding of the natural history of
chronic pancreatitis, the concept of ‘big-duct’ and
‘small-duct’ disease and the influence this has on test
sensitivity. choosing a particular test from amongst this
impressive list also requires a consideration of not only
the test performance (sensitivity, specificity), but also
the availability, cost and risk. table 3 summarizes this
information. from even a brief perusal of this table, one
can see that no perfect test exists. some tests are highly
sensitive but generally unavailable (e.g. direct pancreatic function test using secretin), whilst others are
widely available but insensitive (e.g. faecal elastase,
serum trypsin) or expensive or risky (endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography). in our clinical
practice, we begin an evaluation with inexpensive, riskfree tests that can detect advanced ‘big-duct’ chronic
pancreatitis. these initial tests include serum trypsin,
faecal elastase and transabdominal ultrasonography. if
these tests are abnormal, the diagnosis is usually secure.
if they are negative, we generally proceed with a direct
pancreatic function test. in centres in which this test is
not available, the next step would be a high-quality
computed tomography with pancreas protocol. if this is
non-diagnostic, tests which are either expensive or risky
(endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde

suspicion of chronic pancreatitis:
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, weight loss,
diabetes

serum trypsin or
faecal elastase or
transabdominal ultrasound

negative

secretin test (or other direct pancreatic
function test), if available
otherwise ct with pancreas protocol

positive
negative
treat

positive

positive

ercp
eus
negative

consider other diagnoses

figure 1. approach to the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. ct,
computed tomography; ercp, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; eus, endoscopic ultrasonography.

cholangiopancreatography) would be considered. this
strategy allows the more expensive or risky tests to be
reserved for situations in which cheaper and safer tests
have failed. this strategy is presented in figure 1.
conclusions

the primary utility of pancreatic function testing is for
the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis and for differentiating between pancreatic maldigestion and other forms
of malabsorption. in advanced chronic pancreatitis
(‘big-duct’ disease), nearly all pancreatic function tests
are accurate, as are most routinely available tests of
pancreatic structure. in patients with advanced disease,
 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

the diagnosis can be made by imaging studies (computed tomography, endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and
magnetic resonance imaging with cholangiopancreatography) or by pancreatic function tests, such as serum
trypsinogen or direct pancreatic function testing. in less
advanced disease (‘small-duct’ chronic pancreatitis), the
diagnosis can be especially challenging and direct
pancreatic function tests using a hormonal secretagogue have the best ability to identify these patients.
unfortunately, these direct pancreatic function tests
remain available at only a few institutions and so are
unavailable to most clinicians.
efforts to develop a non-invasive (tubeless) pancreatic
function test with a similar sensitivity to direct
pancreatic function tests continue. most of these tests
initially document a high sensitivity and specificity in
patients with advanced disease and severe pancreatic
insufficiency with malabsorption. at that stage, pancreatic function is usually 10% of normal, and the
disease can be easily diagnosed by most available
imaging studies. the average sensitivity of most
tubeless pancreatic function tests in mild to moderate
chronic pancreatitis is below 50%. as most of the tests
depend on multiple steps, including hydrolysis, absorption, metabolism and exhalation (breath tests), false
positive results can occur in a variety of other
conditions, including conditions which can also cause
malabsorption. in the evaluation of mild to moderate
chronic pancreatitis, when conventional tests are
unrevealing, direct hormonal tests remain the most
sensitive available at present. it is hoped that work
continuing in this area will lead to the development of
a sensitive, simple and widely available test of
pancreatic function that can be used in patients with
chronic pancreatitis of all degrees of severity.
references
1 layer p, yamamoto h, kalthoff l, clain je, bakken lj,
dimagno ep. the different courses of early- and late-onset
idiopathic and alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. gastroenterology 1994; 107(5): 1481–7.
2 owyang c. chronic pancreatitis. in: yamada t, ed. textbook
of gastroenterology. philadelphia: lippincott williams &
wilkins, 1999: 2151–77.
3 pandol sj. pancreatic physiology and secretory testing. in:
feldman m, sleisenger mh, scharschmidt bf, eds. gastrointestinal and liver disease. philadelphia: wb saunders,
1998: 771–82.

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

745

4 niederau c, grendell jh. diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.
gastroenterology 1985; 88: 1973–95.
5 forsmark ce. the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. gastrointest endosc 2000; 52(2): 293–8.
6 boeck wg, adler g, gress tm. pancreatic function tests:
when to choose, what to use. current gastroenterol rep
2001; 3: 95–100.
7 lankisch pg. exocrine pancreatic function tests: progress
report. gut 1982; 23: 777–98.
8 lagerloef ho. pancreatic function and pancreatic disease:
studied by means of secretin. acta med scand 1942;
128(suppl.): 1–289.
9 dreiling da, hollander f. studies in pancreatic function. 1.
preliminary series of clinical studies with the secretin test.
gastroenterology 1948; 11: 714–29.
10 wormsely kg. further studies of the response to secretin
and pancreozymin in man. scand j gastroenterol 1971; 6:
343–50.
11 duerr hk, bode  xxxd2488xxx , ammann rw. interlaboratory quality
control of laboratory data in the secretin-pancreozymin test.
report of a pilot study. irish j med sci 1977; 146(suppl. 1):
11–2.
12 ochi k, mizushima t, harada h, matsumoto s, matsumura
n, seno t. chronic pancreatitis: functional testing. pancreas
1998; 16(3): 343–8.
13 committee of the japanese society of gastroenterology.
interim report of the committee for the standardization
of secretin test. j jpn soc gastroenterol 1985; 82: 3051–2.
14 committee of the japanese society of gastroenterology. final
report of the committee for the standardization of secretin
test. j jpn soc gastroenterol 1987; 84: 1920–4.
15 lundh g. pancreatic exocrine function in neoplastic and
inflammatory disease: a simple and reliable new test. gastroenterology 1962; 42: 275–80.
16 wormsely kg. tests of pancreatic secretion. clin gastroenterol 1978; 7: 529–44.
17 mottaleb a, kapp f, noguera eca, kellock td, wiggins hs,
walter s. the lundh test in the diagnosis of pancreatic
disease: a review of five years experience. gut 1973; 14:
835–41.
18 braganza jm, rao jj. disproportionate reduction in tryptic
response to endogenous compared with exogenous stimulation in chronic pancreatitis. br med j 1978; 2: 392–4.
19 gyr k, agrawal nm, felsenfeld o, font rg. comparative
study of secretin and lundh test. am j dig dis 1975; 20:
506–12.
20 moeller dd, dunn gd, klotz ap. comparison of the pancreozymin-secretin test and lundh test meal. am j dig dis
1972; 17: 799–805.
21 sun dch, shay h. value of combined study of serum enzymes
and duodenal contents after secretin in the diagnosis of
disease of the pancreas. gastroenterology 1957; 32:
212–31.
22 bordalo o, noronha m, lamy j, dreiling da. standard and
augmented secretin testing in chronic pancreatic alcoholic
disease. am j gastroenterol 1975; 64: 125–32.

746

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

23 takebe t, koike d, yokoyama y. modern trends in biochemical tests of the pancreas: cs test and s test. biliary
tract pancreas 1986; 7: 583–8.
24 pererson h. the effect of pure natural secretin on the
bicarbonate secretion in the duodenum in man. scand j
gastroenterol 1970; 5: 105–11.
25 burton p, evans dg, harper aa. a test of pancreatic function in man based on the analysis of duodenal contents after
administration of secretin and pancreozymin. gut 1960; 1:
111–24.
26 isenberg ji, grossman mi. comparison of subcutaneous and
intravenous secretin in man. gastroenterology 1969; 56:
88–91.
27 banwell jg, northam be, cooke wt. secretory response of
the human pancreas to continuous intravenous infusion of
secretin. gut 1967; 8: 50–7.
28 wormsely kg. response to secretin in man. gastroenterology 1968; 54: 197–209.
29 farini r, del-favero g, adorati m, et al. comparison between
bolus injection and infusion of secretin and pancreozymin in
the diagnosis of chronic pancreatic disease (one hour test).
acta hepato-gastroenterol 1977; 24(6): 462–8.
30 bordalo o, noronha m, lamy j, dreiling d. the secretin test
with the standard dose and high dose in chronic pancreatitis. minerva-med 1976; 67(55): 3599–606.
31 sun dch. normal values for the pancreozymin-secretin test.
gastroenterology 1963; 44: 602–6.
32 zieve l, silvis se, mulford b, blackwood wd. secretion of
pancreatic enzymes. response to secretin and pancreozymin. am j dig dis 1966; 9: 671–84.
33 bank s, marks in, moshal mg, efron g, silber r. the pancreatic function test — method and normal values. s afr
med j 1963; 37: 1061–6.
34 wormsely kg. the response to infusion of a combination of
secretin and pancreozymin in health and disease. scand j
gastroenterol 1969; 4: 623–32.
35 banwell jg, northan be, cooke wt. secretory response of
the human pancreas to continuous intravenous infusion
of pancreozymin-cholecystokinin (cecekin). gut 1967; 8:
380–7.
36 conwell dl, zuccaro g, morrow j, et al. a new cholecystokinin (cck) stimulated pancreatic function test distinguishes normals from chronic pancreatitis. gastroenterology
2000; 118(4): a2165(abstract).
37 gullo l, costa pl, fontana g, labo g. investigation of
exocrine pancreatic function by continuous infusion of
 xxxd464xxx  and secretin in normal subjects and in chronic
pancreatitis. digestion 1976; 14: 97–107.
38 basso n, giri s, improta g. external pancreatic secretion
after  xxxg977xxx  infusion in man. gut 1975; 16: 994–8.
39 suzuki t, suzuki k, kobayashi e. comparison of utility
between pancreozymin-secretin tests in patients with
chronic pancreatitis. j jpn soc gastroenterol 1986; 83:
2209–15.
40 somogyi l, cintron m, toskes p. synthetic porcine secretin
is highly accurate in pancreatic testing in individuals with
chronic pancreatitis. pancreas 2000; 21(3): 262–5.

41 ross so, cintron m, toskes pp. comparison of biologic
porcine secretin, synthetic porcine secretin, and synthetic
 xxxd3184xxx  in pancreatic function testing. pancreas
2000; 21(4): 473(abstract).
42 petersen h, eerstad a. comparison of response to intravenous injection and infusion of secretin in man. scand j
gastroenterol 1972; 7: 453–9.
43 wormsely kg. aspects of duodeno-gastric reflux in man. gut
1972; 13: 243–50.
44 petersen h, myren j. secretin dose–response in health and
chronic pancreatic inflammatory disease. scand j gastroenterol 1975; 10: 851–61.
45 bartelheimer h. quantitative fractionierte pankreas- und
gallensaftuntersuchungen durch anwendung einer dreiläufigen doppelballonsonde. dtsch med wochenschr 1953;
78: 993–5.
46 delachaume-salem e, sarles h. normal human pancreatic
secretion in relation to age. biol gastroenterol 1970; 2:
135–46.
47 lagerloef ho, schuetz hb, holmer s. a secretin test with
high doses of secretin and correction for incomplete recovery
of duodenal juice. gastroenterology 1967; 52: 67–77.
48 go vlw, hofmann af, summerskill whj. simultaneous
measurements of total pancreatic, biliary and gastric outputs
in man using a perfusion technique. gastroenterology 1970;
58: 321–8.
49 worning h. pancreatic function tests. rev esp enferm apar
dig 1978; 53(suppl.): 155–78.
50 petersen h, berstad a, myren j. bicarbonate response to
graded doses of secretin in patients with different gastric acid
secretory capacity. acta hepato-gastroenterol 1973; 20:
421–7.
51 thjodleifsson b, wormsley kg. aspects of the effects of
 xxxd2622xxx  on  xxxd2873xxx  stimulated and basal gastric
secretion of acid and pepsin in man. gut 1975; 16:
501–8.
52 lankisch pg, creutzfeldt w. effects of synthetic and natural
secretin on the function of the exocrine pancreas in man.
digestion 1981; 22: 61–5.
53 thomas fb, sinar d, caldwell jh, mekhjian hs, falko jm.
stimulation of pancreatic secretion of water and electrolytes
by furosemide. gastroenterology 1977; 73: 221–5.
54 tympner f, domschke s, domschke w, classen m, demling
l. reproducibility of the response to secretin and secretin
plus pancreozymin in man. scand j gastroenterol 1974; 9:
377–81.
55 denyer e, cotton pb. pure pancreatic juice studies in normal
subjects and patients with chronic pancreatitis. gut 1979;
20: 89–97.
56 ochi k, harada h, mizushima t, tanaka j, matsumoto s.
intraductal secretin test is as useful as duodenal secretin test
in assessing exocrine pancreatic function. dig dis sci 1997;
42: 492–6.
57 gregg ja. the intraductal secretin test: an adjunct to ercp.
gastrointest endosc 1982; 28: 199–203.
58 amann s, newman mb, toskes pp. relationship of the
etiology of chronic pancreatitis to the time to reach peak

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

bicarbonate secretion in duodenal aspirates after secretin
stimulation. gastroenterology 1999; 116: g4811.
pollack bj, forsmark ce. adjunct diagnosis of pancreatic
disease and pancreatic physiology. in: sivak mv jr, ed.
gastroenterologic endoscopy. philadelphia: wb saunders,
2000: 1116–25.
bornschein w. a fast endoscopic test of pancreatic secretion
(endoscopic secretin- xxxd464xxx -test). z gastroenterol 1978;
16(9): 582–92.
ceryak s, steinberg w, marks zh, ruiz a. feasibility of an
endoscopic secretin test: preliminary results. pancreas 2001;
23(2): 216–23.
hayakawa t, kondo t, shibata t, noda a, suzuki t,
nakano s. relationship between pancreatic exocrine function and histological changes in chronic pancreatitis. am j
gastroenterol 1992; 87(9): 1170–4.
rolny p, jagenburg r. the secretin-cck test and a modified
lundh test. a comparative study. scand j gastroenterol
1978; 13(8): 927–31.
heij ha, obertop h, van blankenstein m, ten kate fw,
westbroek dl. relationship between functional and histological changes in chronic pancreatitis. dig dis sci 1986;
31(10): 1009–13.
waye jd, adler m, dreiling da. the pancreas. a correlation
of function and structure. am j gastroenterol 1978; 69:
176–81.
rolny p, lukes pj, gamklou r, jagenburg r, nilson a.
a comparative evaluation of endoscopic retrograde
pancreatography and secretin-cck test in the diagnosis of
pancreatic disease. scand j gastroenterol 1978; 13: 777–81.
nakano s, horiguchi t, takeda t, suzuki t, nakajima s.
comparative diagnostic value of endoscopic pancreatography and pancreatic function tests. scand j gastroenterol
1974; 9: 383–90.
bozkurt t, braun u, leferink s, gilly g, lux g. comparison
of pancreatic morphology and exocrine functional impairment in patients with chronic pancreatitis. gut 1994; 35:
1132–6.
heij ha, obertop h, schimtz pim, van blankenstein m,
westerbroek dl. evaluation of the secretin-cholecystokinin
test for chronic pancreatitis by discriminant analysis. scand
j gastroenterol 1986; 21: 35–40.
domı́nguez-munoz je, manes g, pieramico o, büchler m,
malfertheiner p. effect of pancreatic ductal and parenchymal
changes on exocrine function in chronic pancreatitis. pancreas 1995; 10(1): 31–5.
braganza jm, hunt lp, warwick f. relationship between
pancreatic exocrine function and ductal morphology in
chronic pancreatitis. gastroenterology 1982; 82: 1341–7.
lankisch pg, seidensticker f, otto j, et al. secretin-pancreozymin test (spt) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ercp): both are necessary for diagnosing
or excluding chronic pancreatitis. pancreas 1996; 12(2):
149–52.
malfertheiner p, büchler m, stanescu a, ditschuneit h.
exocrine pancreatic function in correlation to ductal and

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81
82

83

84
85

86

87

88

89

747

parenchymal morphology in chronic pancreatitis. hepatogastroenterol 1986; 33: 110–4.
kitagawa m, naruse s, ishiguro h, nakae y, kondo t,
hayakawa t. evaluating exocrine function tests for
diagnosing chronic pancreatitis. pancreas 1997; 15(4):
402–8.
girdwood ah, hatfield arw, bornman pc, denyer me,
kottler re, marks in. structure and function in noncalcific
pancreatitis. dig dis sci 1984; 29(8): 721–6.
lambiase l, forsmark ce, toskes pp. secretin test diagnoses
chronic pancreatitis earlier than ercp. gastroenterology
1993; 104: a315(abstract).
zuccaro g, conwell dl, vargo j, dumot j, john h, charles
om. the role of endoscopic ultrasonography (eus) in the
diagnosis of early and advanced chronic pancreatitis (cp).
gastroenterology 2000; 118: a674(abstract).
raimondo m, wiersema mj, vazquez-sequeiros e, dimagno
e. endoscopic ultrasound (eus) may not be as sensitive as
previously thought to diagnose chronic pancreatitis (cp). a
preliminary correlation study with cck pancreatic function
test. gastrointest endosc 2001; 53: ab69.
chowdhury rs, bhutani ms, mishra g, forsmark ce, toskes
pp. comparative analysis of pancreatic function testing
versus morphological assessment (by eus) for the evaluation
of chronic unexplained abdominal pain (uap). gastroenterology 2001; 120(5): a647(abstract).
chowdhury rs, forsmark cr, bhutani ms, toskes pp. the
evaluation of unexplained pain of presumed pancreatic origin. gastroenterology 2001; 120(5): a760(abstract).
blau m, manske rf. the pancreas specificity of se- xxxd3187xxx . j nucl med 1961; 2: 102–5.
youngs gr, agnew je, levin ge, bouchier iad. radioselenium in duodenal aspirate as an assessment of pancreatic
exocrine function. br med j 1971; 2: 252–5.
shichiri m, etani n, yoshida m. radioselenium pancreozymin-secretin test for pancreatic exocrine secretion. am j dig
dis 1975; 20: 460–8.
pointer h, kletter k. evaluation of se- xxxd3187xxx  test
for pancreatic diseases. digestion 1980; 20: 225–33.
pointner h, kinast h, flegel u. se- xxxd3187xxx 
excretion in bile and pancreatic juice. digestion 1975; 12:
61–4.
boyd ejs, wood h, clarke g, neill gd, hutchinson f. pancreatic synthetic rates: a new test of pancreatic function.
scand j gastroenterol 1982; 17: 225–31.
domschke s, heptner g, kolb s, sailer d, schneider mu,
domschke w. decrease in plasma amino acid level after
secretin and pancreozymin as an indicator of exocrine
pancreatic function. gastroenterology 1986; 90(4): 1031–8.
dzieniszewski j, jorosz m, kunachowicz h, klys w. level of
amino acids in blood plasma as a test for exocrine pancreatic
function. wiad lek 1990; 43(9–10): 387–96.
maringhini a, nelson dk, jones jd, dimagno ep. is the
plasma amino acid consumption test an accurate test of
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency? gastroenterology 1994;
106(2): 488–93.

748

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark

90 borovicka j, schwizer w, remy b, fried m. cck induced
changes in plasma amino acid concentration (aa) are not a
valid test for pancreatic insufficiency (pi). gastroenterology
1993; 104: a296(abstract).
91 jacobson dg, currington c, connery k, toskes pp. trypsin
like immunoreactivity as a test for pancreatic insufficiency.
n engl j med 1984; 310: 1307–8.
92 borgstroem a, wehlin l. correlation between serum concentration of three specific exocrine pancreatic proteins and
pancreatic duct morphology at ercp examinations. scand j
gastroenterol 1984; 19: 220–7.
93 andriulli a, masoero g, felder m, et al. circulating trypsinlike immunoreactivity in chronic pancreatitis. dig dis sci
1981; 26: 532–7.
94 elias e, reshaw m, wood t. diagnostic importance of
changes in circulating concentrations of immunoreactive
trypsin. lancet 1977; i: 66–8.
95 koop h, lankissich pg, stoeckmann f, arnod r. trypsin
radioimmunoassay in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.
digestion 1980; 20: 151–6.
96 lake-bakaar g, mckavanagh s, gatus b, summerfield ja.
the relative values of serum immunoreactive trypsin concentration and total amylase activity in the diagnosis of
mumps, chronic renal failure and pancreatic diseases. scand
j gastroenterol 1980; 15: 97–101.
97 felber jp, bambule-dick j, carrel o, granduillaume p,
gauthier e. decreased plasma trypsin in juvenile diabetics.
diabetologica 1978; 14: 231(abstract).
98 owyang c, scarpello jh, vinik ai. correlation between
pancreatic enzyme secretion and plasma concentration of
human  xxxg1823xxx  in health and in chronic
pancreatitis. gastroenterology 1982; 83(1 part 1): 55–62.
99 stern ai, hansky j. secretin stimulated  xxxg1823xxx : a test for chronic pancreatitis. aust nz j med 1981;
11(4): 351–4.
100 matsumoto m, wakasugi h, ibayashi h. plasma human
 xxxg1823xxx  response in chronic pancreatitis.
gastroenterol jpn 1982; 17(1): 25–30.
101 anderson bn, hagen c, klein hc, stadil f, worning h. correlation between exocrine pancreatic secretion and serum
concentration of human  xxxg1823xxx  in chronic
pancreatitis. scand j gastroenterol 1980; 15(6): 699–704.
102 valenzuela je, taylor il, walsh jh.  xxxg1823xxx 
response in chronic pancreatitis. dig dis sci 1979; 24(11):
862–4.
103 stern i, robert-thompson ic, hansky j. correlation between
 xxxg1823xxx  response to secretin and ercp findings in chronic pancreatitis. gut 1982; 23(3): 235–8.
104 haverback bj, dyce bj, gutentag pj, montgomery dw.
measurement of trypsin and chymotrypsin in stool: a diagnostic test for pancreatic exocrine function. gastroenterology 1963; 44: 588–97.
105 goldberg dm. proteases in the evaluation of pancreatic
function and pancreatic disease. clin chim acta 2000;
291(2): 201–21.
106 dominguez-munoz je, hieronymus c, sauerbruch t,
malfertheiner p. fecal elastase test: evaluation of a new

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

noninvasive pancreatic function test. am j gastroenterol
1995; 90: 1834–7.
stein j, jung m, sziegoleit a, zeuzem s, caspary wv,
lembcke b. immunoreactive elastase 1: clinical evaluation
of a new noninvasive test of pancreatic function. clin chem
1996; 42: 222–6.
loser c, mollgaard a, folsch ur. fecal elastase 1. a novel,
highly sensitive and specific tubeless pancreatic function
test. gut 1996; 39: 580–6.
kataoka k, hosoda m, yasuda h, sakagami j, kato m,
kashima k. assessment of exocrine pancreatic dysfunction
in chronic pancreatitis. digestion 1999; 60(suppl. 1):
86–92.
katschinski m, schirra j, bross a, goke b, arnold r.
duodenal secretion and fecal excretion of pancreatic
 xxxg429xxx  in healthy humans and patients with chronic
pancreatitis. pancreas 1997; 15(2): 191–200.
kataoka k, yamane y, kato m, kashima k. diagnosis of
chronic pancreatitis using noninvasive tests of exocrine
pancreatic function — comparison to duodenal intubation
tests. pancreas 1997; 15(4): 409–15.
cavallini g, benini l, brocco g, et al. the fecal chymotrypsin
photometric assay in the evaluation of exocrine pancreatic
capacity. comparison with other direct and indirect pancreatic function tests. pancreas 1989; 4(3): 300–4.
dyck w, ammann r. quantitative determination of fecal
chymotrypsin as a screening test for pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency. am j dig dis 1965; 10: 530–45.
muller l, wisniewski zs, kansky j. the measurement of
fecal chymotrypsin: a screening test for pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency. aust ann med 1970; 19: 47–9.
ammann rw, tagwercher e, dashiwagi h, rosenmund h.
diagnostic value of the fecal chymotrypsin test in pancreatic
insufficiency particularly chronic pancreatitis: correlation
with the pancreozymin-secretin test, fecal fat excretion and
final clinical diagnosis. digestion 1981; 21: 281–9.
duerr hk, otte m, forell mm, bode jc. fecal chymotrypsin:
a study on its diagnostic value by comparison with the
secretin-cholecystokinin test. digestion 1978; 17: 404–9.
scotta ms, marzani md, maggiore g, de-giacomo c, melzid’eril gv, moratti r. fecal chymotrypsin: a new diagnostic
test for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in children with
cystic fibrosis. clin biochem 1985; 18(4): 233–4.
de-pedro c, codoceo r, vazquez p, hernanz a. fecal
chymotrypsin levels in children with pancreatic insufficiency. clin biochem 1986; 19(6): 338–40.
sale jk, goldberg dm, thjodleifsson b, wormsley kg.
trypsin and chymotrypsin in duodenal aspirates and feces in
response to secretin and cholecystokinin and pancreozymin.
gut 1974; 15: 132–8.
goldberg dm. proteases in the evaluation of pancreatic
function and pancreatic disease. clin chim acta 2000; 291:
201–21.
scheefers-borchel u, scheefers h, arnold r, fischer p,
sziegoleit a. pancreatic elastase! parameter for the diagnosis
of chronic and acute pancreatitis. lab med 1992; 16:
427–32.

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

review: pancreatic function testing
122 sziegoleit a, krause e, klör hu, kranacher l, linder d.
elastase 1 and chymotrypsin b in pancreatic juice and feces.
clin biochem 1989; 22: 85–9.
123 sziegoleit a, linder d. studies on the sterol-binding capacity
of human pancreatic elastase. gastroenterology 1991; 100:
768–74.
124 stein j, jung m, sziegoleit a, zeuzem s, caspary wf,
lembcke b. immunoreactive elastase 1: clinical evaluation
of a new noninvasive test of pancreatic function. clin chem
1996; 42(2): 222–6.
125 lüth s, teyssen k, forssmann k, kölbel c, krummenauer f,
singer mv. fecal  xxxg429xxx  determination: ‘gold standard’
of indirect pancreatic function tests? scand j gastroenterol
2001; 10: 1092–9.
126 amann st, bishop m, curington c, toskes pp. fecal pancreatic  xxxg429xxx  is inaccurate in the diagnosis of chronic
pancreatitis. pancreas 1996; 13: 226–30.
127 gullo l, ventrucci m, toassetti p, migliori m, pezzilli r. fecal
 xxxg429xxx  determination in chronic pancreatitis. dig dis sci
1999; 44: 210–3.
128 lankisch pg, schmidt i, könig h, lehnick d, knollmann r,
löhr m. fecal  xxxg429xxx : not helpful in diagnosing chronic
pancreatitis associated with mild to moderate exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency. gut 1998; 42: 551–4.
129 löser c, möllgaard a, fölsch ur. fecal  xxxg429xxx : a novel,
highly sensitive and specific tubeless pancreatic function
test. gut 1996; 39: 580–6.
130 gullo l. fecal  xxxg429xxx  in chronic pancreatitis. gut 1999;
44(2): 291–2.
131 lankisch pg, schmidt i. fecal  xxxg429xxx  is not the indirect
pancreatic function test we have been waiting for. dig dis
sci 2000; 45(1): 166–7.
132 di magno ep, go vlw, summerskill whj. relations
between pancreatic enzyme output and malabsorption in
severe pancreatic insufficiency. n engl j med 1973; 288:
813–5.
133 harada h, shundo t, ikubo i. exocrine pancreatic function
test by a synthetic peptide. in: masuda m, ed. pancreatic
function diagnostant. new york: igaku-shoin, 1980:
101–7.
134 gyr k. the use of  xxxd301xxx  in pancreatic disease — a 5-year
experience from switzerland. in: masuda m, ed. pancreatic
function diagnostant. new york: igaku-shoin, 1980: 38–45.
135 amman rw, buehler h, pei p. comparative diagnostic
accuracy of four tubeless pancreatic function tests in chronic
pancreatitis. scand j gastroenterol 1982; 17: 997–1002.
136 tanner ar, fisher d, smith cl. an evaluation of the oneday nbt-paba/14cpaba in the assessment of pancreatic
exocrine insufficiency. digestion 1984; 29: 42–6.
137 lankisch pg, ehrhardt-schmelzer s, koop h, caspery wf.
der nbt-paba-test in der diagnostik dert exokrinen
pankreasinsuffizienz. ein vergleich mit dem sekretinpankreozymin-test, den stuhlenzym-bestimmungen und
der quantitativen stuhlfett-analyse. dtsch med wochenschr
1980; 105: 1418–23.
138 toskes pp.  xxxd301xxx  as a test of exocrine pancreatic
function in adult patients with pancreatic exocrine insuffi-

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

749

ciency. determination of appropriate dose and urinary collection interval. gastroenterology 1983; 85: 565–9.
naruse s, hayakawa t, noda a. diagnosis of pancreatic
disease by a synthetic peptide. in: masuda m, ed. pancreatic
function diagnostant. new york: igaku-shoin, 1980:
88–92.
ventrucci m, gullo l, daniele c, priori p, labo g. pancreolauryl test for pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. am
j gastroenterol 1983; 73: 86–9.
gunkel u, bitterlich n, keim v. value of combinations of
pancreatic function tests to predict mild to moderate chronic
pancreatitis. z gastroenterol 2001; 39(3): 207–11.
leodolter a, kahl s, dominguez-munoz je, gerards c,
glasbrenner b, malfertheiner p. comparison of two tubeless
function tests in the assessment of mild–moderate exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency. eur j gastroenterol hepatol 2000;
12(12): 1335–8.
lock g, kadow r, messmann h, zirngibl h, scholmerich j,
holstege a. modified serum pancreolauryl test in chronic
pancreatitis: evaluation in comparison to endoscopic retrograde pancreatography. hepatogastroenterology 1997;
44(16): 1110–6.
gullo l, pezzili r, ventrucci m. diagnostic value of the
amino acid consumption test in chronic pancreatitis. pancreas 1996; 12(1): 64–7.
glasbrenner b, schon a, klatt s, beck h, adler g. clinical
evaluation of the fecal elastase test in the diagnosis and
staging of chronic pancreatitis. eur j gastroenterol hepatol
1996; 8(11): 1117–20.
dominguez-munoz je, pieramico o, buchler m, malfertheiner
p. clinical utility of the serum pancreolauryl test in diagnosis
and staging of chronic pancreatitis. am j gastroenterol 1993;
88(3): 1237–41.
rosemeyer d, brackmann p, de-boer h, freitag j, koblitz
dk, muller k. 1,000 pancreolauryl tests: evaluation of sensitivity, specificity and use in clinical routine. z gastroenterol 1986; 24(10): 645–4.
malfertheiner p, peter m, junge u, ditschuneit h. oral
pancreas function test with fdl in the diagnosis of chronic
pancreatitis. klin wochenschr 1983; 61(4): 193–8.
lankisch pg, schreiber a, otto j. pancreolauryl test. evaluation of a tubeless pancreatic function test in comparison
with other indirect and direct tests for exocrine pancreatic
function. dig dis sci 1983; 28(6): 490–3.
cavallini g, piubello w, brocco g, et al. reliability of the
bz-ty-paba and the pancreolauryl test in the assessment
of exocrine pancreatic function. digestion 1983; 27(3):
129–37.
kay g, hine p, braganza j. the pancreolauryl test. a method
of assessing the combined functional efficacy of pancreatic esterase and bile salt in vitro? digestion 1982; 24(4):
241–5.
ventrucci m, gullo l, daniele c, priori p, labo g. pancreolauryl test for pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. am j
gastroenterol 1983; 78(12): 806–9.
toskes pp, hansel j, cerda j, deren l. vitamin b12 malabsorption in chronic pancreatic insufficiency. studies

750

154
155

156

157

158

159

160

161

r. s. chowdhury & c. e. forsmark
suggesting the presence of a pancreatic ‘intrinsic factor’.
n engl j med 1971; 248: 627–32.
toskes pp, deren jj. vitamin b12 absorption and malabsorption. gastroenterology 1973; 65: 662–83.
gueant jl, champignuelle b, gaucher p, nicolas jp. malabsorption of vitamin b12 in pancreatic insufficiency of the
adult and of the child. pancreas 1990; 5(5): 559–67.
allen rh, seetharam b, podell e, alpers dh. effects of proteolytic enzymes on the binding of cobalamin to r protein
and intrinsic factor. in vitro evidence that a failure to partially degrade r protein is responsible for cobalamin malabsorption in pancreatic insufficiency. j clin invest 1978;
61(1): 47–54.
chen wl, morishita r, eguchi t, et al. clinical usefulness of
dual-label schilling test for pancreatic exocrine function.
gastroenterology 1989; 96(5): 1337–45.
brugge wr, goff js, allen nc, podell er, allen rh. development of a dual label schilling test for pancreatic exocrine
function based on the differential absorption of cobalamin
bound to intrinsic factor and r protein. gastroenterology
1980; 78(5): 937–49.
leung jwc, frost ra, burgess r, et al. modified dual label
schilling test for pancreatic exocrine function. clin chim
acta 1988; 174: 93.
newcomer ad, hofmann af, dimagno ep, thomas pj,
carlson gl. triolein breath test. sensitive and specific
tests for fat malabsorption. gastroenterology 1979; 76:
6–13.
kato h, nakao a, kishimoto w, nonami t, harada a,
hayakawa t. 13c-labelled trioctanoin breath test for exocrine pancreatic function test in patients after pancreatoduodenectomy. am j gastroenterol 1993; 88: 64–9.

162 watkins jb, klein pd, schoeller da, kirschner bs, park r,
perman ja. diagnosis and differentiation of fat malabsorption in children using 13c-labelled lipids: trioctanoin, triolein
and  xxxd2833xxx  breath test. gastroenterology 1982; 82:
911–7.
163 lembeke b, braden b, caspary wf. exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency: accuracy and clinical value of the uniformly
labeled 13c-hiolein-breath test. gut 1996; 39: 668–74.
164 chen iw, azmudeh k, connell am, saenger el. 14c-tripalmitin breath test as a diagnostic aid for fat malabsorption
due to pancreatic insufficiency. j nucl med 1974; 15: 1125–9.
165 goff js. two-stage triolein breath test differentiates pancreatic insufficiency from other causes of malabsorption. gastroenterology 1982; 83: 44–6.
166 cole sg, rossi s, stern a, hoffmann af. cholesteryl
octanoate breath test. preliminary studies on a new
noninvasive test of human pancreatic exocrine function.
gastroenterology 1987; 93: 1372–80.
167 pederson nt. estimation of assimilation of simultaneously
ingested 14c-triolein and 3h- xxxd2777xxx  as a test of pancreatic
digestive function. scand j gastroenterol 1984; 19: 161–6.
168 ghoos yf, vantreppen gr, rutgeerts p, schurmans pc. a
mixed-triglyceride breath test for intraluminal fat digestive
activity. digestion 1981; 22: 239–47.
169 vantreppen gr, rutgeerts pj, ghoos yf, hiele mi. mixed
triglyceride breath test: a noninvasive test of pancreatic
lipase activity in the duodenum. gastroenterology 1989; 96:
1126–34.
170 loser chr, brauser c, aygen s, hennemann o, folsch ur.
comparative clinical evaluation of the 13c-mixed triglyceride
breath test as an indirect pancreatic function test. scand j
gastroenterol 1998; 33: 327–34.

 2003 blackwell publishing ltd, aliment pharmacol ther 17, 733–750

