genetic engineering to study testicular tumorigenesis.  in humans, sertoli cell tumors account for approximately 4% of all testicular tumors, and 20% of these are malignant. the mechanisms underlying sertoli cell tumorigenesis remain largely unknown. using gene knockout technology, we previously generated mutant mice lacking the  xxxg216xxx  of inhibin dimers. the inhibin alpha-null male mice develop testicular sertoli cell tumors with 100% penetrance. these tumors develop as early as 4 weeks of age and cause a cachexia-like wasting syndrome. castrated inhibin alpha knockout mice develop sex steroidogenic adrenal cortical tumors. these studies have identified inhibins as secreted tumor suppressors with specificity for the gonads and adrenal glands. it had been suggested that endocrine factors play roles in sertoli cell tumorigenesis by altering cell cycle machinery of the sertoli cells. to test the potential of these factors to function as modifiers of sertoli cell tumorigenesis, we have employed a genetic intercross strategy, breeding  xxxd2971xxx  mutant mice with mutant mice deficient in endocrine signaling factors including  xxxd2226xxx   xxxd2227xxx  (hypogonadal, hpg mice),  xxxd2564xxx   xxxd3477xxx , anti-miillerian hormone (amh),  xxxd2697xxx  receptor type ii, or  xxxg183xxx  ( xxxg183xxx , tfm mice), or mice overexpressing  xxxg816xxx . we are also investigating the effects of loss of critical cell cycle regulators, such as cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p27, on sertoli cell tumorigenesis in inhibin alpha knockout males. these studies clearly demonstrate the roles of these factors as modifiers of the sertoli cell tumorigenesis.  xxxd2697xxx  signaling through  xxxd2697xxx  receptor type ii is responsible for the cachexia-like syndrome observed in the  xxxd2971xxx  knockout mice with tumors. the gonadotropin hormones are essential for testicular tumor development, but elevated fsh levels are not sufficient to cause sertoli cell tumors. absence of fsh, lack of  xxxg183xxx , or overexpression of  xxxg816xxx  slows the tumor growth and minimizes the cachexia symptoms, thus prolonging the life span of these double mutant mice. in contrast, absence of amh or p27 causes earlier onset and more aggressive development of testicular tumor, with an earlier death of double mutant mice. we are currently investigating roles of estrogen signaling pathways, and other cell cycle regulators, in tumor development in the inhibin alpha knockout mice by generating mice with double or triple mutations. genetic engineering in mouse models provides a powerful tool to study the mechanisms of testicular tumorigenesis and define the important genetic modifiers in vivo.