the factor viii/ xxxg2423xxx  complex: basic and clinical issues.  factor viiii ( xxxg751xxx ) and  xxxg2423xxx  (vwf) are two distinct but related glycoproteins that circulate in plasma as a tightly bound complex ( xxxg751xxx /vwf). their deficiencies or structural defects are responsible for the most common inherited bleeding disorders, namely  xxxg751xxx  (ha) and von willebrand's disease (vwd). the vwf has a dual role in hemostasis: first it promotes platelet adhesion to thrombogenic surfaces as well as platelet-to-platelet cohesion during thrombus formation; second, it is the carrier for  xxxg751xxx  in plasma.  xxxg751xxx  acts as a co-factor to accelerate the activation of  xxxg741xxx  by activated  xxxg752xxx  in the coagulation cascade. after many years of investigations, the molecular mechanisms of  xxxg751xxx /vwf interactions are now well known and recent biochemical investigations have confirmed that vwf is a key partner for  xxxg751xxx , playing significant roles in  xxxg751xxx  function, its production and its stabilization, in its conformation and immunogenicity.  xxxg751xxx  and vwf are both present in most plasma-derived  xxxg751xxx /vwf concentrates used in clinical practice.  xxxg751xxx /vwf concentrates can be classified into three main categories according to the degree of their purification. intermediate-high purity plasma-derived concentrates containing  xxxg751xxx /vwf currently in use since 1987 carry a low risk of transmitting blood-borne infections. concentrate safety depends on the interaction of two factors: the decrease of viral plasma load and the increase of viral inactivation. these  xxxg751xxx /vwf concentrates are currently used in type 3 vwd and in type 1 or 2 vwd patients who are unresponsive to desmopressin ( xxxd1847xxx ). more recently the presence of the physiologic  xxxg751xxx /vwf complex has been considered to play an important role also in replacement therapy for patients with ha. the correct use of  xxxg751xxx /vwf concentrates in vwd and ha have been reported in several national and international guidelines.