prolonged pulmonary hypertension caused by plateletactivating factor and leukotriene c, in the rat lung
dennis

davidson

and

denise

drafta

division of neonatal-perinatal
medicine, department of pediatrics, schneider children’s hospital,
long island jewish medical center, long island campus for albert einstein college of medicine,
new hyde park, new york 11042
davidson,dennis,and
denise drafta. prolongedpulmonary hypertension
caused by platelet-activating
factor and leukotriene c4 in the rat lung. j. appl. physiol.
73(3): 955-961,
1992.-platelet-activating
factor
(paf)
and leukotrienes
(lts) are potent pulmonary
hypertensive
and inflammatory
mediators produced by the lung. previously
we showed that a
rapid injection of paf into the pulmonary
artery of an isolated
rat lung produced an extended elevation in mean pulmonary
arterial pressure (pap). the objective of the present study was
to determine
whether the extended pressor response induced
by paf was caused by prolonged activation of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway or slow clearance of lts from the lung parenchyma. rat lungs were perfused with a nonrecirculating
physiological salt solution that contained indomethacin
and albumin.
five minutes after a rapid injection of paf into the pulmonary
artery catheter, the following
elevations
(mean % above baseline) were observed:
pap (83%), ltb,
(3,260%),
ltc,
(1,490%), ltd, (970%), and lte, (1,500%). at 20 min these
levels declined but were still significantly
elevated above baseline. the  xxxg147xxx 
inhibitor
 xxxd1879xxx 
(dec),
administered
before the paf injection, inhibited
the elevations
of pap and all lts. dec administration
that began 5 min
after paf reduced pap and only ltc, levels at 20 min in
comparison
to lungs with no dec. the  xxxg147xxx -activating protein inhibitor
mk886, administered
orally 2-6 h before
perfusion,
also inhibited
the pressor response to paf as well as
lt production,
as did dec. we conclude that 1) the extended
pulmonary
hypertension
induced by paf was caused mainly by
prolonged
activation
of  xxxg147xxx 
with ltc, production,
2) the relative overall lung clearance of ltb,, ltd,, and lte,
was slower than that of ltc,, and 3) ltb,, ltd,, and lte,
had no appreciable
pressor effect.

elevation of pulmonary arterial pressure in the isolated
rat lung (21,5). in addition, we found that a rapid injection of paf into the pulmonary artery of the isolated rat
lung, perfused in a nonrecirculating
manner, produced
an extended elevation in mean pulmonary arterial pressure (5). previous studies have not measured lt levels at
more than one time point after the lung was exposed
to paf.
the first objective of this study was to demonstrate
that lts (specifically  xxxg147xxx  products) mediate
the extended pulmonary hypertension induced by paf
in the isolated rat lung. if this could be shown, our second
objective was to determine whether the extended pressor
response to paf was caused by a prolonged activation of
the  xxxg147xxx  pathway or a slow clearance of lts
from the lung.
a better understanding
of the way the lung clears endogenous lts may provide knowledge that can be applied to pharmacotherapy
for certain inflammatory
or
hypertensive diseases of the lung. differences in the metabolic fate of the products of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway
have been demonstrated
with use of exogenous lts
added to isolated lungs (8,23). however, addition of lts
to one compartment
of the lung, e.g., alveoli, may not
represent lung clearance of endogenous lts in disease
states. in the present study, we have been able to study
the relationship between production and the overall relative clearance of endogenous lts in the lung parenchyma during the elevation of pulmonary arterial pressure induced by paf.

pulmonary
vascular
resistance;
peptidoleukotrienes;
leukotriene b,; lung metabolism;
 xxxg147xxx ;
 xxxg147xxx -activating protein inhibitor

methods

(paf)andleukotrienes
(lts) act as vasoconstrictors,
bronchoconstrictors,
edemogenic substances, and white blood cell chemoattractants in the lung. there is strong evidence that these
substances are important in the pathogenesis of lung disorders such as persistent pulmonary hypertension of the
newborn (2, 18), bronchopulmonary
dysplasia (l7), endotoxin-induced
lung injury (3), and asthma (1,x).
previous studies by other investigators (21) and work in our
laboratory (5) have demonstrated
a biochemical
and
physiological link between paf and lts. intravascular
paf stimulates lung lt production, which results in an

isolated perfused rat lung preparation. pulmonary production and metabolism of ltb,, ltc,, ltd,, and
lte, after an intravascular injection of paf were studied in the parenchyma of the isolated perfused rat lung.
male sprague-dawley rats (250 g) were injected with indomethacin (5 mg/kg ip) 1 h before dissection, and indomethacin (0.5 pg/ml) was added to the perfusate to block
the cyclooxygenase pathway. this prevents the appreciable edema production observed in the rat lung after an
injection of paf. anesthesia was achieved by the administration of pentobarbital
sodium (30 mg) by intraperitoneal injection. a rigid catheter was tied into the trachea
via a tracheostomy. the rat was ventilated mechanically
with warm (33°c) humidified room air with use of a tidal

platelet-activatingfactor

0161-7567/92

$2.00 copyright

0 1992 the american

physiological

society

955

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

956

prolonged

pulmonary

hypertension

and

leukotrienes

volume of 2 ml at 60 breaths/min
and a positive end-exwater adjusted to a ph of 5.8 with use of acetic acid and
piratory pressure of 3 cmh,o. right and left ventriculosammonium hydroxide. the flow rate was 1 ml/min. an
tomies as well as excision of the left atria1 appendage
ultraviolet
detector, set at a 280-nm wavelength,
was
were performed.
a catheter with distal and side port
used to determine the retention times of each lt. the
openings was inserted through the right ventricle into
retention times were 12.00 t 0.03, 20.20 t 0.05, and
the main pulmonary artery, where it was ligated in place.
24.00 t 0.04 (se) min for ltc,, ltd,, and lte,, respecthe lungs were perfused at 4 ml/100 g body wt with a 4% tively. the respective aliquots of hplc effluent for the
albumin-krebs-henseleit
solution equilibrated
with a three lts were dried and then reconstituted
with assay
gas mixture of 21% o,-5% co,-74% n, at 38oc. the
buffer. recovery oif the triti .ated 1 ntern .a1 standard was
perfusion system was nonrecirculating.
the heart and
determ .ined before the ria step the recoveries were
87 t 6, 46 t 6, and 64 t 3% for ltc,, ltd,, and
lungs were carefully removed and suspended by the endotracheal tube in a humidified
38oc chamber. pulmolte,, respectively. the dilutions during the assay steps
nary venous effluent dripped out of the left atrium and
and recovery of the internal standards made the counts
the left ventricle. mean pulmonary arterial pressure and
low enough before the final step of the assay so that there
phasic airway pressure were recorded continuously
on a was no interference
of the internal standard with the
polygraph.
blood was washed from the lung, and a ria standard curve.
steady-state
mean pulmonary
arterial pressure was
for ria of ltc,, ltd,, and lte,, a tritium-labeled
achieved within 10 min of the start of the perfusion.
lt kit (advanced magnetics) was used. the standard
measurement
of lung parenchymal levels of ltb,
curve is based on ltc,. specific binding was 58%, and
ltc, ltd,, and lte,. the following procedures have
nonspecific bindin g was 3%. the sensitivity of the assay
been adapted from previous work by westcott and co- was 24 pg. studies in our laboratory showed that the anworkers (21). at a selected time point of perfusion, the
tibody was 100% reactive with ltd, and the cross-reaclung was rapidly removed from the perfusion chamber
tivity (50% b/b,) was 75% for ltc, and 60% for lte,.
and placed in 30 ml of ice-cold methanol. the lung was results of the ria for lte, and ltd, were multiplied
homogenized, and three 5-ml aliquots were removed for
by 1.2 and 0.72, respectively, by use of the ltc, standard
determination
of ltb,, ltc,, ltd,, and lte,. fifteen
curve.
thousand disintegrations
per minute of tritiated lt were
with use of hplc, a decomposition
study was peradded to the appropriate aliquot to serve as an internal
formed to examine whether there is ongoing metabolism
recovery standard (new england nuclear, boston, ma).
of ltc, to ltd, and lte, during our assay procedures.
with the use of high-performance
liquid chromatograwhen a known amount of [3h]ltc,
was added to an
phy (hplc), the percentage of tritium leached off the
ice-cold methanol homogenate of unstimulated
(by paf)
peptidoleukotriene
internal standard was assessed belung tissue, there was no measurable conversion to ltd,
fore each assay. the final recovery was corrected accordor lte,.
ingly.
protocol 1. the first set of studies was designed to exafter overnight precipitation
of protein at -7o”c, the
amine the change in lung parenchyma
lt levels and
methanol supernatant
was removed and dried in a vacmean pulmonary arterial pressure at 5 and 20 min after
uum centrifuge. the sample was then reconstituted
in intravascular
exposure to paf. isolated lungs were perkh,po, buffer for the next c,, sep-pak purification
fused for 10 min to establish a blood-free effluent and
(waters, milford, ma). after the column was prewashed
steady baseline mean pulmonary arterial pressure. paf
and the sample was loaded, the column was washed with
(1 - o - hexadecyl - 2 - o - acetyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoryl
20% methanol-potassium
phosphate buffer followed by choline; biomol, plymouth meeting, pa) was dissolved
water. lts were eluted with 80% methanol in water. the
in 100% ethanol, and dilutions were made with use of a
sample was dried again before radioimmunoassay
(ria)
0.25% albumin-0.9%
saline vehicle. the final ethanol
buffer was added for ltb, samples or before hplc
concentration
in the injectate was 0.1%. ten minutes
buffer was added for ltc,, ltd,, and lte, samples.
after the start of the perfusion, 50 pg of paf in a l-ml
ltb, was measured by ria with a c3h]ltb, kit (advehicle of 0.25% albumin-0.9%
saline were injected over
vanced magnetics,
cambridge,
ma). the monoclonal
30 s into a side po lrt of the pulmonary artery catheter. it is
antibody had ~1% crossreactivity
for ltc,, ltd,, and
emphasi zed that the perfusion system was nonreci rculte,. the ltb, standard curve was characterized by a lating. the dose of paf was chosen to be far below subsensitivity (95% b/b,) of 18 pg and a 50% b/b, of 170 pg. maximal response in terms of mean pulmonary arterial
specific binding of [3h]ltb,
to antibody at 0 standard
pressure yet appreciable enough to assess the effect of
was 31% and nonspecific binding was 3.4%. when sampharmacological
blockade on the pressor response as
ples of ltb, were diluted lo- and loo-fold, parallelism to
well as on lt production
(5, 21).
undiluted values was demonstrated
by ria. the recovafter the injection of paf, perfusions were abruptly
ery of [3h]ltb,
or cold ltb, added to an unstimulated
stopped at 5 or 20 min. in pilot studies we found that the
sample gave the same recovery [72 t 4% (se)].
peak rise in mean pulmonary arterial pressure occurred 5
because there is appreciable cross-reactivity
among
min after the injection of paf. in addition, we expected a
ltc,, ltd,, and lte,, hplc was used to separate
persistent elevation of mean pulmonary arterial pressure
these compounds before ria. a nucleosil c,, hplc colabove baseline for 20 min. in our pilot studies we also
umn (250 mm long) with 5-pm particle size was employed
found that after 20 min the lung would become suddenly
(thomson chromatography,
springfield, va). the isoand visually edematous at very variable times. therecratic mobile phase consisted of 67% methanol-33%
fore, we selected 20 min as the second time point after the
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

prolonged

start
perfusion

i

-10

pulmonary

hypertension

paf
peak
injection pap

i

m5

i

0

 xxxd1879xxx 
\
early exposure

dle;;;;kar;;;;;ne

t

time (mn)
design for determining
role of leukotrienes
in
persistent
elevation
of mean pulmonary
arterial
pressure
(pap)
induced by a rapid intravascular
injection
of platelet-activating
factor
(paf) into isolated
perfused
rat lung. leukotriene
level .s in lung parenchyma
were measured
5 and 20 min after paf alone (control)
or together
with early vs. late exposure
to  xxxd1879xxx 
(dec),
a
5lipoxygenase
inhibitor.
fig.

1. experimental

paf injection for pulmonary
arterial pressure and lt
measurements.
to determine baseline levels of lung parenchyma lts and baseline mean pulmonary
arterial
pressure, other isolated lungs were treated identically as
above but no paf was injected.
protocol 2. the second set of studies examined the effects of early (before paf) and late (after paf) exposure
of the lung to  xxxd1879xxx 
(dec), a  xxxg147xxx  inhibitor, figure 1 shows the design for these experiments. early treatment
with dec was defined as exposure to dec (3 mg/ml) in the perfusate at the onset of
the perfusion, that is, 10 min before the paf injection,
and continuing 5 min after the paf injection. mean pulmonary arterial pressure and lung parenchyma
levels
were measured 5 min after the paf injection. early exposure studies were designed to determine whether dec,
at the dose and duration selected, could inhibit the production of lung lts and the initial elevation in mean
pulmonary
arterial pressure. the dose range for dec
was based on previous work by other investigators using
the rat lung in which  xxxg147xxx  inhibition was demonstrated (20) yet the pressor response to  xxxg99xxx 
was preserved (14).
late exposure of the lung to dec was defined as perfusing the lung initially with the standard perfusate but
then abruptly switching to the perfusate containing dec
(3 mg/ml) 5 min after the paf injection. these lungs
(like the lungs exposed early to dec) were exposed to
dec for exactly 15 min. at 20 min after the injection of
paf, mean pulmonary arterial pressure and lung parenchyma levels of lts were measured. the studies that
involved late exposure to dec were designed to determine whether the extended elevation of mean pulmonary
arterial pressure and lung lt levels at 20 min after the
paf injection could be attributed to prolonged activation
of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway or to a slow metabolism of
lung lts. if late exposure to dec resulted in a decrease
in lt levels at 20 min after the injection of paf compared with lungs that were not treated with dec, then
the prolonged elevation of lts could be attributed to a
prolonged activation of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway. conversely, if there were no differences in lung lt levels at
the 20-min time point between dec-treated
and untreated lungs, then the persistent elevation of lts could
be attributed to a slow metabolism of lts.

and

leukotrienes

957

protocoz 3. the third set of studies was designed to
determine whether the action of dec on the paf-induced elevation of mean pulmonary pressure was specifically related to its inhibition of lt production. five rats
received the  xxxg147xxx -activating
protein inhibitor
mk886 (donated by merck frosst centre for therapeutic research, quebec, canada) in a 0.01%  xxxd2609xxx , 2%  xxxd102xxx  by gavage 2-6 h before perfusion (total volume 1 ml po). a 3.3 mg/loo g body wt dose
was used. gillard and co-workers
(7) described the
marked inhibitory effect of mk886 on lt production in
a variety of biological models including the rat lung. five
rats (controls) received vehicle only. all rats were pretreated with indomethacin,
and lungs were perfused as
described earlier. the increase in mean pulmonary arterial pressure as well as lung parenchyma levels of ltc,
and ltd, 5 min after paf were compared in mk886 and
control groups.
data analysis. lung parenchyma
levels of lts and
mean pulmonary
arterial pressure measurements
at 5
and 20 min after the paf injection were compared at
respective times for lungs perfused with standard perfusate vs. dec. mean pulmonary arterial pressure and lung
parenchyma
lt levels, 5 min after the paf injection,
were also compared
in mk886and vehicle-treated
groups. the mann-whitney
two-sample test was used
for these analyses. a one-tailed p 5 0.05 was considered
statistically significant (4).
results

pulmonary arterial pressure response to intravascular
paf with and without exposure to dec. the steady-state
mean pulmonary arterial pressure served as the baseline
value 10 min after the onset of the perfusion and immediately before the paf injection. baseline mean pulmonary arterial pressure was 7.5 t 0.8 (se) torr. mean
pulmonary arterial pressure did not change over the next
20 min in control lungs (no exposure to paf). no change
in mean pulmonary
arterial pressure was observed for
the paf vehicle solution.
a representative polygraph tracing of the mean pulmonary arterial pressure response to a rapid intravascular
injection of paf is shown in fig. 2 (top). mean pulmonary arterial pressure increased to a peak level of 13.7 t
1.5 torr (83 t 11% above baseline) 5 min after the paf
injection. mean pulmonary
arterial pressure remained
elevated  xxxd1891xxx .2 t 0.4 torr (36 t 4% above baseline) at 20
min. early exposure with dec significantly inhibited the
peak increase in mean pulmonary
arterial pressure to
9.9 -+ 0.4 torr (32 t 4% above baseline). late exposure to
dec brought the already established mean pulmonary
arterial pressure response down to baseline 8.0 t 0.3
torr (7 t 4% above baseline) at 20 min. this was significantly lower than the value observed 20 min after paf
with no dec.
lung parenchymal lt levels after intravascular paf:
effect of early vs. late exposure to dec. figure 3 depicts
the cumulative data for mean pulmonary
arterial pressure at 5 and 20 min after the paf injection together
with simultaneous changes in lung parenchyma levels of
peptidoleukotrienes
(ltc,, ltda. and lte,). in lungs

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

958

prolonged

pulmonary

hypertension

injectk)n of
platelet activating
factor
t+
g zwqo
gb=
*3qi
nwz
at+8
stef
t
t\r
e w’o
zagsi

leukotrienes

reductions of 75 and 72% for lung parenchyma
ltc, and ltd,, respectively.

----

-

and

---.no  xxxd1879xxx (dec)

levels of

discussion

the hypothesis for this study was that lts are mediators of the extended pulmonary hypertension observed

--~-~~~~~~

=w

%ip

$gg&$&y,:)&g+j

-,

100

“-ia@
z

“i

10
f

\r

1

----

r

80

platelet
activating
factor
paf)
injection

(10)
-i-

/

0

5

i

i

1

10

15

20

base

0

paf

alone

paf

. dec

paf

+ dec

q
q

.,.,.,.
.,.,.,.,...
.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:
:.>:.:...:.:
:: : _.,..
....
~~~~
i

q

i

60

line

mean
t se,
l different

early
late

(

) number
from
paf

of lungs
alone
(pc.05)

time (mn)
fig. 2. examples
of polygraph
recordings
of mean pap from isolated perfused
rat lung after a rapid intravascular
injection
of paf
(indomethacin
pretreatment;
nonrecirculating
perfusate).
effect
of
early vs. late treatment
with dec is shown. perfusions
were stopped
at
5 or 20 min to measure
lung parenchymal
levels of leukotrienes.

exposed to paf alone (no dec), all three lt levels increased above baseline values at 5 min. at 20 min, the
three lt levels remained elevated but there were differences in the percent decrease of each level compared with
their respective peaks at 5 min. twenty minutes after the
paf injection, ltc, and ltd, levels decreased by over
half of their peak values, respectively, whereas lte, levels remained elevated.
with early exposure to dec, a decrease in mean pulmonary arterial pressure and all three peptidoleukotrienes was observed (fig. 3). compared with lungs exposed to paf alone, early exposure to dec significantly
reduced the 5-min values for mean pulmonary arterial
pressure and the three peptidoleukotrienes.
this reduction in ltc,, ltd,, and lte, was very similar; the levels in lungs exposed early to dec were one-fourth of the
levels in lungs exposed to paf alone. an important contrast was observed with late exposure to dec. there
were reductions in mean pulmonary arterial pressure
and ltc, when the zo-min time points with and without
the inhibitor were compared (fig. 3). however, ltd, and
lte, did not change significantly.
the changes in lung ltb, levels in response to intravascular paf and the effect of dec exposures are shown
in fig. 4. ltb, levels increased within 5 min of the paf
injection, and by 20 min, levels were reduced by about
one-half. early exposure to dec significantly reduced
ltb, levels 5 min after the paf injection. this was the
same magnitude of inhibition observed for the peptidoleukotrienes, about one-fourth of the level observed in
lungs exposed to paf alone after 5 min. in contrast, no
difference in ltb, levels was observed at 20 min for paf
alone vs. paf plus late exposure to dec.

time

(6)

t

80

f’,.,“,
‘. / .:*. i
f *,/- .,
..:. . xi.
’ y-.1

effect of mk886 on paf-induced pulmonary hypertension. five control rats developed a 99 t 22% increase in

mean pulmonary arterial pressure 5 min after the intravascular injection of paf (fig. 5). five rats treated with
mk886 exhibited a markedly attenuated (23 t 10%) increase in mean pulmonary pressure 5 min after the intravascular injection of paf. the reduced pulmonary vascular pressor response to mk886 was associated with mean

(mn)

(10)

i

,
i

5
10
time (mn)

fig. 3. effect
of a
pap and peptidoleukotriene
treated,
nonrecirculating
ministered
before paf
levels at 5 min. in late
reduced
pap and only

i
i

15

rapid

intravascular
injection
of paf on mean
levels in isolated
rat lung (indomethacin
perfusate).
in early exposure
group, dec adinhibited
elevation
of pap and all leukotriene
exposure
group, dec, administered
after paf,
leukotriene
c, levels at 20 min.

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

prolonged

pulmonary

hypertension

after a single rapid intravascular injection of paf in the
isolated perfused rat lung pretreated with indomethacin.
the injection of paf was made into the pulmonary artery of a nonrecirculating
perfusion system. the perfusate was a cell-free physiological salt solution, and therefore the lung was the principal source of lts. the dose of
paf was chosen to yield a pressor response far below
(about one-third) the maximum
pressor response observed in previous work (5,zl). with this design, we have
demonstrated a pulmonary vascular and lung biochemical response that may be operating in pathophysiological
conditions in which endogenous paf is elevated and associated with pulmonary hypertension.
sepsis (3) and
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (2)
have been suggested as clinical examples of paf-induced
pulmonary hypertension. the conclusion of the present
study was that the extended pulmonary hypertension induced by paf was caused to a large extent by prolonged
activation of the  xxxg147xxx  pathway and specifically
by ltc, production.
the  xxxg147xxx  pathway of  xxxd208xxx  metabolism leads to the intermediate
lta, before it splits
to produce the nonpeptide-containing
ltb, or the peptidoleukotrienes.
the peptidoleukotrienes
are metabolized from ltc, to lt19, to lte, by amino acid removal.
the present study provides new information
on the time
course of change in endogenous lung lts after intravascular exposure to paf.
previous work by others and ourselves in which the
isolated rat lung was used has examined lt levels at one
time point after intravascular exposure to paf. in the
earlier work, ltc, and ltd, levels were increased in the
vascular effluent, 10 min after the intravascular injection
of paf (21). in later work, we demonstrated that lung
parenchyma levels of ltc, were markedly elevated compared with pulmonary vascular effluent levels 5 min after
the injection of paf (5). in the present study we find that
paf causes large but differing elevations of ltb,, ltc,,
ltd,, and lte, in the lung parenchyma 5 min after the
platelet
a~twtvimlg
-

q base
line
q paf alone

(7)

ww
injection

q

paf

+ dec

early

paf

+ dec

late

mean
f se, ( ) number
* different
from
paf

-10
l

-5

0

dle?hylcarbai#aliff e
iwuyexqqswte

5

10

15

of lungs
alone
(p45)

20

dlethylcarbamazlne (dec) h
-

lateexposure

time (mn)
fig. 4. change in leukotriene b, (ltb,) levels in lung parenchyma
of isolated rat lung (indomethacin treated, nonrecirculating perfusate)
after a rapid intravascular injection of paf. in early exposure group,
dec, administered before paf, inhibited elevation of ltb, levels at 5
min. in late exposure group, dec, administered after paf, did not
significantly reduce ltb, levels at 20 min.

959

and leukotrienes
base line

platelet
activating
factor
vw
injection

el

paf alone

l?izil

paf + mk886

mean k se
n=4=1ottlmepoint
$3 different
from
paf alone (px.01)
time (min)

i
i
i
i
i
i
i

-5

0

f--l

5

time (min)
fig. 5. effect of mk886 (&lipoxygenase-activating
protein inhibitor) on intravascular paf-induced elevations of mean pap and lung
leukotriene levels in isolated perfused rat lung. inhibitory effects of
mk886 (administered in vivo) were very similar to that observed in
earlier experiments when dec was used instead.

paf injection.
the elevations were in the order of
ltb,>ltc,>lte,>ltd,.
this was the same order
noted for baseline levels of each of these lts, respectively. therefore the elevation of lts observed 5 min
after paf had not saturated lung clearance pathways for
lts. twenty minutes after the paf injection, there was
a partial decline in each of the lts except for lte, levels, which did not change between 5 and 20 min. this
latter finding is consistent with a slow metabolism
or
release of lte, from the lung, as suggested by other investigators (23). the high levels of lte, observed at
both time points were not caused by in vitro conversion
of peptidoleukotrienes
during storage or handling of samples. we found that rapid homogenization
of the lung in
ice-cold methanol stops peptidoleukotriene
conversion
to lte,, as shown by others (23).
another major objective of our study was to compare
lt levels (20 min after the injection of paf) in lungs
exposed to paf alone with paf plus late exposure to
dec. this comparison enabled us to determine which
 xxxg147xxx  product had the principal pressor role
and what th e relative differences were in overall lung
parenchyma
clearance. before this comparison
was

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

960

prolonged

pulmonary

hypertension

made, it was demonstrated
that dec, at the dose selected, acted as a slipoxygenase
inhibitor.
in the early exposure studies, dec inhibited the elevation of ltb, and the peptidoleukotrienes
along with pulmonary arterial pressure. the same dose of dec was
then used for the late exposure studies; that is, dec was
added to the perfusate 5 min after the intravascular paf
injection. late dec exposure resulted in a reduction in
mean pulmonary arterial pressure and only ltc, at 20
min compared with the control group. therefore,
we
concluded that ltc, is the most important slipoxygenase product in this experimental
model and the principal
cause of the extended increase in pulmonary
vascular
resistance. the pressor effect of ltc, could not be mediated by prostanoids, because the cyclooxygenase pathway was blocked. although there may be species differences, ltc, does not stimulate prostanoid production in
the human lung (16).
ltb,, ltd,, and lte, levels were not different in
control and the late dec groups at 20 min after the paf
injection, whereas mean pulmonary arterial pressure was
reduced in the latter group. therefore, these lts did not
have an appreciable pressor effect, which is in general
agreement with work by others. ltb, is a potent chemotactic agent with no appreciable or direct effect on pulmonary vascular resistance (9). exogenous ltc, has a more
potent pressor effect than ltd, (20) or lte, (6) in rat
lung models similar to that used in the present study.
ltb,, ltd,, and lte, levels remained elevated in the
late dec group, whereas ltc, levels were significantly
decreased compared with 20-min values after the paf
injection alone. this demonstrates
that ltb,, ltd,,
and lte, are more slowly metabolized or released from
the lung. the differences in the relative rate at which the
lung cleared endogenous ltc, vs. ltb,, ltd,, and
lte, is only in partial agreement with work by other
investigators who have examined the metabolism of exogenous lts in the isolated rat lung. in one study ltc,
added to a recirculating perfusion buffer led to persistent
pulmonary
hypertension,
and ltc, was rapidly converted to ltd, and lte, (8). however, ltb, added to
the airway was released rapidly by the lung into the vascular effluent. in another study, airway instillation
of
lts also led to a rapid disappearance of ltb,, but the
peptidoleukotrienes
were slowly metabolized to lte,
and n-acetyl lte,. both lte, and n-acetyl lte, had a
very slow metabolism or release from the lung (21). the
principal difference between past work by others and our
present study is with regard to ltb,. our studies indicate that ltb, may be more of a sustained chemotactic
stimulus produced by the lung than previously recognized. this result is corroborated
by recent work using
chopped human lung and [ l-14c]arachidonic
acid. in the
latter study, ltb, metabolism
was much slower than
ltc, metabolism (10).
in summary, we found an extended elevation of pulmonary arterial pressure induced by a rapid intravascular
injection of paf into the pulmonary
artery of the isolated rat lung. the perfusion system was nonrecirculating. two lt synthesis inhibitors, dec and mk886, having different mechanisms of action, separately inhibited

and

leukotrienes

the paf-induced elevation in mean pulmonary
arterial
pressure and lt production
in the lung parenchyma.
the extended pulmonary
hypertension
could be attributed mainly to a prolonged activation of the slipoxygenase pathway and specifically ltc, production.
ltb,,
ltd,, and lte, have no appreciable effect on mean pulmonary arterial pressure in the model studied. although
metabolic degradation or release of lts from the lungs
was not addressed in the present study, we can conclude
that the overall clearance rate from the lung parenchyma
of ltb,, ltd,, and lte, was longer than that of ltc,.
the interaction between paf and lt production deserves further study in light of other findings that 1)
paf, after being produced in lung cells (e.g., endothelial
cells), may be retained intracellularly
and protected from
plasma inactivation
(lo), and 2) ltc, and ltd, stimulate endothelial cells to produce paf (11,13). clarifying
the cellular mechanism by which paf leads to a prolonged production of lts could provide insight into the
pathophysiology
of certain inflammatory
and hypertensive disorders of the lung.
the authors thank dr. robert bienkowski and dr. philip lipsitz for
support of this work and review of the manuscript and dr. fred chasalow for expert advice regarding the assay techniques. the strong support of diane davidson and manuscript preparation by irene barling
are also gratefully acknowledged.
this work was funded by a trudeau scholar award from the american lung association and a grant-in-aid
from the american heart
association, new york state affiliate (d. davidson).
address reprint requests to d. davidson.
received 31 july 1991; accepted in final form 11 march 1992.
references

1. arm, j. p., s. p. o’hickey,
r. j. hawksworth,
c. y. fong, a. e.
crea, b. w. spur, and t. h. lee. asthmatic airways have a disproportionate
hyperresponsiveness
to lte,, as compared with
normal airways, but not to ltc,, ltd,,  xxxd2586xxx , and histamine. am. rev. respir. dis. 142: 1112-1118,
1990.
2. caplan, m. s., w. hsijeh, x. son, s. s. gidding,
and j. r. hageman. circulating plasma  xxxd2973xxx  in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newbown. am. rev. respir. dis. 142:
1258-1262,199o.
3. chang, s. w., c. 0. feddersen,
kel.  xxxd2973xxx 

lung injury in endotoxin-treated

p. m. henson,
and n. f. voelmediates hemodynamic changes in
rats. j. clin. invest. 79: 1498-1509,

1987.
4. colton,

t. statistics
in medicine.
boston, ma: little, brown,
1974, p. 221-223.
5. davidson,
d., m. singh, and g. f. wallace.
role of leukotriene
c, in pulmonary hypertension: platelet-activating
factor vs. hypoxia. j. appl. physiol. 68: 1628-1633, 1990.
6. feddersen,
c. o., m. mathias,
r. c. murphy,
j. t. reeves,
and n. f. voelkel.
leukotriene e, causes pulmonary vasoconstriction, not inhibited by meclofenamate. prostuglundins
26: 869883, 1983.
7. gillard,
j., a. w. ford-hutchinson,
d. denis, a. foster, r. fortin,
and h. morton.
l-663, xxxd1571xxx (mk-886)(3-[

c. chan, s. charleson,
s. leger, c. s. mcfarlane,
1-4-chlorobenzyl)-3-t
butyl-thio-5-isopropylindol-2-yl]
-2,2dimethyl
 xxxd3029xxx ), a
novel, orally active leukotriene biosynthesis inhibitor. can. j. physiol. phurmucol.
67: 456-464,
1989.
8. harper,
t. w., j. y. westcott,
n. voelkel,
and r. c.
murphy.
metabolism of leukotrienes b, and c, in the isolated
perfused rat lung. j. biol. chem. 259: 14437-14440,
1984.
9. henderson,
w. r. eicosanoids and  xxxd2973xxx  in
allergic respiratory diseases. am. rev. respir. dis. 143: 586-590,
1991.

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

prolonged
10.

kumlin,

further

pulmonary

hypertension

m., and s. dahlen.
characteristics of formation and
metabolism of leukotrienes in the chopped human lung.

biochim.
11. lynch,

biophys.

actcz 1044:

201-210,

1990.

j. m., and p. m. henson. the intracellular retention of
newly synthesized  xxxd2973xxx . j. immunol.
137:

2653-2661,1986.
12. mcintyre,

t. m., g. a. zimmerman,
and s. m. prescott.
leukotrienes c, and d, stimulate human endothelial cells to synthesize platelet-activating
factor and bind leukotrienes. proc. nutl.

acad. sci. usa 83: 2204-2208,1986.
13. mcintyre,
t. m., g. a. zimmerman,
k. satoh, and s. m. prescott. cultured endothelial cells synthesize both platelet-activat-

ing factor and prostacylin in response to histamine,
and  xxxd83xxx . j. czin. inuest. 76: 271-280,
14. morganroth,
m. l., j. t. reeves, r. c. murphy,
voelkel.
leukotriene synthesis and receptor blockers
oxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. j. appl. physiol. 56:

bradykinin,
1985.
and n.

f.
block hyp-

1340-1346,

1984.
15. piacentini,

16.

and leukotrienes

17. stenmark,
k. r., s. j. james, n. f. voelkel, w. h. toews, j. t.
reeves, and r. murphy.
leukotriene c, and d, in neonates with
hypoxemia and pulmonary hypertension. n. engl. j. med. 309: 7780, 1983.
18. stenmark,
k. r., m. eyzaquirre,
j. y. westcott,
p. m. henson, and r. c. murphy.
potential role of eicosanoids and paf in
the pathophysiology of bronchopulmonary
dysplasia. am. rev. respir. dis. 136: 770-772,
1987.
19. stewart,
a. g., and w. a. phillips.
intracellular platelet-acti-

vating factor regulates eicosanoid generation in guinea-pig resident peritoneal macrophages. br. j. pharmacol.
98: 141-148,1989.
20. voelkel,
n. f., k. r. stenmark,
j. t. reeves, m. m. mathias,
and r. c. murphy.
actions of lipoxygenase metabolites in isolated
rat lungs. j. appl. physiol. 57: 860-867,
1984.
21. voelkel,
n. f., s. worthen,
j. t. reeves, p. m. henson, and
r. c. murphy. nonimmunological
production of leukotrienes induced by  xxxd2973xxx . science wash. dc 218: 286-288,

g. l., and m. a. kaliner. the potential role of leukotrienes in bronchial asthma. am. rev. respir. dis. 143: 596-599,

1982.
22. westcott,
voelkel.

1991.
sautebin,
f. berti,

23.

l., t. vigano, e. grassi, m.
m. mezze’iti,
and g. folco.
induced by the ca++ ionophore a23187,
chyma in vitro. j. pharmacol.
exp. ther.

t. crivellari,
g. galli,
release of leukotrienes,
from human lung paren232: 439-444,

1985.

961

j. y., t. j. mcdonnell,
p. bostwick,
and n. f.
eicosanoid production in isolated perfused lungs stimulated by calcium ionophore a23187. am. rev. respir. dis. 138: 895900,1988.
westcott,

j. y., t. j. mcdonnell,
and n. f. voelkel.
alveolar
transfer and metabolism of eicosanoids in the rat. am. rev. respir.
dis.

139: 80-87,

1989.

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/jappl by ${individualuser.givennames} ${individualuser.surname} (137.092.098.118) on september 25, 2018.
copyright © 1992 american physiological society. all rights reserved.

