site of action of the general anesthetic propofol in muscarinic  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction.  although a potential target site of general anesthetics is primarily the gaba a receptor, a chloride ion channel, a previous study suggested that the intravenous general anesthetic propofol attenuates the m1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor ( xxxg447xxx )-mediated signal transduction. in the present study, we examined the target site of propofol in  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction. two-electrode voltage-clamp method was used in xenopus oocytes expressing both m1 receptors and associated g protein alpha subunits (gqalpha). propofol inhibited  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction in a dose-dependent manner (ic50 = 50 nm). injection of guanosine 5'-3-o-(thio)triphosphate (gtpgammas) into oocytes overexpressing gqalpha was used to investigate direct effects of propofol on g protein coupled with the  xxxg447xxx . propofol did not affect activation of gqalpha-mediated signal transduction with the intracellular injection of gtpgammas. we also studied effects of propofol on l-[n-methyl-3h]scopolamine methyl chloride ([3h]nms) binding and  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction in mammalian cells expressing  xxxg447xxx . propofol inhibited the  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction but did not inhibit binding of [3h]nms. effects of propofol on gs- and gi/o-coupled signal transduction were investigated, using oocytes expressing the beta2 adrenoceptor (beta2 receptor)/ xxxg437xxx  or oocytes expressing the m2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor ( xxxg448xxx )/ xxxg1252xxx  (a member of g protein-gated inwardly rectifying k(+) channels). neither beta2 receptor-mediated nor  xxxg448xxx -mediated signal transduction was inhibited by a relatively high concentration of propofol (50 microm). these results indicate that propofol inhibits  xxxg447xxx -mediated signal transduction by selectively disrupting interaction between the receptor and associated g protein.