british journal of dermatology (2003) 149 (suppl. 64): 57–58

historical posters: summaries of posters
h-1
the early history of melanoma
d.j.eedy
craigavon area hospital group trust, craigavon, u.k.
the earliest description of melanoma is attributed to rené
laënnac who discussed ‘la melanose’ at the faculty of
medicine in paris in 1806. in 1820, william norris, a general
practitioner from stourbridge, provided a detailed description
of melanoma of the skin. in 1857 norris described eight
cases of melanosis, and suggested that, at least in part, the
aetiology of ‘melanosis’ may be the products of the industrial
revolution. carswell, who first coined the word melanoma in
1838, used chemical analysis to suggest that melanoma
resulted from degradation of blood. pemberton (1858) detailed
the characteristics and sites of metastases, early pathological
studies and the earliest descriptions with statistics on prognosis. whitfield (1900) concluded the cell of origin to be
chromophore-containing naevus cells derived from the
epidermis.
jonathan hutchinson (1890) described lentigo maligna,
which now bears his name, as ‘infective senile freckles’ which
he believed to be infective because of their slow progressive
growth. dubreuilh (1894) described four similar cases, before
in 1912 characterizing the lesion as circumscribed precancerous melanosis. hutchinson also described melanotic whitlow in 1886.
the surgical management of melanoma was defined by
sampson handley, as a consequence of his examination of
lymphatic permeation by melanoma as described in his
hunterian lectures in 1907. this wide excision of melanoma
remained unchanged for over 50 years.

h-2
abstract withdrawn

h-3
sir ernest graham-little, dermatologist and
politician
b.e.monk
dermatology department, bedford hospital nhs trust, bedford,
u.k.
of the many extraordinary individuals who have graced
british dermatology over the years, few can have had more
remarkable lives than sir ernest graham-little (1867–1950).
little (he styled himself graham-little after his knighthood in
1931) had two careers, firstly as one of the most distinguished,
successful and pioneering dermatologists of the early 20th
century, and then from 1924 to 1950 as an independent
member of parliament (the last so elected for over 50 years).
ó 2003 british association of dermatologists

little’s contributions to dermatology included his description of a form of scarring alopecia which has become known
as graham-little syndrome, the early development of carbon
dioxide snow, and the rational use of radiation. in his
parliamentary career he played a significant role in facilitating medical education for women, and was a steadfast
opponent of the national health service. he managed to
combine his parliamentary duties with holding the presidency
of the british association of dermatologists in 1935–6, and
returned to clinical dermatology in the second world war.
his career in the house of commons only ended when
university seats were abolished.

h-4
dermatologists, beacons of epidemics: past,
present and future!
k.s.leslie and n.j.levell
department of dermatology, norfolk and norwich university
hospital, norwich, u.k.
by march 1981 at least eight cases of kaposi’s sarcoma (ks)
had occurred among young homosexual men in new york. ks
was a then rare form of a relatively benign neoplastic process
arising from both vascular and lymphatic endothelium. these
cases were unusual as they were more aggressive and occurred
in young men. previously, ks had tended to affect older men
particularly of eastern european origin, as originally described
by kaposi. dermatologists from the u.s.a. and europe reported
many more new cases over the next few years. human
immunodeficiency virus (hiv) was isolated in 1983. today
many leading clinicians and researchers in the field of hiv
medicine are trained dermatologists.
the bubonic plague tormented mankind for many centuries before dermatology became a speciality or medicine even
became a science. however, dermatologists over the last two
centuries have often been involved in diagnosis and treatment of this condition. an erythematous plaque may develop
at the site of the initial flea bite and over the next few days an
exanthematous rash appears leading to widespread purpura
or the ‘black death’. dr douglas w.montgomery (1859–
1941) was appointed the first professor of dermatology in
1892 at the university of california medical school. he
helped to contain an outbreak of the bubonic plague in san
francisco in 1900. he studied, with public health officials,
autopsy material from a chinese man with swollen lymph
nodes and confirmed the diagnosis of the bubonic plague.
daniel turner (1667–1741) has been hailed as the ‘first
english dermatologist’. in his book de morbis cutaneis he
wrote extensively about syphilis and suggested the need to
administer internal medicines for this condition. by the
nineteenth century syphilis was endemic in europe and north
america. due to its many and varied cutaneous presentations,

57

58

historical posters

physicians with a special interest in this area often became
skilled at treatment of skin diseases. dermatology evolved as a
speciality and even today in mainland europe the specialty is
still that of dermatovenereology.
the future is unpredictable, but most epidemics from the
past presented with skin changes. syphilis is not a disease of
the past; many hundreds of new cases were diagnosed in the
u.k. in the last year. the threat of bioterrorism places
dermatologists in the front line of management of conditions
such as smallpox or anthrax. are you ready for the next
outbreak?

h-5
vitiligo: the historical curse of depigmentation
g.millington and n.j.levell
department of dermatology, norfolk and norwich university
hospital, norwich, u.k.
vitiligo, the ‘small blemish’ (from the latin vitulum) was first
described more than 1500 years bc. both ancient egyptian

and pre-hindu vedic texts give a clear record of depigmented
macules, a vedic myth being that the anthropomorphic
deification of the sun developed vitiligo after being gazed upon
by his illegitimate son, saturn. an accurate description also
exists in japanese shinto prayers from 1200 bc.
leprosy is recorded as a pale swelling, distinct from vitiligo
in the ebers papyrus (an egyptian collection of writings from
1500–3000 bc), but there is no such demarcation between
the two diseases in either the bible or in the first european
description of the disease by hippocrates. sadly, this type of
‘nondiscrimination’ persists in many communities in the
world today, where vitiligo sufferers are sometimes shunned
in the same age-old way as people with leprosy.
early attempts at treatment mirror contemporary therapies
too, as both ancient egyptian and indian writings depict
psoralen-containing plants applied to pale macules and then
exposed to sunlight.
we have much to learn from both the sociological and
medical history of vitiligo, if we are to make progress in
improving the management of this ancient disease in the
modern world.

ó 2003 british association of dermatologists, british journal of dermatology 149 (suppl. 64), 57–58

