adverse reactions to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in aids
michelle a floris-moore, maria i amodio-groton, and michela t catalano

objective:

to report the case of a woman with aids who developed tremor, acute pancreatitis, and elevated serum creatinine
levels while receiving trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (tmp/smx).

case summary: a 37-year-old puerto rican woman with aids, hiv nephropathy, and a recent history of disseminated
histoplasmosis presented with fever, nonproductive cough, pancytopenia, and elevated transaminase and alkaline phosphatase
levels. serum creatinine was near her baseline level of 2.9 mg/dl. treatment was started with  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex for
histoplasmosis and intravenous tmp/smx for presumed pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. two days later, the patient developed a
high-frequency tremor and severe abdominal pain, and serum creatinine increased to 5.6 mg/dl. tmp/smx was discontinued, after
which the patient’s symptoms resolved within 72 hours and serum creatinine returned to baseline levels.
discussion: a high incidence of adverse reactions to tmp/smx has been reported among hiv-infected persons. toxic sulfamethoxazole

metabolites may elicit hypersensitivity reactions. trimethoprim can inhibit renal creatinine secretion, leading to high serum creatinine
levels. trimethoprim also inhibits  xxxg631xxx , causing decreased dopamine production, which may lead to parkinsonian
symptoms. use of the naranjo probability scale indicated a probable relationship between the adverse effect and tmp/smx.
conclusions: the high frequency and wide range of potential adverse effects associated with the use of tmp/smx in hiv-infected

persons require that clinicians consider drug toxicity as a cause of new symptoms in patients receiving this medication.
key words: creatinine, hiv, pancreatitis, tremor, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.

ann pharmacother 2003;37:1810-3.
published online, 15 oct 2003, www.theannals.com, doi 10.1345/aph.1d179

rimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (tmp/smx) has an est
tablished record of safety and efficacy in the general
population. in immunocompetent persons, adverse reactions to tmp/smx are most often dermatologic or gastrointestinal and occur in approximately 8% of persons.1-3
in contrast, in the hiv-infected population, a much higher
incidence of adverse reactions has been reported, with frequencies as high as 83% found in 1 study.2 we report the
case of a woman with aids who developed tremor, acute
pancreatitis, and elevated serum creatinine levels while receiving tmp/smx. an objective causality assessment using the naranjo probability scale indicated a probable relationship between the adverse effect and tmp/smx therapy
in this patient.4
author information provided at the end of the text.

1810

■

the annals of pharmacotherapy

■

case report
a 37-year-old, 60-kg, puerto rican woman with aids was admitted
to the hospital with fever, cough, and generalized weakness. hiv infection had been diagnosed in 1996. her cd4+ lymphocyte count 2 months
before admission was 14 cells/mm3, and hiv-1 rna viral load was
>750 000 copies/mm3. she had a history of hiv nephropathy, with a
baseline serum creatinine level of 2.5 mg/dl (normal 0.5–1.5). disseminated histoplasmosis had been diagnosed 8 months prior to this admission and treated with intravenous  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex followed by oral itraconazole. the patient had been prescribed antiretroviral therapy with zidovudine/lamivudine,  xxxd166xxx , and ritonavir, but
had not taken these drugs because of her reluctance to use any medicines
for her hiv disease. she did not report any adverse effects from these
antiretrovirals. she had also not taken any of her other prescribed medications (itraconazole, tmp/smx, azithromycin) during the 6-week period prior to hospitalization. she had no history of essential tremor or any
other neurologic disease and no prior episodes of pancreatitis.
the patient reported generalized weakness, fever, and 3 weeks of nonproductive cough. physical examination revealed fever (38.8 ˚c), rr 18
breaths/min, and normal bp and hr. she had oral candidiasis. her lungs

2003 december, volume 37

www.theannals.com

case reports

were clear to auscultation. the abdomen was soft and nondistended with
a liver span of 9 cm, a palpable spleen tip, moderate right upper quadrant
tenderness, and no rebound tenderness or guarding. she had no rash.
neurologic examination revealed normal sensory and motor function
and a normal cranial nerve examination. the patient had no tremor and
had normal stance and gait.
laboratory testing revealed a white blood cell count of 1.1 × 103/mm3
(4.8–10.8); hemoglobin 6.1 g/dl (12–16); platelet count 46 000/mm3
(180 – 400); serum aspartate aminotransferase (ast) 752 u/l (5– 40),
serum  xxxg941xxx  (alt) 223 u/l (5– 40), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) 571 u/l (60 –250), alkaline phosphatase 552 u/l (30 –
115), and albumin 2.2 g/dl (3.5–5.5). total bilirubin, prothrombin, and
partial thromboplastin times were normal. serum creatinine was 2.9
mg/dl. chest x-ray showed no infiltrates. abdominal ultrasound showed
marked hepatomegaly, with the right lobe measuring 19 cm in length.
the liver was echogenic and heterogeneous, and there was no hepatic
mass. biliary structures appeared normal and her spleen was near the upper limit of normal size. the patient refused bone marrow aspiration.
on hospital day 2, intravenous  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex 5 mg/
kg/d was started to treat presumed relapse of disseminated histoplasmosis. given the patient’s 3-week history of nonproductive cough in the setting of her not having taken pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (pcp) prophylaxis, a sputum sample was sent for direct fluorescent antigen testing,
and empiric pcp therapy was initiated with tmp/smx 15 mg/ kg/d.
ibuprofen and diphenhydramine were administered prior to infusion of
 xxxd164xxx  lipid complex. acetaminophen was given when the patient developed a fever. no other medications were administered.
on the morning of day 4, the patient developed a high-frequency
tremor that involved both upper extremities, was present at rest, and
worsened with activity. laboratory testing revealed serum creatinine 5.6
mg/dl, with serum potassium 5.4 meq/l. serum calcium was 6.7 mg/dl
(8.5–10.5) with albumin 1.5 g/dl (3.5–5.5). on day 5, the patient’s
serum creatinine had increased to 5.9 mg/dl. in view of concern about
renal toxicity, tmp/smx and ibuprofen were discontinued that afternoon. in the absence of any confirmatory clinical or microbiologic evidence of pcp, no alternative therapy was initiated.
the following morning (day 6), the patient developed acute onset of
severe epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting. she appeared acutely ill
and was tachycardic (hr 100 beats/min) and tachypneic (rr 22 breaths/
min). her abdomen was very distended, with marked epigastric tenderness, voluntary guarding, and hypoactive bowel sounds. lung examination revealed bibasilar rales. she had no rash. she had a severe high-frequency tremor, worse than on previous examination, which involved her
head in addition to both upper extremities and made it difficult for her to
write or use utensils. she had normal muscle tone and deep tendon reflexes. cognitive and cranial nerve functions were normal.
laboratory testing showed white blood cell count of 3.2 × 103/mm3,
hemoglobin 7.7 g/dl, and platelet count 32 000/mm3. serum creatinine
was 5.2 mg/dl and potassium was 5.0 meq/l. serum amylase was 542
u/l (16 –108) and lipase 2018 u/l (20 –190). transaminases had decreased, with alt 316 u/l and ast 113 u/l. alkaline phosphatase
was 509 u/l and total bilirubin 0.3 mg/dl. serum calcium was 6.4
mg/dl (8.5–10.5) with  xxxg124xxx  1.5 g/dl. abdominal computed
tomography with oral contrast showed peripancreatic edema and ascites.
the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made, and the patient was transferred to the medical intensive care unit. intravenous metronidazole and
ceftazidime were started.
within 72 hours of stopping tmp/smx, by the morning of day 8, the
patient’s gastrointestinal symptoms and tremor had resolved. serum
amylase had fallen to 289 u/l and serum lipase to 244 u/l. serum creatinine decreased to 2.6 mg/dl over the next 5 days. urinary assay for
histoplasma capsulatum was confirmatory, with a value of 11.0 antigen
units (strongly positive). she improved consistently and was discharged
home 10 days later after having received 14 days of intravenous  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex. treatment for histoplasmosis was continued
with oral fluconazole, and she was given dapsone for pcp prophylaxis.
two months after discharge, the urinary h. capsulatum assay level was
3.2 antigen units. liver function tests normalized, with ast 26 u/l,
alt 17 u/l, and alkaline phosphatase 75 u/l. thrombocytopenia and
leukopenia improved, with platelet count rising to 129 000/mm3 and
white blood cell count to 4.2 × 103/mm3, but she remained severely anemic (hemoglobin 6.3 g/dl) and required blood transfusions.

www.theannals.com

discussion
widespread use of tmp/smx for treatment and prophylaxis in the hiv-infected population has been associated with adverse reactions involving a variety of organ systems. our patient developed severe central nervous system, gastrointestinal, and renal adverse effects shortly after
starting therapy with tmp/smx. previous reports of
tmp/smx-induced adverse reactions have included individual reports of tremor, pancreatitis, and impaired renal
function, but to our knowledge (pubmed, october 2003),
this is the first case reported in which all of these manifestations occurred simultaneously.1-3, 5-10
both trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole have been implicated as causes of drug toxicity. trimethoprim, an inhibitor of  xxxg631xxx , has been proposed as
the cause of adverse effects involving the central nervous
system.  xxxg631xxx  reduces 7,8-dihydrobiopterin to tetrahydrobiopterin, an essential cofactor in the
production of dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and
serotonin. decreased production of dopamine can then
lead to symptoms of parkinsonism including tremor.
a case was described of parkinsonian symptoms developing after administration of tmp/smx to a 48-monthold child with a deficiency of  xxxg1912xxx ,
an enzyme essential in the regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin.11 another report described 4 cases of patients
with aids who developed tremor within days of starting
therapy with tmp/smx.5 other neurologic symptoms, including apathy, ankle clonus, and wide-based gait, were
also present in some of these cases. all symptoms resolved
within 2–3 days of stopping tmp/smx. over a minimum
of a 12-month follow-up period, only 1 of these patients
developed dementia, making it unlikely that their tremor
and other neurologic symptoms represented early manifestations of aids encephalopathy. our patient had no preexisting signs or symptoms of encephalopathy and has not
manifested any evidence of neurologic disease since her
discharge from the hospital.
sulfamethoxazole is metabolized by 2 pathways. nacetylation, the predominant metabolic pathway, is mediated by the polymorphic enzyme n-acetyltransferase, with
activity inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.10 in patients who have genetically determined slow n-acetylation,
use of sulfonamides can result in a high level of substrate
available for alternate metabolic pathways. the alternate
pathway involves cytochrome p450 oxidative enzymes
producing toxic hydroxylamine derivatives that bind to
macromolecules and cause cell death or elicit an immunologic response.12 these derivatives are scavenged by the
antioxidant glutathione. in hiv-infected persons, glutathione
concentrations are significantly lower than those of normal
controls.13,14 it is postulated that this deficiency of glutathione, needed for the detoxification of hydroxylamine
derivatives, may exacerbate the toxic effects of sulfamethoxazole metabolites, and plays a role in the pathogenesis of
hypersensitivity reactions to sulfonamides in hiv-infected
patients.13

the annals of pharmacotherapy

■

2003 december, volume 37

■

1811

ma floris-moore et al.

trimethoprim can inhibit renal tubular secretion of
potassium and creatinine, leading to hyperkalemia and increases in serum creatinine concentrations.15,16 in addition,
tubular necrosis and insterstitial nephritis may result from
sensitivity to sulfonamides.17,18 mechanisms underlying the
development of acute pancreatitis associated with use of
tmp/smx are not well understood. hiv infection is associated with an increased risk of acute pancreatitis.19 medications frequently used for treatment and prophylaxis may
also cause pancreatitis in this population. in addition to didanosine and pentamidine, which are more commonly implicated, tmp/smx has been associated with the development of acute pancreatitis.19,20
summary
while tmp/smx remains a very important agent for
prophylaxis and treatment of infections in hiv-infected
persons, the potential severity of adverse effects requires
that clinicians have a low threshold for discontinuing this
drug if patients develop symptoms attributable to toxicity
of either moiety. neurologic, gastrointestinal, and severe
dermatologic reactions are seen with greater frequency in
this population and warrant close attention to the possibility of an adverse drug effect caused by tmp/smx.
michelle a floris-moore md ms, instructor, division of infectious
diseases, department of medicine and department of epidemiology & population health, montefiore medical center and albert einstein college of medicine, bronx, ny
maria i amodio-groton pharmd ms, clinical pharmacy manager, infectious diseases, department of pharmacy, montefiore medical center; assistant clinical professor, albert einstein college of
medicine
michela t catalano md, associate professor, division of infectious diseases, department of medicine, montefiore medical center and albert einstein college of medicine
reprints: michelle a floris-moore md ms, aids research program, department of epidemiology & population health, montefiore
medical center, 3303 rochambeau ave., bronx, ny 10467-2490,
fax 718/652-1343, mfloris@montefiore.org

references
1. van der ven aj, koopmans pp, vree tb, van der meer jwm. adverse
reactions to co-trimazole in hiv infection. lancet 1991;338:431-3.
2. gordin fm, simon gl, wofsy cb, mill j. adverse reactions to trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. ann intern med 1989;100:606-11.
3. salter aj. trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole: an assessment of more than
12 years of use. rev infect dis 1982;2196-236.
4. naranjo ca, busto u, sellers em, sandor p, ruiz i, roberts ea, et al. a
method for estimating the probability of adverse drug reactions. clin
pharmacol ther 1981;30:239-45.
5. borucki mj, matzke ds, pollard rb. tremor induced by trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (aids). ann intern med 1988;109:77-8.
6. van gerpen ja. tremor caused by trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole in a
patient with aids. neurology 1997;48:537-8.
7. aboulafia dm. tremors associated with trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole
therapy in a patient with aids: case report and review. clin infect dis
1996;22:598-9.
8. jaffe js, abrams di, ammann aj, lewis bj, golden ja. complications
of  xxxd1734xxx  in treatment of aids-associated pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia in homosexual men. lancet 1983;2:1109-11.
9. liu lx, seward sj, crumpacker cs. intravenous trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole and ataxia (letter). ann intern med 1986;104:448.

1812

■

the annals of pharmacotherapy

■

10. slavik rs, rybak mj, lerner sa. trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole–induced tremor in a patient with aids. ann pharmacother 1998;32:189-92.
11. woody rc, brewster ma. adverse effects of trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole in a child with  xxxg1912xxx  deficiency. dev
med child  xxxd122xxx  1990;32:633-44.
12. shear nh, spielberg sp, grant dm, bing kt, kalow w. differences in
metabolism of sulfonamides predisposing to idiosyncratic toxicity. ann
intern med 1986;105:179-84.
13. buhl r, jaffe ha, holroyd kj, wells fb, mastrangeli a, saltini c, et al.
systemic glutathione deficiency in symptom-free hiv-seropositive individuals. lancet 1989;2:1294-8.
14. rieder mj, krause r, bird ia, dekaban ga. toxicity of sulfonamidereactive metabolites in hiv-infected, htlv-infected, and noninfected
cells. j acquir immun def 1995;8:134-40.
15. alappan r, perazella ma, buller gk. hyperkalemia in hospitalized patients treated with trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole. ann intern med
1996;124:316-20.
16. greenberg s, reiser iw, chou sy, porush jg. trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole induces reversible hyperkalemia. ann intern med 1993;
119:291-5.
17. chandra m, chandra p, mcvicar m, susin m, teichberg s. rapid onset
of  xxxd1734xxx  induced interstitial nephritis. int j pediatr nephrol
1985;6:289-92.
18. cryst c, hammar sp. acute granulomatous interstitial nephritis due to
 xxxd1734xxx . am j nephrol 1988;8:483-8.
19. cappell ms, hassan t. pancreatic disease in aids — a review. j clin
gastroenterol 1993;17:254-63.
20. alberti-flor jj, hernandez me, ferrer jp, howell s, jeffers l. fulminant
liver failure and pancreatitis associated with the use of sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim. am j gastroenterol 1989;84:1577-9.

extracto
objetivo: informar el caso de una mujer con diagnóstico de aids que
desarrolló temblores, pancreatitis aguda, y elevaciones en las
concentraciones de creatinina sérica mientras recibía
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
resumen: una mujer de 37 años de edad con diagnóstico de aids,
nefropatía causada por el hiv, e historial reciente de histoplasmosis
diseminado se presenta con fiebre, tos no productiva, pancitopenia, y
elevación en las concentraciones de transaminasa y fosfatasa alcalina. la
creatinina sérica se encontraba en su valor base de 2.9 mg/dl. la
paciente fue comenzada en  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex para su
histoplasmosis y trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole para una presunta
pulmonía por pneumocystis carinii. dos días más tarde, la paciente
desarrolló temblores frecuentes, dolor abdominal severo, y la
concentración de creatinina sérica aumentó a 5.6 mg/dl. al
descontinuar trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, los síntomas de la paciente
resolvieron y, al cabo de 72 horas, los valores de creatinina sérica se
normalizaron.
discusión: entre los pacientes infectados con hiv, se ha reportado una
alta incidencia de efectos adversos a trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
metabolitos tóxicos de sulfamethoxazole pueden causar estas reacciones
de hipersensibilidad. trimethoprim puede inhibir la secreción renal de
creatinina, llevando a un aumento en las concentraciones séricas de
creatinina. trimethoprim también inhibe la reductasa de dihidrofolato,
causando una disminución en la producción de dopamina lo cual podría
causar síntomas de parkinsonismo.
conclusiones: este caso describe un incidente en el que se manifestaron
concurrentemente temblores, pancreatitis, y aumento en la concentración
sérica de creatinina, asociados con la administración de
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. para evaluar la causalidad de estos
efectos adversos, se utilizó la escala de probabilidad de efectos
adversos de naranjo. esta evaluación apunta hacia una relación
probable entre los efectos adversos y el uso de trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole en esta paciente. la alta incidencia y el amplio
potencial de efectos adversos que se pueden asociar al uso de
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole en pacientes infectados con hiv
requiere el que se tome en consideración la probabilidad de toxicidad
asociada al medicamento cuando el paciente manifiesta síntomas nuevos.

2003 december, volume 37

wanda t maldonado

www.theannals.com

case reports
résumé

raporter le cas d’une femme atteinte du sida qui a
développé des tremblements, une pancréatite aiguë et des niveaux de
créatinine élevés durant l’utilisation de trimethoprim-sulfaméthoxazole.
sommaire de cas: une femme de 37 ans avec le sida, le vih, une
néphropathie, et une histoire récente d’histoplasmose disséminée s’est
présentée avec de la fièvre, une toux non-productive, une pancytopénie,
et des niveaux de transaminases et phosphatases alcalines élevés. la
créatinine sérique à la base était de 2.9 mg/dl. le traitement a été
amorcé avec de l’amphotéricine b en complexe lipidique pour
l’histoplasmose et le trimethoprim-sulfaméthoxazole par voie
intraveineuse pour une présumée pneumonie à pneumocystis carinii.
deux jours plus tard, la patiente a développé des tremblements de
fréquence élevée et des douleurs abdominales sévères. la créatinine
sérique a augmenté à 5.6 mg/dl. les symptômes de la patiente ont
disparu dans les 72 heures suivant l’arrêt du trimethoprimsulfaméthoxazole et la créatinine est revenue à son niveau de base.
objectif:

www.theannals.com

discussion: une incidence élevée de réactions adverses avec le
triméthoprim-sulfaméthoxazole a été rapportée chez les personnes
infectées par le vih. des métabolites toxiques du sulfaméthoxazole
peuvent provoquer des réactions d’hypersensibilité. le trimethoprim
peut inhiber la sécrétion de créatinine rénale favorisant des niveaux
sériques de créatinine élevés. le trimethoprim inhibe également la
 xxxg631xxx , causant une diminution dans la production de
dopamine pouvant apporter des symptômes de type parkinsonien.
conclusions: la fréquence élevée et la grande variété d’effets adverses
potentiels associés à l’utilisation du trimethoprim-sulfaméthoxazole chez
les personnes infectées par le vih requièrent l’attention du clinicien
pour prendre en considération la toxicité médicamenteuse comme cause
de nouveaux symptômes chez les patients recevant ce médicament.

the annals of pharmacotherapy

chantal guévremont

■

2003 december, volume 37

■

1813

