archives of insect biochemistry and physiology 54:145–156 (2003)

chloride channels as tools for developing
selective insecticides
jeffrey r. bloomquist*
ligand-gated chloride channels underlie inhibition in excitable membranes and are proven target sites for insecticides. the gaminobutyric acid (gaba1) receptor/chloride ionophore complex is the primary site of action for a number of currently used
insecticides, such as lindane, endosulfan, and fipronil. these compounds act as antagonists by stabilizing nonconducting
conformations of the chloride channel. blockage of the gaba-gated chloride channel reduces neuronal inhibition, which leads
to hyperexcitation of the central nervous system, convulsions, and death. we recently investigated the mode of action of the
silphinenes, plant-derived natural compounds that structurally resemble picrotoxinin. these materials antagonize the action of
gaba on insect neurons and block gaba-mediated chloride uptake into mouse brain synaptoneurosomes in a noncompetitive
manner. in mammals, avermectins have a blocking action on the gaba-gated chloride channel consistent with a coarse
tremor, whereas at longer times and higher concentrations, activation of the channel suppresses neuronal activity. invertebrates display ataxia, paralysis, and death as the predominant signs of poisoning, with a glutamate-gated chloride channel
playing a major role. additional target sites for the avermectins or other chloride channel-directed compounds might include
receptors gated by histamine, serotonin, or acetylcholine.
the voltage-sensitive chloride channels form another large gene family of chloride channels. voltage-dependent chloride
channels are involved in a number of physiological processes including: maintenance of electrical excitability, chloride ion
secretion and resorption, intravesicular acidification, and cell volume regulation. a subset of these channels is affected by
convulsants and insecticides in mammals, although the role they play in acute lethality in insects is unclear. given the wide
range of functions that they mediate, these channels are also potential targets for insecticide development. arch. insect
biochem. physiol. 54:145–156, 2003. © 2003 wiley-liss, inc.
keywords: clc; ligand-gated chloride channels; avermectin; cyclodiene; gaba receptor

introduction
membrane-bound proteins containing chloride
ion channels are established target sites for insecticides. the gaba receptor-chloride ionophore
complex is the site of action for the insecticidal
cyclodienes, fipronil, and lindane (bloomquist,
2001), and an altered gaba receptor is responsible
for cyclodiene resistance (ffrench-constant et al.,
2000). similarly, the avermectins affect mamma-

lian gaba- and perhaps glycine-gated chloride
channels (bloomquist, 1993), but use the glutamate-gated chloride channel as their primary target site in invertebrates (rohrer and arena, 1995).
recent genomic information on additional receptors has come to light, including those gated by
acetylcholine, serotonin, and histamine (table 1)
that might aid in their exploitation as target sites
of pesticide action (raymond and sattelle, 2002).
the first part of this report will review relevant lit-

department of entomology, virginia polytechnic institute and state university, blacksburg, virginia
abbreviations used: bind = 3,3-bis-trifluoromethyl-bicyclo (2.2.1) heptane-2,2-dicarbonitrile; cns = central nervous system; dids = 4,4¢-diisothiocyanato2,2¢-stilbenedisulfonic acid; ebob = 4¢-ethynyl-n-propylbicycloorthocarboxylate; na = nodulisporic acid; p-cn-tbob = 4-t-butyl-1-(4-cyanophenyl)bicycloorthocarboxylate; ptx = picrotoxinin; tbps = 4-t-butyl-bicyclophosphorothionate.
*correspondence to: dr. jeffrey r. bloomquist, department of entomology, virginia polytechnic institute and state university, blacksburg, va 24061.
e-mail: jbquist@vt.edu
presented at the national meeting of the entomological society of america, symposium: biorational insecticides—mechanism and application, november 2002.

© 2003 wiley-liss, inc.
doi: 10.1002/arch.10112
published online in wiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

146

bloomquist
table 1. major subtypes of ligand-gated and voltage-gated chloride channels
cl– channel family

groupa

ligand-gated
acetylcholine
gaba
glutamate
glycine
histamine
serotonin

m
i,m,n,v
i,n
v
i
n

voltage-gated clcb
clc-0
clc-1
 xxxg472xxx 
clc-3
clc-4
clc-5
clc-k

v
v,n
v,n
v,n
v,n
v,n
v

tissue

proposed function

nerve/muscle
nerve (all)/muscle (i,n)
nerve/muscle
nerve
nerve
nerve

neuronal inhibition/muscle tension
neuronal inhibition/muscle tension
regulate glutamate excitability
neuronal inhibition
visual system neurotransmission
neuronal inhibition

fish electric organ
muscle
ubiquitous
ubiquitous
nerve/muscle
kidney
kidney

stabilize membrane potential
stabilize membrane potential
chloride secretion/regulation
cell volume regulation
acidification of endocytotic vesicles
acidification of endocytotic vesicles
chloride reabsorption

a

group refers to taxonomic group where i = insect, m = mollusc, n = nematode, and v = vertebrate.
although a similar numbering system is proposed for vertebrate (fahlke, 2001) and nematode (c. elegans) clc-type channels,
they are not strict homologs of one another (schriever et al., 1999).

b

erature on these receptors and their known interactions with insecticides, as well as present some
new results on the mode of action of silphinenes,
a new class of gaba antagonists. because target
site resistance must be considered in the design of
new compounds, recent findings from these studies will also be discussed. the next section will
briefly summarize what is known about the physiological roles filled by voltage-dependent chloride
channels. evidence that they may play a role in
the toxicity of avermectins (bloomquist, 1993) and
pyrethroids (forshaw et al., 2000) suggests that this
may be a fruitful area in which to search for new
insecticidal modes of action. this analysis of the
insecticidal potential of chloride channel subtypes
is by no means exhaustive, as there are other classes
of channels that are not addressed, such as calciumgated chloride channels (dixon et al., 1993). for
purposes of review, published compendia of research results will be used where appropriate, with
the primary literature cited for more recent or
unique findings.

ligand-gated chloride channel structure
and function
ligand-gated chloride channels are activated by
a variety of transmitters in different tissues of different taxonomic groups (table 1). they have a

structural motif similar to that of the  xxxg456xxx  (ranganathan et al., 2000), with
several known subunits whose structure and function have been intensively investigated and reviewed (knipple et al., 1995; rohrer and arena,
1995; hosie et al., 1997; bloomquist, 2001). they
are pentameric assemblies having an intrinsic chloride ion channel, and contain multiple subunit
types, where each subunit is thought to be composed of a cysteine loop on the n-terminus (extracellular) and four transmembrane helices (m1–m4),
with the m2 transmembrane regions of each subunit forming the ion channel. binding of the transmitter (typically two molecules) causes activation
of the chloride channel and initiates chloride influx, which hyperpolarizes the membrane potential and reduces membrane input resistance. the
open chloride channels, therefore, stabilize the
membrane potential at the equilibrium potential
for chloride, which is usually near that of the resting membrane potential.
the availability of several cloned genes for
ligand-gated chloride channel subunits and their
expression in cell lines makes them amenable for
use in high throughput screening methodologies.
stable expression of insect gaba receptors has
been achieved by several groups (e.g., lee et al.,
1993) and although homomultimeric receptors
show reasonable pharmacological fidelity to naarchives of insect biochemistry and physiology

chloride channels as insecticide targets

tive receptors, studies discussed in subsequent sections of this report suggest that heteromultimeric
assemblies may be required for faithful reconstruction of the pharmacology of native receptors.

gaba receptor as an insecticide target
the gaba receptor remains a viable insecticide
target, and recent reviews have appeared on the
electrophysiological and biochemical actions of
gaba receptor-directed insecticides (hosie et al.,
1997; ffrench-constant et al., 2000; bloomquist,
2001). in insects and mammals, the behavioral effects of central gaba antagonists include hyperactivity, hyperexcitability, and convulsions, which are
correlated with increased spontaneous nerve activity and the generation of prolonged, high-frequency discharges following nerve stimulation.
electrophysiological studies showed that the depression of firing, membrane hyperpolarization, or
inward chloride current caused by application of
gaba were blocked by convulsants. antagonism
was best explained by a stabilization of a closed,
gaba-bound form of the channel, and the alanine
302 residue on the m2 helix was identified as critical for convulsant action. similarly, inhibition of
gaba-stimulated 36cl uptake in mouse and rat
brain vesicles displayed noncompetitive kinetics,
and good correlations were obtained between the

147

potency for blocking chloride uptake, displacement
of radioligands from the convulsant site, and acute
lethality.
a variety of structurally divergent chloride channel blockers show activity at the insect gaba receptor and these compounds have been thoroughly
reviewed (casida, 1993; deng, 1995; bloomquist,
2001). compounds include the polychlorocycloalkanes, such as the currently used insecticides lindane and endosulfan. a related norbornane is
bidn (fig. 1), which when tritiated and used as a
radioligand was displaced <50% by ebob, tbob,
tbps, and ptx (all at 100 mm), suggesting that
there is a distinction between the binding site for
these compounds and that for cyclodienes and
bidn (rauh et al., 1997). other potent gaba antagonists are the arylheterocycles, which includes
fipronil, a limited number of fipronil analogs, and
a large number of related structural series (e.g.,
trioxabicyclooctanes, thiazines, arylpyrimidines,
oxathianes, and dithianes) synthesized by john
casida and his collaborators. these latter materials typically require synergism with piperonyl butoxide (pb) to be toxic and show poor mammalian
selectivity. addition of alkyl side chains to the
trioxabicyclooctane moiety in the 3-position (fig.
1) resulted in good synergized insecticidal activity,
and the compounds had selectivity ratios over 50
for [3h]ebob binding (rat ic50/housefly ic50), in-

fig. 1. structures of gaba
antagonists referred to in
the text.

december 2003

148

bloomquist

dicating differential receptor recognition (ju and
ozoe, 1999). ptx was the first described chloride
channel blocker, and other ptx-like natural products are structurally-related terpenoids, including
the tutins and picrodendrins (fig. 1) that are also
isolated from plants (hosie et al., 1996). the rank
order of potency for picrodendrin displacement of
ebob binding in housefly membranes showed a
better correlation with their pb-synergized toxicity
to blattella germanica by injection, than it did for
blocking gaba-gated currents in expressed gabagated homomultimeric receptors (ozoe et al.,
1998). this finding suggests that native receptors
are heteromultimers, and that homomultimeric receptor expression systems may not provide reliable
estimates of intrinsic activity on native receptors
or of in vivo toxicity.
cyclodiene-resistant insect strains are generally
cross-resistant to a broad range of the convulsant
compounds discussed above, although resistance
ratios vary (4.8-fold for lindane to several thousand-fold for dieldrin). the resistance protects the
nervous system from the hyperexcitatory effects of
many insecticides, and must be considered in the
design of new compounds. mechanistic studies in
drosophila melanogaster found that there was an alanine to serine or glycine substitution at position
302 in a gaba receptor subunit that resulted in
10-fold (tbps), 100-fold (ptx), or 1,000-fold (lindane) resistance in the neurons, in vitro (ffrenchconstant et al., 2000). the varying levels of
resistance in vivo and in vitro have implications
concerning the mode of action of these compounds.
further, native gaba receptors from resistant drosophila larval neurons showed a decreased tendency
to desensitize at high gaba concentrations, and
the relative absence of the inactivated state in these
receptors is thought to form an important molecular mechanism of underlying resistance (zhang et
al., 1994). interestingly, homomultimeric alaninecontaining gaba receptors cloned from drosophila
and expressed in xenopus oocytes are fully sensitive to block by ptx and dieldrin, even though
these receptors show no evidence of desensitization (ffrench-constant et al., 1993). it would appear, therefore, that the desensitized state is not

absolutely required for cyclodiene block, or again
that homomultimeric receptors differ somewhat
from their native counterparts.
in a series of reports, mullin and collaborators
(1994, 1997) proposed that a mixed gaba/glycine
ligand-gated chloride channel receptor is present
on chemosensory cells and that this receptor mediates gustatory responses to certain plant compounds and insecticides. this idea is novel, since
there is little evidence for classical strychnine-sensitive, glycine-type receptors in insects (kerkut,
1985; table 1), and it arose from studies of
antifeedants that exhibited ptx-like effects in the
western corn rootworm (mullin et al., 1994). the
silphinenes (fig. 1), compounds isolated from the
plant senecio palmensis, have documented antifeedant and toxic effects on insects, and are especially active on beetles (gonzalez-coloma et al.,
1997). there is a structural similarity between the
parent silphinene and ptx (mullin et al., 1997),
and this led my laboratory to characterize their action in established gaba receptor assays. in previous studies (bloomquist, 2001), mouse brain
vesicles were incubated with silphinene, and the
preparation challenged with 100 mm gaba to determine its effect on 36cl. these compounds were
effective inhibitors with ic50 values in the low micromolar range. more recent studies defined the
action of silphinene on nerve firing in drosophila
melanogaster central nerve membrane preparations
from susceptible and cyclodiene-resistant (rdl)
strains (fig. 2). the parent compound was also an
antagonist of insect gaba receptors, and was
equally effective on resistant preparations. this
property would be favorable in the field if central
disinhibition is an important part of their mode
of action.
the mode of action of the avermectins on the
gaba receptor has been reviewed and the following is taken from these accounts (bloomquist,
1993, 2001; duce et al., 1995). in contrast to the
uniformly convulsive actions of gaba antagonists,
the avermectins cause a different poisoning syndrome and have different effects on this receptor.
at a lethal dose in mice, abamectin or ivermectin
causes a coarse tremor that gives way to ataxia and
archives of insect biochemistry and physiology

chloride channels as insecticide targets

149

fig. 2. responses to silphinene in central nerve preparations isolated from third instar larvae of susceptible (oregon-r) or cyclodiene-resistant (rdl) strains of d. melanogaster.
inset: dissection and recording set-up, methods essentially

as described in bloomquist (1994). application of gaba
reduced nerve discharge, which was reversed by silphinene
to a similar extent in susceptible and cyclodiene-resistant
preparations.

coma-like sedation, which are the predominant
signs of intoxication in invertebrates. avermectins
can block the action of gaba at low concentrations in neurons or invertebrate muscle, and cause
irreversible activation of the receptor when the concentration is raised. under other conditions, depending on the species or assay under study, they
can augment gaba-induced currents or gabainduced 36cl uptake. gaba antagonism is consistent with tremor in exposed animals, whereas
enhancement of gaba action or irreversible channel activation mirrors ataxia and sedation.

2001). newer compounds include a growing array
of semi-synthetic derivatives having essentially the
same mode of action, but with altered potencies
against different classes of parasites and insects. established compounds include the lepidopteracide
emamectin, the cattle enterocides eprinomectin
and doramectin, as well as milbemycin-a-5-oxime,
which is used in dogs. a newer compound is
selamectin (fig. 2), which is active for flea control
and is an oxime-substituted monosaccharide combining structural features of both avermectins and
milbemycins (banks et al., 2000). a breakthrough
compound having similar pharmacology and mode
of action to the avermectins, but with a different
structure, is nodulisporic acid. this material was
isolated from a fungus, is toxic to fly species, and
binds to the same site on glutamate-gated chloride channels as ivermectin (smith et al., 2000).
any role for these channels in insecticide action is mostly attributed to the avermectins, where
the high selectivity of the these compounds is due

glutamate-gated chloride channels as an
insecticide target
the avermectins are macrocyclic lactones chemically related to the milbemycins (aglycone avermectins), and their chemistry and biological activity
on glutamate-gated chloride channels have been
recently reviewed (shoop et al., 1995; bloomquist,
december 2003

150

bloomquist

fig. 3. structures of nodulisporic acid and selamectin.
milbemycins are avermectin aglycones at the 13 position,
whereas selamectin is a monosaccharide at this position.

this compound is also a 22, 23-dihydroavermectin, as is
ivermectin, and has an oxime in the 5 position.

to the lack of glutamate-gated chloride channels
in mammals (rhorer and arena, 1995; cleland,
1996; bloomquist, 2001). generally, these receptors are found on skeletal muscle and in the cns
of insects and other invertebrates (table 1), as well
as caterpillar visceral muscle. the receptors are specifically activated by ibotenic acid and blocked by
ptx, and may play a role in regulating muscle excitability to circulating levels of glutamate in
hemolymph. ptx blockade of c. elegans receptors
was localized to a b-type subunit, and was reduced
>10,000-fold by an ala to thr substitution in the
m2 domain, suggesting ptx binding within the
channel pore, and a mechanism of blockage similar to that of the gaba receptor (etter et al., 1999).
unusual selectivity was observed in expression
studies of c. elegans gene glc-3 homomultimers,
which were activated by avermectin (ec50 = 0.4
mm), and blocked by fipronil and bidn (ec50s of
0.2 and 12 mm, respectively), but were insensitive
to 1 mm ptx (horoszok et al., 2001). the contribution of glutamate-gated chloride channels to the
lethal action of compounds usually classified as
channel blockers is still to be determined.
a number of recent studies have elaborated
upon the role of this receptor in the action of the
avermectins and na. gene structure and phyloge-

netic analyses indicate that glutamate-gated chloride channels are similar to vertebrate glycine receptors (vassilatis et al., 1997), and a and b
subtypes were cloned from c. elegans. when expressed in xenopus oocytes, the b subunit was
found to contain the binding site for glutamate,
while the  xxxg220xxx  alone is sensitive to activation
by avermectins, and a + b receptors show equal
sensitivity to avermectin. a similar pharmacology
was observed in native receptors found in c. elegans
buccal muscle, with the glucla2 subunit gene conferring avermectin sensitivity in this tissue (pemberton et al., 2001).
studies of resistant strains confirmed an important role for glutamate-gated chloride channels in
avermectin mode of action. selection experiments
showed that ivermectin resistance resulted from
mutations in (dent et al., 2000), or altered expression of (blackhall et al., 1998), a subunits of
glutamate-gated chloride channels. selection of
drosophila with na caused at least 20-fold resistance in larvae, and this resistance was reflected in
decreased binding of [35s]na to adult head membrane preparations as well as reduced sensitivity
of glutamate-gated chloride channels expressed in
xenopus oocytes (kane et al., 2000). in contrast,
there was only about 4-fold resistance to ivermectin
archives of insect biochemistry and physiology

chloride channels as insecticide targets

and no resistance to fipronil in the na-selected larvae. it is interesting to note that there was also
about 5-fold and 4-fold resistance to na and
ivermectin, respectively, in rdl drosophila larvae carrying a mutated gaba receptor (kane et al., 2000).
unfortunately, no measure of variability was given
for the ld100 values reported by kane et al. (2000),
so no statistical analysis of these results is available. little resistance was observed in diet assays
with abamectin (resistance ratio = 1.7) and emamectin (resistance ratio = 0.5) in adult flies of
the rdl strain, but 3-fold resistance was observed
to abamectin 8,9-epoxide (bloomquist, 1994).
overall, these results indicate that there may be
some contribution of altered gaba receptors to
resistance, and hence, to in vivo toxicity. immunoprecipitation studies suggested that both glutamate subunits and rdl subunits were components
of na and ivermectin receptors, in vivo (ludmerer
et al., 2002). much further work needs to be done
to clarify the subunit composition of native receptors and its impact upon insecticide mode of
action.

other ligand-gated chloride channels as targets
of insecticides
the existence of additional ligand-gated chloride channel receptors suggests the possibility of
additional sites of action for chloride channel-directed insecticides in invertebrates. histamine-gated
chloride channels (table 1) are found within insect visual pathways (hardie, 1988), and mediate
light-induced hyperpolarization within the neuropile by an increased chloride ion conductance
(zettler and straka, 1987; gengs et al., 2002). the
native receptors in housefly are reported to be
sensitive to both histaminergic and cholinergic antagonists (hardie, 1988). similar to invertebrate
glutamate receptors subunits, cloned drosophila histamine receptor subunits possess four conserved
cysteine residues most similar to vertebrate glycine
receptors (zheng et al., 2002). when expressed in
xenopus oocytes, the receptors were activated by histamine or 1 mm ivermectin, but were insensitive
to glutamate, glycine, gaba, or acetylcholine, as
december 2003

151

well as the following antagonists tested  xxxd1891xxx  mm:
ptx, fipronil, strychnine, or cimetidine (zheng et
al., 2002). the relatively restricted expression of
histamine-gated chloride channels in insects suggests that it is unlikely to be involved in an acute
lethal action, but perhaps good insect control in
some cases can be affected by disrupting insect vision. new compounds will need to be dissimilar
from the established antagonists tested by zheng
et al. (2002), if the xenopus experiments are an accurate reflection of the ion channel pharmacology
of native receptors.
other ligand-gated chloride channels are known
to exist in invertebrates (table 1), but their existence in insects is undocumented. the mod-1 gene
of c. elegans codes for a ligand-gated chloride channel subunit activated by 5-ht (table 1) that is
distinct from the mammalian  xxxg1116xxx  subtype (ranganathan et al., 2000). the sensitivity of this receptor to convulsants or avermectins remains
unknown. an inhibitory chloride channel gated by
acetylcholine was described in snail neurons, and
it is sensitive to low concentrations (10 nm–1 mm)
of abamectin (bokisch and walker, 1986). a crayfish stomach muscle receptor cross-activated by
gaba, glutamate or acetylcholine is sensitive to
channel block by lindane and picrotoxinin (zufall
et al., 1989a), and is activated by low concentrations (0.1 pm) of ivermectin (zufall et al., 1989b).
overall, the mechanism of convulsant blockage or
avermectin activation in this receptor appears similar to those of other ligand-gated chloride channels and, therefore, increases the likelihood that
effects on a wide range of these receptors may by
exploited for insect control.

voltage-gated chloride channel structure
and function
voltage-gated chloride channels are involved in
transmembrane flux of chloride and are gated by
changes in membrane voltage (fahlke, 2001). voltage-dependent chloride channels underlie a wide
range of physiological processes, including: maintenance of electrical excitability in nerve and
muscle membranes, chloride ion secretion and re-

152

bloomquist

sorption, intravesicular acidification, and cell volume regulation (fahlke, 2001; table 1). although
there is a significant body of information on the
amino acid sequence and channel gating of clc-0
and clc-1 channels (table 1), the physiological
role of voltage-dependent chloride channels in
nerve and muscle is not well defined, especially
for invertebrates. in mammals, clc-1 is found in
mammalian skeletal muscle, and its functional destruction leads to myotonia (steinmeyer et al.,
1991). voltage-dependent chloride channels are
found in drosophila neurons (yamamoto and
suzuki, 1987), drosophila s2 fetal cells (asmild and
willumsen, 2000), and c. elegans (schriever et al.,
1999), although there is currently no designation
of drosophila channels using the clc nomenclature. the involvement of these channels in a number of critical physiological processes suggests that
they may be exploitable as insecticide target sites,
especially if insect or nematode subtypes exist that
are absent in mammals or have a structure different from their mammalian homologs.

voltage-gated chloride channels as
insecticide targets
there are examples of insecticides usually classified as gaba antagonists interacting with voltage-dependent chloride channels (bloomquist,
1993). comparative studies of intraperitoneal vs.
intracerebral injection in mice found little or no
potentiation of toxicity after intracerebral injection
of lindane, abamectin, tbps, and p-cn-tbob,
which supports the possibility of effects on other,
perhaps peripheral sites (bloomquist, 1993). in-

volvement of voltage-gated chloride channels in the
mode of action of these compounds was suggested
in [35s]tbps binding studies using the torpedo
nobiliana electric organ, which lacks gaba receptors, but does possess voltage-gated chloride channels (abalis et al., 1985). in this tissue, the ic50s
for binding displacement by picrotoxinin and endrin were of relatively low potency compared to
their ic50 values for displacing binding in rat brain
membranes. in contrast, lindane was about 4-fold
more potent as an inhibitor of binding to torpedo
membranes than rat brain, and was a more effective inhibitor (ic50 = 40 nm) than either picrotoxinin or endrin (abalis et al., 1985). thompson et
al. (1990) confirmed a 10-fold greater potency of
lindane for inhibiting [35s]tbps binding in electric organ compared to rat brain, and because of
its polyphasic dissociation curve in rat brain suggested that [35s]tbps may bind to both the gaba
receptor and a voltage-dependent chloride channel. ffrench-constant et al. (2000) reported high
levels (approximately 1,000-fold) of resistance to
lindane-dependent blockage of gaba-gated currents in cultured rdl drosophila neurons, but there
was only about 5-fold resistance to this compound
in toxicity bioassays (ffrench-constant and roush,
1991). this low level of resistance in the whole
animal could be due to an interaction with another target site, in vivo, perhaps voltage-dependent chloride channels.
avermectins also interact with voltage-dependent chloride channels. abamectin stimulates
radiochloride efflux from mammalian brain vesicular preparations that is sensitive to block by dids
(fig. 4), an established blocker of voltage- xxxd2870xxx -

fig. 4. structures of stilbene derivatives described
in the text.

archives of insect biochemistry and physiology

chloride channels as insecticide targets

dent chloride channels (abalis et al., 1986). similar results were observed for abamectin-dependent
efflux from mouse brain vesicles (payne and
soderlund, 1991), and structure-activity studies
found that seven abamectin analogs stimulated
efflux with half maximal potencies of around 1 mm
(payne and soderlund, 1993). from this work, the
authors (payne and soderlund, 1991) concluded
that interaction with gaba-insensitive chloride
channels may contribute to the neurotoxicity of the
avermectins.
recent studies implicate voltage-dependent
chloride channels in the neurotoxic action of pyrethroids. early electrophysiological studies by
forshaw and ray (1990) demonstrated that mammalian muscle and nonmyelinated nerve showed
an increase in membrane resistance following treatment with deltamethrin, but not cismethrin. subsequent patch clamp studies of neuroblastoma
found a class of chloride channels that was sensitive to blockage by type 2 pyrethroids (ray et al.,
1997). neuroprotection studies with ivermectin and
barbiturates suggested that the effects of ivermectin
and phenobarbital on intoxication by deltamethrin
were specifically related to an action on voltage-sensitive chloride channels (forshaw et al., 2000). i am
unaware of any published studies showing pyrethroid effects on these channels in insects.
novel insecticidal or nematicidal molecules targeting voltage-sensitive chloride channels are
known. for example, a novel stilbene natural product (3,4-dihydroxy-4-isopropylstilbene, fig. 4) was
isolated from the bacterium photorhabdus luminescens (hu et al., 1999). this compound bears
some structural resemblance to the established voltage-sensitive chloride channel blocker, dids, and
it has paralytic activity in a variety of nematode
species in in vitro screens (hu et al., 1999). it remains to be determined whether this compound
blocks voltage-sensitive chloride channels as its
mode of paralytic action. alternatively, a novel
therapeutic action of this stilbene compound relates to its effectiveness as a protein kinase inhibitor, and it is a useful drug for the treatment of
human inflammatory diseases (chen et al., 2001).
either of these mechanisms would provide unique
december 2003

153

modes of action for new experimental insecticidal
molecules.

acknowledgments
i thank isaac ishaaya for his invitation to participate in the symposium related to this report.
dr. azucena gonzalez-coloma kindly provided the
silphinenes used in some of these studies.

literature cited
abalis i, eldefrawi m, eldefrawi a. 1985. binding of gaba
receptor channel drugs to a putative voltage-dependent
chloride channel in torpedo electric organ. biochem
pharmacol 34:2579–2582.
abalis i, eldefrawi a, eldefrawi m. 1986. actions of avermectin
b1a on the g-aminobutyric acida receptor and chloride
channels in rat brain. j biochem toxicol 1:69–82.
asmild m, willumsen n. 2000. chloride channels in the
plasma membrane of a foetal drosophila cell line, s2. pflug
arch eur j physiol 439:759–764.
banks b, bishop b, evans n, gibson s, goudie a, gration k,
pacey m, perry d, witty m. 2000. avermectins and flea
control: structure-activity relationships and the selection
of selamectin for development as an endectocide for companion animals. bioorg med chem 8:2017–2025.
blackhall w, pouliot j-f, prichard r, beech r. 1998. haemonchus contortus: selection at a glutamate-gated chloride channel gene in ivermectin- and moxidectin-selected strains.
exp parasitol 90:42–48.
bloomquist j. 1993. toxicology, mode of action, and target
site-mediated resistance to insecticides acting on chloride
channels. comp biochem physiol 106c:301–314.
bloomquist j. 1994. cyclodiene resistance at the insect gaba
receptor/chloride channel complex confers broad cross resistance to convulsants and experimental phenylpyrazole
insecticides. arch insect biochem physiol 26:69–79
bloomquist j. 2001. gaba and glutamate receptors as biochemical sites for insecticide action and resistance. in:
ishaaya i, editor. biochemical sites important in insecticide action and resistance. berlin: springer. p 17–41.
bokisch aj, walker rj. 1986. the action of avermectin (mk
936) on identified central neurones from helix and its in-

154

bloomquist

teraction with acetylcholine and gamma- xxxd2177xxx 
(gaba) responses. comp biochem physiol 84c:119–125.
casida j. 1993. insecticide action at the gaba-gated chloride channel: recognition, progress, and prospects. arch
insect biochem physiol 22:13–23.
chen g, webster j, li j, hu k, zhu j. 2001. anti-inflammatory and psoriasis treatment and protein kinase inhibition by hydroxystilbenes and novel stilbene derivatives and
analogs. patent no. wo 2001042231.
cleland t. 1996. inhibitory  xxxg981xxx  channels. mol
neurobiol 13:97–136.
deng y. 1995. insecticide binding sites in the house fly head
g- xxxd2177xxx  gated chloride-channel complex. in:
clark jm, editor. molecular action of insecticides on ion
channels. acs symp ser 591. washington, dc: american
chemical society p 230–250.
dent j, smith m, vassilatis d, avery l. 2000. the genetics of
ivermectin resistance in caenorhabditis elegans. proc natl
acad sci 97:2674–2679.
dixon dm, valkanov m, martin rj. 1993. a patch-clamp study
of the ionic selectivity of the large conductance, ca-activated chloride channel in muscle vesicles prepared from
ascaris suum. j membr biol 131:143–149.
duce i, bhandal n, scott r, norris t. 1995. effects of ivermectin on g- xxxd2177xxx  and glutamate-gated chloride conductance in arthropod skeletal muscle. in: clark
jm, editor. molecular action of insecticides on ion channels. acs symp ser 591. washington, dc: american
chemical society. p 250–263.

ffrench-constant r, anthony n, aronstein k, rocheleau t,
stilwell g. 2000. cyclodiene insecticide resistance: from
molecular to population genetics. annu rev entomol
48:449–466.
forshaw pj, ray de. 1990. a novel action of deltamethrin
on membrane resistance in mammalian skeletal muscle
and non-myelinated nerve fibers. neuropharmacology
29:75–81.
forshaw pj, lister t, ray de. 2000. the role of voltage-gated
chloride channels in type ii pyrethroid insecticide poisoning. toxicol appl pharmacol 163:1–8.
gengs c, leung h-t, skingsley d, iovchev m, yin z, semenov
e, burg m, hardie r, pak w. 2002. the target of drosophila
photoreceptor synaptic transmission is a histamine-gated
chloride channel encoded by ort (hcla). j biol chem
277:42113–42120.
gonzalez-coloma a, gutierrez c, cabrera r, reina m. 1997.
silphinene derivatives: their effects and modes of action
on colorado potato beetle. j agric food chem 45:946–950.
hardie rc. 1988. effects of antagonists on putative histamine
receptors in the first visual neuropile of the housefly
(musca domestica). j exp biol 138:221–241.
horoszok l, raymond v, sattelle db, wolstenholme aj. 2001.
glc-3: a novel fipronil and bidn-sensitive, but picrotoxinin-insensitive, l-glutamate-gated chloride channel subunit
from caenorhabditis elegans. br j pharmacol 132:1247–1254.
hosie a, ozoe y, koike k, ohmoto t, nikaido t, sattelle d.
1996. actions of picrodendrin antagonists on dieldrin-sensitive and -resistant drosophila gaba receptors. br j
pharmacol 119:1569–1576.

etter a, cully d, liu k, reiss b, vassilatis d, schaeffer j,
arena j. 1999.  xxxd2947xxx  blockade of invertebrate
glutamate-gated chloride channels: subunit dependence
and evidence for binding within the pore. j neurochem
72:318–326.

hosie a, aronstein k, sattelle d, ffrench-constant r. 1997.
molecular biology of insect neuronal gaba receptors.
trends neurosci 20:578–583.

fahlke c. 2001. ion permeation and selectivity in clc-type
chloride channels. am j renal physiol 280:f748–f757.

hu k, li j, webster j. 1999. nematicidal metabolites produced by photorhabdus luminescens (enterobacteriaceae),
bacterial symbiont of entomopathogenic nematodes.
nematology 1:457–469.

ffrench-constant r, roush r. 1991. gene mapping and crossresistance in cyclodiene insecticide-resistant drosophila
melanogaster (mg.). genet res  xxxg322xxx  57:17–21.
ffrench-constant r, rocheleau t, steichen j, chalmers a.
1993. a point mutation in a drosophila gaba receptor
confers insecticide resistance. nature 363:449–451.

ju x, ozoe y. 1999. bicyclophosphorothionate antagonists
exhibiting selectivity for housefly gaba receptors. pestic
sci 55:971–982.
kane n, hirschberg b, qian s, hunt d, thomas b, brochu r,
ludmerer s, zheng y, smith m, arena j, cohen c, schmatz

archives of insect biochemistry and physiology

chloride channels as insecticide targets
d, warmke j, cully d. 2000. drug-resistant drosophila indicate glutamate-gated chloride channels are targets for
the antiparasitics nodulisporic acid and ivermectin. proc
natl acad sci 97:13949–13954.
kerkut ga. 1985. insect pharmacology comes of age. in:
kerkut g, gilbert l, editors. comprehensive insect physiology biochemistry and pharmacology. oxford: pergamon
press. p 1–3.
knipple d, henderson j, soderlund d. 1995. structural and
functional characterization of insect genes encoding
ligand-gated chloride-channel subunits. in: clark jm, editor. molecular action of insecticides on ion channels. acs
symp ser 591. washington, dc: american chemical society. p 205–215
lee h-j, rocheleau t, zhang h-g, jackson m, ffrench-constant r. 1993. expression of a drosophila gaba receptor in
a baculovirus insect cell system: functional expression of
insecticide susceptible and resistant gaba receptors from
the cyclodiene resistance gene rdl. febs lett 335:315–318.
ludmerer s, warren v, williams b, zheng y, hunt d, ayer m,
wallace m, chaudhary a, egan m, meinke p, dean d, garcia m, cully d, smith m. 2002. ivermectin and nodulisporic
acid receptors in drosophila melanogaster contain both gaminobutyric acid-gated rdl and glutamate-gated glucla
chloride channel subunits. biochemistry 41:6548–6560.
mullin c, chyb s, eichenseer h, hollister b, frazier j. 1994.
neuroreceptor mechanisms in insect gustation: a pharmacological approach. j insect physiol 40:913–931.
mullin c, gonzalez-coloma a, gutierrez c, reina m, eichenseer h, hollister b, chyb s. 1997. antifeedant effects of
some novel terpenoids on chrysomelidae beetles: comparisons with alkaloids on an alkaloid-adapted and
nonadapted species. j chem ecol 23:1851–1866.
ozoe y, arkamatsu m, higata t, ikeda i, mochida k, koike
k, ohmoto t, nikaido t. 1998. picrodendrin and related
terpenoid antagonists reveal structural differences between
ionotropic gaba receptors of mammals and insects.
bioorg med chem 6:481–492.
payne gt, soderlund dm. 1991. activation of g-aminobutyric
acid insensitive chloride channels in mouse brain synaptic
vesicles by avermectin b1a. j biochem toxicol 6:283–292.
payne gt, soderlund dm. 1993. actions of avermectins on
g- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba)-sensitive and gaba-insensi-

december 2003

155

tive chloride channels in mouse brain. pestic biochem
physiol 47:178–184.
pemberton d, franks c, walker j, holden-dye l. 2001. characterization of glutamate-gated chloride channels in the
pharynx of wild-type and mutant caenorhabditis elegans
delineates the role of the subunit glucl-a2 in the function of the native receptor. mol pharmacol 59:1037–1043.
ranganathan r, cannon sc, horvitz. rh. 2000. mod-1 is a
serotonin-gated chloride channel that modulates locomotory behaviour in c. elegans. 408:470–475.
rauh j, benner e, schnee m, cordova d, holyoke c, howard
m, bai d, buckingham s, hutton m, hamon a, roush r,
sattelle d. 1997. effects of [3h]-bidn, a novel bicyclic
dinitrile radioligand for gaba-gated chloride channels of
insects and vertebrates. br j pharmacol 121:1496–1505.
ray de, sutharsan s, forshaw p. 1997. action of pyrethroid
insecticides on voltage-gated chloride channels in neuroblastoma cells. neurotoxicology 18:755–760.
raymond v, sattelle db. 2002. novel animal-health drug targets from ligand-gated chloride channels. nat rev drug
discov 1:427–436.
rohrer s, arena j. 1995. structural and functional characterization of insect genes encoding ligand-gated chloridechannel subunits. in: clark jm, editor. molecular action
of insecticides on ion channels. acs symp ser 591. washington, dc: american chemical society. p 264–283.
schriever am, friedrich t, pusch m, jentsch tj. 1999. clc
chloride channels in caenorhabditis elegans. j biol chem
274:34238–34244.
shoop w, mrozik h, fisher m. 1995. structure and activity
of avermectins and milbemycins in animal health. vet
parasitol 59:139–156
smith m, warren v, thomas b, brochu r, ertel e, rohrer s,
schaeffer j, schmatz d, petuch b, tang y, meinke p,
kaczorowski g, cohen c. 2000. nodulisporic acid opens
insect glutamate-gated chloride channels: identification of
a new high affinity modulator. biochemistry 39:5543–
5554.
steinmeyer k, ortland c, jentsch t. 1991. primary structure and functional expression of a developmentally regulated skeletal muscle chloride channel. nature 358:
301–304.

156

bloomquist

thompson r, menking d, valdez a. 1990. comparison of
lindane, bicyclophosphate and  xxxd2947xxx  binding to the
putative chloride channel sites in rat brain and torpedo
electric organ. neurotoxicol teratol 12:57–63.

zhang h-g, ffrench-constant r, jackson m. 1994. a unique
amino acid of the drosophila gaba receptor with influence on drug sensitivity by two mechanisms. j physiol
479.1:65–75.

vassilatis d, elliston k, paress p, hamelin m, arena j, schaeffer
j, van der ploeg l, cully d. 1997. evolutionary relationship of the ligand-gated ion channels and the avermectinsensitive, glutamate-gated chloride channels. j mol evol
44:501–508.

zheng y, hirschberg b, yuan j, wang a, hunt d, ludmerer s,
schmatz d, cully d. 2002. identification of two novel
drosophila melanogaster histamine-gated chloride channel
subunits expressed in the eye. j biol chem 277:2000–2005.

yamamoto d and suzuki n. 1987. single-channel recordings
of chloride currents in primary cultured drosophila neurons. arch insect biochem physiol 6:151–158.

zufall f, franke c, hatt h. 1989a. similarities between the
effects of lindane (g- xxxd2488xxx ) and  xxxd2947xxx  on ligand-gated
chloride channels in crayfish muscle membrane. brain res
503:342–345.

zettler f, straka h. 1987. synaptic chloride channels generating hyperpolarizing m-responses in monopolar neurones
of the blowfly visual system. j exp biol 131:435–438.

zufall f, franke c, hatt h. 1989b. the insecticide avermectin
b1a activated a chloride channel in crayfish muscle membrane. j exp biol 142:191–205.

archives of insect biochemistry and physiology

