[cancer research 64, 2070 –2075, march 15, 2004]

orlistat is a novel inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx  with antitumor activity
steven j. kridel,1 fumiko axelrod,1 natasha rozenkrantz,2 and jeffrey w. smith1
1

cancer research center, the burnham institute, and 2activx biosciences, la jolla, california

abstract
one of the fundamental principles of pharmacology is that most drugs
have side effects. although considerable attention is paid to detrimental
side effects, drugs can also have beneficial side effects. given the time and
expense of drug development, it would be particularly exciting if a systematic method could be applied to reveal all of the activities, including
the unappreciated actions, of a potential drug. the present study takes the
first step along this path. an activity-based proteomics strategy was used
to simultaneously identify targets and screen for their inhibitors in prostate cancer. orlistat, a food and drug administration-approved drug
used for treating obesity, was included in this screen. surprisingly, we find
a new molecular target and a potential new application for orlistat.
orlistat is a novel inhibitor of the thioesterase domain of fatty acid
synthase, an enzyme strongly linked to tumor progression. by virtue of its
ability to inhibit  xxxg765xxx , orlistat halts tumor cell proliferation,
induces tumor cell apoptosis, and inhibits the growth of pc-3 tumors in
nude mice.

introduction
most drugs have side effects. these range in magnitude from
simple nuisances to life-threatening complications. although focus is
placed on negative side effects, beneficial side effects are also observed. unfortunately, the unanticipated effects of a drug are often
revealed in the later stages of development or even after the drug has
been approved for use. given the time and expense of drug development, it would be particularly exciting if all activities of a compound
could be revealed at the outset of its development. with such information, care could be taken to minimize detrimental side effects, and
testing of the drug could be expanded to other indications should its
activity profile warrant.
the ability to perform all of the encompassing screens of the
activity of a drug may be on the horizon. in principle, one could
predict the effects of a drug by knowing all of its targets. recent
emphasis on global profiling strategies, including gene expression
profiling and proteomics, drives this type of thinking (1). yet these
profiling technologies measure abundance, not function, and they fall
short of making it possible to screen drugs against a plethora of
targets. recent work in the area of chemical biology points the way
toward direct profiling of protein activity, offering a possible solution
to this hurdle. two groups have created chemical probes that react at
the active site of multiple enzymes of a given class. liu et al. (2)
synthesized a probe containing  xxxd3217xxx  as the warhead and
biotin as the reporter, and then used this probe to reveal the serine
hydrolase activity profile in biological samples. greenbaum et al. (3)
showed that the cysteine proteinases profile could be visualized with
probes containing reactive epoxides. because activity-based probes
bind at an active site of the enzyme, a direct measure of the level of
active enzyme can be obtained. consequently, it becomes possible to

use straightforward competition assays to screen for inhibitors of all
of the enzymes within a family.
here we apply the activity-based screening strategy to identify
serine hydrolases in prostate cancer cells. the activity-based nature of
the screen also allows us to identify inhibitors of these enzymes. of
particular interest is  xxxg765xxx  (fas), which is up-regulated
in the prostate cancer (pca) cells compared with normal prostate
epithelial cells, and has been implicated in the progression of various
types of tumors (4 –9). interestingly, orlistat is a novel and rather
selective inhibitor of fas in tumor cells. this drug inhibits the
thioesterase function of the enzyme, interferes with cellular fatty acid
synthesis, and can halt tumor cell proliferation and induce tumor cell
apoptosis. orlistat also inhibits the growth of pc-3 prostate tumors in
vivo. altogether the study reaffirms the significance of fas in tumor
progression and underscores the fact that this enzyme is a valid
oncology target. the study also indicates that compounds with reactive ␤-lactones, such as orlistat, should be evaluated as potential
antitumor agents.
materials and methods

activity profiling of serine hydrolases. lncap, du-145, and pc-3 cell
lines (american type culture collection) were maintained in rpmi 1640
(irvine scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°c in 5%
co2. the prec cell line (clonetics) was maintained in defined medium
supplied by clonetics. each cell line was maintained in 150-mm tissue culture
dishes. to generate protein lysates, cells were washed with ice-cold pbs and
harvested by scraping with a cell lifter into cold pbs. cells were collected by
centrifugation, resuspended in 50 mm tris-cl (ph 8.0), and then lysed by
sonication as described previously (2, 10). soluble and insoluble cell fractions
were separated by ultracentrifugation for 1 h at 64,000 rpm at 4°c. protein
concentrations were determined by bca assay (pierce).
activity profiling was performed with  xxxd3217xxx  (fp)-polyethylene
glycol (peg)-6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine (tamra) using methods described previously (2, 10). briefly, soluble fractions (40 ␮l; 1 mg/ml) were
treated with 2 ␮m fp-peg-tamra for 1 h at ambient temperature. reactions
were stopped by the addition of laemmli buffer and boiling. nonspecific
reaction of the probe was determined with a duplicate sample boiled for 10 min
before labeling with fp-peg-tamra. the labeled samples were resolved by
10% sds-page and visualized by scanning with a hitachi flatbed scanner at
605 nm.
serine hydrolase activity in whole cells was measured with a membranepermeable probe, fp-bodipy. after addition of orlistat, the probe was added
to cells (final concentration of 2 ␮m), and the reaction was allowed to proceed
to completion (1 h). cells were lysed by the addition of laemmli sample buffer
and boiled; samples were resolved on sds-page and visualized by scanning
with a hitachi flatbed scanner at 605 nm.
inhibition of serine hydrolase activity by ␤-lactones. ebelactone a
and b stocks were made in dmso. orlistat (roche) was solubilized from pills
in  xxxd102xxx . cell lysates were generated at 1 mg/ml as described above.
samples (40 ␮g) were incubated with inhibitors for 20 min, and fp-pegtamra was added and reacted for an additional 30 min.
received 11/20/03; revised 12/23/03; accepted 1/20/04.
identification of labeled serine hydrolases. to identify serine hydrogrant support: grants ca69306 and ca82713 from the nih, grant 1701-1-0031
lases, a  xxxd3217xxx  probe linked to biotin was used (2, 10). cell lysates
from the department of defense prostate cancer program, cancer center grant ca
were preadsorbed to avidin-agarose to reduce nonspecific binding of proteins
30199 from the national cancer institute, and support from activx biosciences.
during the purification. cell lysates were labeled with fp-peg-biotin (5 ␮m)
the costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. this article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with
for 1 h at room temperature. protein was separated from unincorporated
18 u.s.c. section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
fp-peg-biotin by gel filtration on nap 25 columns. sds was added to the
note: s. kridel and f. axelrod contributed equally to this work.
eluate to a concentration of 0.5%, and the sample was denatured by boiling.
requests for reprints: jeffrey smith, cancer research center, the burnham institute,
samples were diluted with 50 mm tris (ph 7.5) and 150 mm nacl, and
10901 north torrey pines road, la jolla, ca 92037. e-mail: jsmith@burnham.org.
2070

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat’s antitumor activity

incubated with avidin-agarose for 1 h at room temperature. the agarose beads
were washed eight times with 50 mm tris (ph 7.5) and 150 mm nacl
containing 1% tween 20. labeled protein was eluted with laemmli buffer
containing 1% sds. protein was resolved by 10% sds-page and detected by
silver staining. specific bands were extracted and subjected to in-gel digestion
by trypsin and peptide mass fingerprinting with matrix-assisted desorption
ionization-time of flight as described previously (11, 12).
expression of the recombinant thioesterase domain of fatty acid
synthase. the portion of the fas gene (gi:21618359) encoding the thioesterase domain was amplified by pcr using the following primers: 5⬘ atg
acg ccc aag gag gat ggt ctg gcc cag cag (corresponds to
nucleotides 6727– 6756) and 3⬘ gcc ctc ccg cac gct cac  xxxg873xxx  tgg
ct (corresponds to nucleotides 7625–7650). the recombinant thioesterase
domain was cloned into ptrchis (invitrogen) and expressed in escheria coli.
the recombinant protein corresponds to residues 2202 through 2509 of fas.
the thioesterase was purified by ni-affinity chromatography, and analyzed for
activity and inhibition by orlistat, using methods described above.
detection of  xxxg765xxx  by western blot. pc-3 cells (5 ⫻ 104)
treated with orlistat were boiled in laemmli buffer, resolved by sds-page,
and transferred to nitrocellulose. the membrane was blocked with nonfat milk
and probed with an anti-fas monoclonal antibody (pharmingen). binding was
visualized with an horseradish peroxidase-conjugated rabbit antimouse igg
(bio-rad) followed by chemiluminescent detection with the western lighting
chemiluminescence reagent (perkin-elmer).
inhibition of fatty acid synthesis by orlistat. cellular fatty acid synthesis was measured by the incorporation of [14c]acetate (13, 14). cells
(2.5 ⫻ 104 cells/well in 24-well plates) were washed twice with pbs and
incubated in defined serum-free medium containing 300 ␮g/ml bsa and
insulin, transferrin, and selenium as supplements. medium was added to the
cells in the presence or absence of orlistat. cells were incubated with orlistat
for up to 2 h before the addition of 1 ␮ci of [14c]acetate. cells were incubated
with [14c]acetate for 2 h, at which time medium was removed, and the cells
were washed with pbs/edta and trypsinized. cell pellets were washed twice
more with pbs, and  xxxd2154xxx  were extracted with chloroform-methanol (1:1)
for 30 min. the extract was dried under n2 and extracted with water-saturated
butanol. butanol was evaporated under n2, and labeled  xxxd2154xxx  were
detected by scintillation counting.
effects of orlistat on cell proliferation. pc-3 cells were exposed to
orlistat along with different concentrations of palmitate for 48 h. fresh
medium, along with orlistat and palmitate, were added every 24 h. prolifer-

fig. 2. activity profiling of normal and neoplastic prostate epithelial cells. lysates
were generated from primary cultures of normal prostatic epithelial cells (precs) and
from three prostate tumor cell lines (lncap, du-145, and pc-3). lysates were incubated
with  xxxd3217xxx - xxxd2982xxx -6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine (fp-pegtamra) for 1 h at room temperature. nonspecific labeling with the activity probe was
measured in samples denatured by boiling (lanes marked ⫹). samples were resolved by
10% sds-page and visualized at 605 nm using a hitachi flatbed gel scanner (lanes 1– 8).
the effect of three ␤-lactones on the activity labeling of serine hydrolases from prostate
cancer cells was assessed in a similar manner. before incubation with fp-peg-tamra,
lysates were preincubated with ebelactone a (lane 10), ebelactone b (lane 11), or orlistat
(lane 12). after labeling with fp-peg-tamra, the reactions were halted and enzyme
activity visualized as described above.

ation was assessed by measuring bromodeoxyuridine labeling using the cell
proliferation elisa (roche).
effects of orlistat on cell death. cells were plated in 96-well tissue
culture plates in complete medium. after 24 h, the cells were exposed to
orlistat for an additional 24 h. apoptosis was measured with the cell death
detection elisa (roche), which was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. as an independent assessment of apoptosis, the amount of
cleaved poly(adp-ribose) polymerase was measured in cells after treatment
with orlistat. cells were cultured with the orlistat (25 ␮m) or ethanol for 72 h,
or with  xxxd3241xxx  (1 ␮m) for 5 h. at each time point, total cell extracts
were generated by addition of 1⫻ sds sample buffer. samples were subjected
to western analysis using antibodies against the cleaved form of poly(adpribose) polymerase (cell signaling). western blotting was performed according to protocols established by the manufacturer of the anti-poly(adp-ribose)
polymerase antibody
pc-3 xenograft tumor model. the effect of orlistat on growth of pc-3
tumors in nude mice was assessed with a staged model. pc-3 cells (1 ⫻ 106)
were injected into the flank of male athymic nude mice 4 –5 weeks of age.
tumors were allowed to grow until they reached a size of ⬃100 mm3, at which
time orlistat administration was initiated. orlistat was administered in 30 ␮l of
vehicle containing 33% ethanol and 66% peg 400. animals received 240
mg/kg/day of orlistat. tumor size was measured with calipers twice weekly,
and volume was calculated with the formula volume ⫽ ␲/6 ⫻ xy2 (15).

results and discussion

fig. 1. structures of ␤ lactones.

an activity-based proteomics screen was used to identify serine
hydrolases in pca cells and to screen for their inhibitors. serine
hydrolases were revealed with an activity-based probe composed of a
2071

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat’s antitumor activity

fp warhead linked to the fluorophore (fp-tamra) (16). primary
cultures of normal prostate epithelial cells (prec) were compared
with three pca cell lines, lncap, du-145, and pc-3. cell lysates
were reacted with fp-tamra and then resolved on sds-page (fig.
2, lanes 1– 8). in each case, ⬃15 different hydrolases were detected as
fluorescent bands on sds gels. the pattern of serine hydrolase expression is generally similar among the cell lines, with two significant
distinctions. a band of 62 kda was active in the normal precs but
absent in all of the tumor lines. peptide mass fingerprinting showed
this enzyme to be carboxylesterase-2. conversely, a hydrolase with a
mass of ⬃270 kda is expressed in all of the tumor lines but absent in
normal precs. peptide mass fingerprinting with mass spectrometry
showed this band to be fas, an observation that was confirmed by
immunoprecipitating the complex between fp-tamra and fas
(fig. 3b).
fas is responsible for the conversion of dietary carbohydrate to fat
and is the only eukaryotic enzyme capable of synthesizing palmitate,
the precursor for the majority of nonessential  xxxd2154xxx  (17). fas has
a unique structure and mode of action. the enzyme contains seven
separate enzymatic pockets and an acyl carrier protein. the distinct
enzyme domains of fas operate together to condense acetyl coa and
malonyl coa, ultimately generating the 16 carbon polyunsaturated
fatty acid palmitate. palmitate remains covalently attached to the acyl
carrier protein of the enzyme until it is liberated by the final enzymatic
pocket on the enzyme, the intrinsic thioesterase. this thioesterase is
the sole serine hydrolase within fas and is the target of the fptamra probe (see below).
fas is up-regulated in many tumors. its function has been strongly

linked to tumor cell proliferation (18), making it an attractive therapeutic target. a functional connection between fas and tumor cell
proliferation was originally suggested by work with the fungal product  xxxd463xxx  and its synthetic derivative c75. these compounds
inhibit the ketoacyl synthase domain of fas, the first enzymatic
pocket in the enzyme (19, 20), and have shown some promise as
antitumor agents (8, 20 –22).
we capitalized on the fact that fp-tamra reacts with the active
site of the thioesterase domain of fas to screen for alternative
inhibitors of this enzyme. three derivatives of natural products, each
containing a ␤-lactone moiety, were tested for the ability to block
activity-based labeling of fas. these are ebelactones a and b, and
 xxxd2792xxx , which is also known as orlistat and is marketed as
xenical (fig. 1). the ␤-lactone can undergo nucleophilic attack on the
carbonyl carbon of the lactone ring by the active site serine of the
esterase, yielding a covalent adduct between enzyme and inhibitor
(23). all three of the compounds inhibit the thioesterase of fas (fig.
2, right panel, lanes 10 –12), but only orlistat is selective for fas in
tumor cells. orlistat is a drug approved and widely used for weight
management in obese patients (24). the effectiveness of orlistat in
obesity is conferred by the ability of the drug to inhibit pancreatic
lipase in the gastrointestinal tract, thereby preventing uptake of dietary
fat. the inhibition of fas by orlistat has never been reported and is
not believed to be relevant to its mode of action in weight loss.
to characterize the effects of orlistat on fas in intact cells, we
measured the ability of the compound to inhibit the activity of fas in
whole cells. pc-3 cells were treated with a range of orlistat, and the
level of fas thioesterase function was measured with a membrane-

fig. 3. effect of orlistat on cellular activity of  xxxg765xxx 
(fas). a, fas activity in intact pc-3 cells was measured with a
membrane-permeable activity probe,  xxxd3217xxx  (fp)-bodipy.
pc-3 cells were first incubated with a range of orlistat, and the remaining fas activity was assessed by adding fp-bodipy to the cells. cell
lysates were separated on sds-page, and active serine hydrolases were
visualized (top panel) as described in “materials and methods.” the
effect of orlistat on the level of fas protein was measured using the
same cell lysates as in by western blot (bottom panel). b, immune
precipitation of the complex between fas and fp-6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine (tamra). cell lysates were treated with 12 ␮m orlistat
(⫹) or vehicle control (⫺) before labeling with fp-tamra. fas was
immune precipitated with anti-fas antibody. the top panel indicates the
level of the complex between fp-tamra and fas, whereas the bottom
panel (western blot) shows the amount of total fas expression. c, the
effect of orlistat on cellular fatty acid synthesis was gauged by measuring the incorporation of [14c]acetate into  xxxd2154xxx  as described in
“materials and methods.” d, the ability of orlistat to block labeling of
the recombinant thioesterase domain of fas was measured by preincubating the thioesterase with a range of orlistat and subsequently with the
activity probe fp-tamra. samples were run on sdg-page, and
signal was visualized as described; bars, ⫾sd.

2072

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat’s antitumor activity

permeable activity-based probe, fp-bodipy. orlistat caused a concentration-dependent inhibition of labeling of fas by fp-bodipy
(fig. 3a), indicating that orlistat inhibits fas in intact cells. orlistat
had no effect on the abundance of fas, which was measured from the
same treated samples by western blot. the identity of the labeled fas
was confirmed by immune-precipitating the complex between fptamra and fas with an antibody specific for the enzyme (fig. 3b).
the effects of orlistat on cellular fatty acid synthesis were gauged by
measuring the incorporation of [14c]acetate into  xxxd2154xxx . saturating levels of orlistat (30 ␮m) reduced cellular fatty acid synthesis by
⬃75% within 30 min (fig. 3c). moreover, orlistat blocked the
labeling of the active site serine of the recombinant thioesterase
domain of fas by fp-peg-tamra (fig. 3d), proving that this
enzymatic domain of fas is a target for orlistat. because orlistat is
a tight-binding irreversible inhibitor, we cannot define its precise
affinity for fas. however, the results in fig. 2d, and similar results
obtained on whole fas in cell lysates (not shown), suggest that the
apparent ki of orlistat for fas is near 100 nm. when treating whole
cells, however, higher concentrations of the compound were necessary to achieve nearly complete inhibition of the enzyme (fig. 3a).
orlistat has similar effects on fas and on fatty acid synthesis in other
pca lines, as well as in colon and breast cancer cell lines (data not
shown).
orlistat induced a pronounced antiproliferative effect in the pc-3
cell line and exhibited a slight effect on the androgen-dependent
lncap cells. the compound had little effect on the du-145 cells or
the normal prec cells in the 48-h time period of the measurement
(fig. 4a). the inhibitory effects of orlistat on the proliferation of
pc-3 cells were reversed by addition of palmitate, the end product of
fas (fig. 4b). this observation strongly indicates that decreased
proliferation results from inhibition of fas by orlistat.
we have observed that orlistat has potent antiproliferative effects
on many other tumor cell lines, including cells derived from breast
(mda-mb-435 and mda-mb-231) and colon (caco-2 and sw480)
cancer. in virtually all of the cases, tumor cells are more sensitive to
orlistat over normal epithelial cells and fibroblasts. yet, as observed
here with pca cells, variance in the sensitivity of tumor cells to
orlistat is observed (data not shown). the mechanisms underlying
these differences are not entirely clear and are currently under investigation. the antitumor activity of anti-fas compounds has been
linked to hormone-dependence (25), pten status (26), and her-2
status (27). consequently, the sum total of these signaling pathways in
any single tumor may ultimately define sensitivity to a fas blockade.
orlistat also induced tumor cell apoptosis, but again the sensitivity
of the individual tumor cell lines to the compound was somewhat
different (fig. 5a). when cell death was assessed at 24 h by measuring dna fragmentation (roche cell death elisa), the pc-3 and
lncap cells exhibited substantial levels of cell death. at this time
point, however, only a modest effect was observed on death of the
du-145 cells. orlistat was without effect on death of human foreskin
fibroblasts or normal precs. this finding is consistent with reports
that fas has little, if any, role in apoptosis in normal cells (18).
prolonged exposure (72 h) of each tumor cell line to orlistat resulted
in cleavage of poly(adp-ribose) polymerase, another marker of apoptosis (fig. 5b). in this and other apoptosis assays (e.g., staining of
annexin on the cell surface), we have yet to observe significant effects
of orlistat (1–25 ␮m) on fibroblasts, normal precs, or normal mammary epithelial cells (data not shown). as with cell proliferation, the
effects of orlistat on apoptosis were also reversed by the addition of
palmitate (fig. 5c).
the effects of orlistat on tumor growth in vivo were tested in a
xenograft model with the pc-3 cells. tumors were grown to ⬃100
mm3 in the flank of nude mice, at which time orlistat was adminis-

fig. 4. orlistat inhibits tumor cell proliferation. a, the effect of orlistat on proliferation of prostate cancer cells was measured by the incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine
(brdurd). pc-3 (f), lncap (f), du-145 (œ), and prec cells (⽧) were seeded as
subconfluent monolayers into microtiter plates. cells were exposed to orlistat for 32 h,
then a brdurd labeling solution was added to the wells. brdurd incorporation was
measured according to the manufacturer’s protocol (roche cell proliferation elisa).
proliferation is expressed as a percentage of proliferation in untreated cells. b, the ability
of palmitate to rescue cells from orlistat-induced growth arrest was tested with pc-3 cells.
along with orlistat, cells were incubated with 0 (⽧), 3.25 ␮m (f), 7.5 ␮m (œ), and 15
␮m (f) palmitate. brdurd incorporation was measured according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (roche cell proliferation elisa).

tered via i.p. injection (240 mg/kg/day). when compared with vehicle
injection, orlistat prevented the growth of pc-3 tumors (fig. 6). in
five separate experiments such as that shown in fig. 6, tumor growth
was blocked by 63%, 62%, 46%, 41%, and 16%. all of the differences
were statistically significant in t tests with ps ⬍ 0.05. animals
exhibited no outward signs of toxicity, experienced no loss of weight,
nor were there any effects of orlistat (240 mg/kg/day) on hematocrit
or wbc levels (data not shown).
a pharmacokinetic analysis of orlistat (155 mg/kg) administered
by i.p. injection showed peak blood levels to be ⬃10 ␮m 2 h after
dosing (data not shown). beyond this time, blood levels of the drug
decayed rapidly. although the cost of a pharmacokinetic analysis at
240 mg/kg was prohibitive, it is unlikely that blood levels reached
much beyond 16 ␮m, and the half-life is expected to be the same.
altogether then, the peak blood levels at the dose of 240 mg/kg (⬃16
␮m) are likely to be just above the dose of orlistat required to affect
tumor cells (1– 6 ␮m). these parameters are generally consistent with
the level of growth inhibition that we observe in vivo.
altogether, the findings presented here, and results from our larger
survey of a number of tumor and normal cell lines (data not shown),
lead to the following conclusions: (a) orlistat is a novel inhibitor of
the thioesterase activity of fas, and by virtue of this property, orlistat

2073

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat’s antitumor activity

can block cellular fatty acid synthesis; (b) orlistat can interfere with
prostate tumor cell proliferation; (c) orlistat selectively induces apoptosis in prostate tumor cells; (d) tumor cells have various levels of
sensitivity to orlistat; and (e) orlistat inhibits growth of pc-3 xenograft tumors in vivo.
as with any compound, off-target activity is always a confounding
issue. in fact, one reason why we chose to include orlistat in our study
was to determine whether orlistat had targets other than pancreatic
lipase. nevertheless, the overwhelming body of evidence in this report
indicates that the effects of orlistat on tumor cells are elicited through
its inhibition of fas. activity-based screening in numerous tumor
cells has revealed no other target for orlistat than fas. furthermore,
the concentrations of orlistat that elicit cytostatic and cytotoxic effects are very close to the cellular ic50 for the inhibition by orlistat of
fas. additional support for this conclusion is drawn from our finding

fig. 5. orlistat induces tumor cell death. a, pc-3, lncap, du-145, normal prostate
epithelial cells (precs), and normal foreskin fibroblasts cells were exposed to orlistat
(12.5 ␮m) for 48 h. tumor cell death was measured with the cell death detection elisa
(roche), which measures dna fragments within immunocaptured nucleosomes. dna
fragmentation was assessed by measuring a405-a490. the level of cell death is plotted as
a percentage of  xxxd3241xxx  induced death. b, lncap, du-145, and pc-3 cells were
cultured with orlistat (12.5 ␮m) for 72 h, with  xxxd3241xxx  (st) as a positive control for
induction of cell death, or in medium without any stimulus (c). after incubation, cell
extracts were generated and subjected to western analysis using antibodies selective for
the cleaved form of poly(adp-ribose) polymerase. c, pc-3 cells were treated across a
concentration range of orlistat. concurrently, cells were supplemented with palmitate.
control cells (f) received no palmitate. test cells were treated with 1.8 ␮m (œ), 3.75 ␮m
(f), or 7.5 ␮m (⽧) palmitate. after a 48-h treatment, cell death was measured with the
cell death detection elisa (roche).

fig. 6. orlistat inhibits growth of pc-3 tumors in vivo. the effect of orlistat on growth
of pc-3 tumors in nude mice was assessed with a staged model. pc-3 cells (1 ⫻ 106) were
injected into the flank of nude mice. tumors were allowed to grow until they reached a
size of ⬃100 mm3, at which time administration of orlistat (f) or vehicle (f) was
initiated in separate sets of 8 mice. orlistat was administered at 240 mg/kg/day for a
period of 3 weeks. this experiment is representative of four repetitions. the differences
in mean tumor volume of the drug versus vehicle groups were statistically significant at
every time point with the final measurement at day 28 having a p of 0.02 in a paired t test,
assuming unequal variance; bars, ⫾sd.

that orlistat directly inhibits the recombinant thioesterase domain of
fas. finally, palmitate, the end product of fas, rescues pc-3 cells
from the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of the compound.
this conclusion is also strongly supported by reports in the literature
showing that fas is misregulated in tumors (13) and that c75, an
antagonist of the ketoacyl synthase domain, has antitumor activity (8,
20, 22). finally, recent studies show that silencing of fas in tumor
cells with small interfering rna induces apoptosis in pca cells (28).
although we cannot exclude the possibility that orlistat has some
other target, the simplest interpretation of the data presented here is
that orlistat acts by inhibiting fas.
orlistat has minimal effects on the normal cells we have tested,
suggesting that the compound could have therapeutic index sufficient
for antitumor therapy. orlistat also represents an alternative to  xxxd463xxx  or c75, which inhibits the ketoacyl synthase domain of the
enzyme but also interacts with carnitine  xxxd2832xxx  transferase (29). in
its approved formulation, however, orlistat is administered orally.
because of its extremely low oral bioavailability, the effects of orlistat are largely confined to the gastrointestinal tract, where it inactivates  xxxg1789xxx  (24). therefore, the formulation and route of
delivery would have to be changed to treat tumors of the breast,
prostate, and so on. one cannot exclude the possibility that the oral
formulation of orlistat could be useful in treating tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract, such as colon cancer. we have found orlistat to
block fas and induce apoptosis in a number of colon cancer lines,3
so treating patients at high risk for colon cancer in a prophylactic
manner could be considered.
the potential for synthesizing more potent or bioavailable variants
of orlistat is high. orlistat is one of a class of compounds containing
a reactive ␤-lactone. other compounds in this class include the natural
products ebelactones a and b, some inhibitors of hmg coa synthase
(30), and panclicin d, a synthetic inhibitor of  xxxg1789xxx  (31).
given the relatively broad inhibition profile of ebelactones a and b
against serine hydrolases (fig. 2) and the demonstration that synthetic
routes are available for creation of variants of orlistat (30), a more
in-depth evaluation of ␤-lactones as serine hydrolase antagonists and
as antitumor agents is warranted.
3
f. axelrod. orlistat as an anti-tumor agent for colorectal cancer, manuscript in
preparation.

2074

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat’s antitumor activity

finally, the identification of the ability of orlistat to inhibit the
thioesterase domain of fas was made possible by the application of
activity-based profiling. the analysis we performed involved a screen
of only three ␤-lactones against slightly ⬎35 different serine hydrolases. even within this small test set, a novel target and indication
were identified for an approved drug. it is reasonable to believe that
a high throughput version of such a screen could drive decisionmaking in drug development. information from such screens could
lead to the identification of more selective leads much earlier in
development. as in the case of this report, such an analysis might also
point toward unanticipated targets and indications for other drugs.
acknowledgments
we thank activx for providing the fp-tamra probe used in these studies.

references
1. ideker t, galitski t, hood l. a new approach to decoding life: systems biology. ann
rev genomics hum genet 2001;2:343–72.
2. liu y, patricelli mp, cravatt bf. activity-based protein profiling: the serine hydrolases. proc natl acad sci usa 1999;96:14694 –9.
3. greenbaum d, medzihradszky kf, burlingame a, bogyo m. epoxide electrophiles
as activity-dependent  xxxg548xxx  profiling and discovery tools. chem biol
2000;7:569 – 81.
4. alo pl, visca p, marci a, mangoni a, botti c, di tondo u. expression of fatty acid
synthase (fas) as a predictor of recurrence in stage i breast carcinoma patients.
cancer (phila) 1996;77:474 – 82.
5. alo pl, visca p, trombetta g, et al.  xxxg765xxx  (fas) predictive strength in
poorly differentiated early breast carcinomas. tumori 1999;85:35– 40.
6. bull jh, ellison g, patel a, et al. identification of potential diagnostic markers of
prostate cancer and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia using cdna microarray. br j
cancer 2001;84:1512–9.
7. furuya y, akimoto s, yasuda k, ito h. apoptosis of androgen-independent prostate
cell line induced by inhibition of fatty acid synthesis. anticancer res 1997;17:4589 –
93.
8. gabrielson ew, pinn ml, testa jr, kuhajda fp. increased  xxxg765xxx  is a
therapeutic target in mesothelioma. clin cancer res 2001;7:153–7.
9. gansler ts, hardman w, iii, hunt da, schaffel s, hennigar ra. increased expression of  xxxg765xxx  ( xxxg765xxx ) in ovarian neoplasms predicts shorter survival.
hum pathol 1997;28:686 –92.
10. kidd d, liu y, cravatt b. profiling serine hydrolase activities in complex proteomes.
biochemistry 2001;40:4005–15.
11. landry f, lombardo cr, smith jw. a method for application of samples to matrixassisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight targets that enhances peptide detection. anal biochem 2000;279:1– 8.
12. harvey s, zhang y, landry f, miller c, smith jw. insights into a plasma membrane
signature. physiol genomics 2001;5:129 –36.

13. kuhajda fp, jenner k, wood fd, et al. fatty acid synthesis: a potential selective
target for antineoplastic therapy. proc natl acad sci usa 1994;91:6379 – 83.
14. pizer es, chrest fj, digiuseppe ja, han wf. pharmacological inhibitors of mammalian  xxxg765xxx  suppress dna replication and induce apoptosis in tumor
cell lines. cancer res 1998;58:4611–5.
15. boven e, winograd b, berger dp, et al. phase ii preclinical drug screening in human
tumor xenografts: a first european multicenter collaborative study. cancer res
1992;52:5940 –7.
16. patricelli mp, giang dk, stamp lm, burbaum jj. direct visualizaiton of serine
hydrolase activities in complex proteomies using fluorescent active site-directed
probes. proteomics 2001;1:1067–71.
17. wakil sj.  xxxg765xxx , a proficient multifunctional enzyme. biochemistry
1989;28:4523–30.
18. kuhajda fp. fatty-acid synthase and human cancer: new perspectives on its role in
tumor biology. nutrition 2000;16:202– 8.
19. moche m, schneider g, edwards p, dehesh k, lindqvist y. structure of the complex
between the antibiotic  xxxd463xxx  and its target, ␤-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase. j biol chem 1999;274:6031– 4.
20. kuhajda fp, pizer es, li jn, mani ns, frehywot gl, townsend ca. synthesis and
antitumor activity of an inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx . proc natl acad sci usa
2000;97:3450 – 4.
21. pizer es, wood fd, heine hs, romantsev fe, pasternack gr, kuhajda fp. inhibition of fatty acid synthesis delays disease progression in a xenograft model of
ovarian cancer. cancer res 1996;56:1189 –93.
22. pizer es, pflug br, bova gs, han wf, udan ms, nelson jb. increased fatty acid
synthase as a therapeutic target in androgen-independent prostate cancer progression.
prostate 2001;47:102–10.
23. hadvary p, sidler w, meister w, vetter w, wolfer h. the lipase inhibitor  xxxd2792xxx  binds covalently to the putative active site serine of  xxxg1789xxx .
j biol chem 1991;266:2021–7.
24. mcneely w, benfield p. orlistat. drugs 1998;56:241–249.discussion 250.
25. swinnen jv, esquenet m, goossens k, heyns w, verhoeven g. androgens stimulate
 xxxg765xxx  in the human prostate cancer cell line lncap. cancer res
1997;57:1086 –90.
26. van de sande t, de schrijver e, heyns w, verhoeven g, swinnen jv. role of the
phosphatidylinositol 3⬘-kinase/pten/akt kinase pathway in the overexpression of
 xxxg765xxx  in lncap prostate cancer cells. cancer res 2002;62:642– 6.
27. kumar-sinha c, ignatoski kw, lippman me, ethier sp, chinnaiyan am. transcriptome analysis of her2 reveals a molecular connection to fatty acid synthesis. cancer
res 2003;63:132–9.
28. de schrijver e, brusselmans k, heyns w, verhoeven g, swinnen jv. rna interference-mediated silencing of the  xxxg765xxx  gene attenuates growth and
induces morphological changes and apoptosis of lncap prostate cancer cells. cancer
res 2003;63:3799 – 804.
29. thupari jn, landree le, ronnett gv, kuhajda fp. c75 increases peripheral energy
utilization and fatty acid oxidation in diet-induced obesity.[comment]. proc natl acad
sci usa 2002;99:9498 –502.
30. romo d, harrison ph, jenkins si, et al. synthesis and inhibitory action on hmgcoa synthase of racemic and optically active oxetan-2-ones (␤-lactones). bioorg
med chem 1998;6:1255–72.
31. yang hw, zhao cx, romo d. studies of the tandem mukaiyama aldollactonization
(tmal) reaction: a concise and highly diastereoselective route to b-lactones applied
to the total synthesis of the potent  xxxg1789xxx  inhibitor, (-)-panclicin d.
tetrahedron 1997;53:16471– 88.

2075

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

orlistat is a novel inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx  with
antitumor activity
steven j. kridel, fumiko axelrod, natasha rozenkrantz, et al.
cancer res 2004;64:2070-2075.

updated version

cited articles
citing articles

e-mail alerts
reprints and
subscriptions
permissions

access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/64/6/2070

this article cites 30 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/64/6/2070.full#ref-list-1
this article has been cited by 47 highwire-hosted articles. access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/64/6/2070.full#related-urls

sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
to order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the aacr publications
department at pubs@aacr.org.
to request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/64/6/2070.
click on "request permissions" which will take you to the copyright clearance center's
(ccc)
rightslink site.

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 2004 american association for cancer
research.

