involvement of matrix metalloproteinases in the onset of dentin mineralization - fanchon - 2004 - european journal of oral sciences - wiley online library 
 
 
 abstract 
 
 in order to study the involvement of matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) on dentin formation and mineralization, day 18 embryonic mouse tooth germs were cultured for 10 d in the presence or absence of marimastat, a general mmp inhibitor, or ct 1166 , a more selective inhibitor of gelatinases (mmp‐2 and mmp‐9) and stromelysin‐1 (mmp‐3). with marimastat a dose‐dependent increase in thickness of the predentin layer and a decreased mineralization of dentin were observed. at the highest concentration of the inhibitor used, enamel formation had ceased. with ct 1166 , these effects were already apparent at the lowest concentration used. western blot analyses demonstrated that the two inhibitors inhibited the expression of  xxxg1429xxx  (mmp‐20). these observations indicate that mmps (possibly mmp‐2, ‐3, ‐9 and/or ‐20) play a role in the onset of dentin mineralization. the lack of enamel formation was possibly due to diffusion of amelogenin from its normal site of apposition. the protein clearly was not retained at the surface of the non‐mineralized dentin layer, and immunopositive amelogenin accumulated in the odontoblast compartment. the diffusion of enamel proteins and the accumulation revealed by immunolabeling of two small leucine‐rich proteoglycans,  xxxg612xxx  and biglycan, in the predentin may have contributed to impaired dentin mineralization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 it is well documented that matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) are implicated in epithelio–mesenchymal interactions during the initial stages of odontogenesis ( 1 ). they are likely to play a role in the turnover and degradation of basement membrane proteins in embryonic tooth germs during morphogenesis and cytodifferentiation ( 2 ). when dentin and enamel are in the process of formation, the two gelatinases mmp‐2 and mmp‐9 and stromelysin‐1 (mmp‐3) are present, with specific distributions suggesting functional implications for each mmp ( 3 ,  4 ). expression of mmp‐8 was reported ( 5 ).  xxxg1429xxx  (mmp‐20) is also present in the forming enamel ( 6 ), and in mature teeth ( 7 ). in addition, membrane type 1‐metalloproteinase (mt1‐mmp) is expressed in tooth tissues ( 8 ,  9 ). the enzymatic breakdown of some of the matrix molecules in the extracellular domain may influence dental tissue formation and mineralization. it is well known that intact proteoglycans can inhibit mineralization. thus, degradation of proteoglycan in predentin near the mineralization front, may be a necessary step before mineral deposition. in the growth plate this occurs by the action of neutral metalloproteinases, most likely mmp‐3 ( 10 ,  11 ). it was the aim of the present study to determine whether mmp activity might also play a role in the onset of mineralization processes in the developing tooth germ. to this end, we subjected cultured embryonic tooth germs to two mmp inhibitors: marimastat, a general inhibitor of mmps, and the more selective ct 1166 , a gelatinase inhibitor acting also on mmp‐3 ( 12 ,  13 ).
          
 
 
  material and methods 
 all experiments were performed under an institutionally approved protocol for the use of animals in research. pregnant swiss mice were killed at the day 18 of gestation by cervical dislocation. fifty‐two embryos were taken from the uterine cavity, and 104 mandibular first molar tooth germs were dissected under a stereo‐microscope in hank's buffer. they were cultured in a chemically defined semi–solid medium, bgjb (gibco, cergy‐pontoise, france), supplemented with 20 ng ml −1 l ‐glutamine, 275 µg ml −1  sodium ascorbate (merck, darmstadt, germany), 2 mg per 100 ml beta‐glycerophosphate and an antibiotic solution (gibco) containing penicillin (10 000 u ml −1 ) and streptomycin (10 ng ml −1 ) diluted to a final concentration of 1%. the medium was supplemented with 0.5% agar (bacto agar; difco, detroit, mi, usa)  14 - 16 ). germs were cultured in the presence or absence of marimastat (british biotechnology, oxford, uk) or ct 1166  (kindly donated by dr a. j. docherty, celltech r & d, slough, uk) added at day 2. three groups were obtained: control tooth germs (14 molar tooth germs); germs cultured in the presence of three different concentrations of marimastat (0.2, 1 and 2 µ m ); and germs cultured with three different concentrations of ct 1166  (0.2, 1 and 2 µ m ). fifteen tooth germs were used per subgroup. since the inhibitors were dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (dmso) at 0.1% concentration, dmso was added to the control group in equal amount.
          
 after 10 d of culture, the tooth germs were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde buffered with 0.1  m  sodium cacodylate (ph 7.4) for 3–4 h, dehydrated and embedded in paraplast plus (oxford labware, oxford, uk). five‐micrometer thick serial sections were stained either with hematoxylin and eosin, or immunostained with antibodies raised against amelogenin (a generous gift from dr i. slaby, biora, malmo, sweden), murine  xxxg612xxx  (lf‐113) or biglycan (lf‐107) (generous gifts from dr larry fisher, nidcr, nih, bethesda, md, usa) ( 17 ). four to six sections per tooth germ were immunostained for each antibody. five‐micrometer thick sections were treated in methanol to inhibit endogenous peroxidases. sections were treated at 4°c overnight with 1% phosphate buffered saline (pbs)–bovine  xxxg124xxx  (bsa) and incubated with the primary antibody at 1/100 dilution for 2 h at room temperature. treatment with the primary antibody was followed by incubation for 20 min with the secondary antibody, a peroxidase conjugated goat antimouse igg (dako, glostrup, denmark). the immunoreactivity was detected with diaminobenzidine diluted with pbs. controls were carried out by absorption, using the antibody with the protein at appropriate concentrations, and by omitting the primary antibody. the nature of the molecules in the embryonic tooth germs, and the specificity of the antibodies that were used were confirmed by western blots (results not shown).
          
 thirty‐five additional tooth germs cultured under the same conditions as mentioned above (five per group) were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1  m  sodium cacodylate buffer, postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide and embedded in epon ( 16 ). ultra‐thin sections stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate were observed with a transmission electron microscope (jeol 100b) operating at 80 kv.
          
 
  western blot analyses 
 tooth germs cultured in the presence or absence of marimastat or ct 1166  were homogenized and extracted using a potter glass homogenizer (10 germs in 150 µl buffer) with cold cell lysis buffer (50 m m  tris–hcl ph 7.4, 0.2% triton x‐100, 5 m m   xxxg2125xxx  2 , 0.9% nacl) supplemented with 1/100 protease inhibitor cocktail set v ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (edta) free (calbiochem, la jolla, ca, usa). the lysate was sonicated on ice three times for 5 s and centrifuged  xxxd1891xxx  000  g  for 15 min at 4°c. protein lysate was mixed with an equal amount of buffer containing 50 m m  tris‐hcl ph 6.8, 25% glycerol, 2% sodium  xxxd3215xxx  (sds) and 0.01% bromophenol blue with beta‐ xxxd26xxx  and subjected to 12% sodium  xxxd3215xxx –polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (sds‐page). proteins were transblotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane (0.45 µm) (bio‐rad, hercules, ca, usa). an anti‐mmp‐20 developed in rabbit and directed against a synthetic peptide corresponding to the hinge region of the metalloproteinase (m9183; sigma, st louis, mo, usa) was used for the detection of mmp‐20. western blotting was carried out with the mmp‐20 antibody at 1/1000 dilution for 2 h at room temperature. the membrane was washed and incubated with a 1/1000 dilution of an igg‐peroxidase conjugate for 2 h at room temperature. signal was detected by means of the renaissance western blot chemiluminescence reagent plus kit from nen life science (boston, ma, usa).
             
 
 
 
  results 
 
 
  light and electron microscopy 
 in the control germ group at the beginning of the culture ( fig. 1a ), presecretory ameloblasts were facing polarizing odontoblasts. after 10 d of culture, continuous layers of predentin and dentin were formed, whereas enamel was present only at the tips of the cusps ( fig. 1b ). as the dissected tooth germs were oval or round at that stage of development, it was impossible to standardize proper orientation of the germs during embedding. as a consequence, the angle formed between the longitudinal axis of the germ and the plane of sectioning displayed such variations that it invalidated any attempt to carry out reliable morphometric analysis on dentin and predentin width. therefore, we will focus on major changes that had occurred under the influence of the inhibitors.
          
 
 
 figure 1 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 embryonic tooth germs just after dissection (a), and after 10 d of culture (b). cultured in the presence of 1 µ m  marimastat 
            
              (c) or 1 µ m  ct 1166  (d) for 10 d, dentin formation was altered and no enamel was detectable. pam, presecretory ameloblasts; pod, polarizing odontoblasts; d, dentin; pd, predentin; p, pulp; e, enamel. original magnification × 144. 
 
 
 
 
 in the presence of marimastat, changes seemed to be dose‐dependent. whereas at 0.2 µ m  predentin layers seemed slightly widened, at 1 µ m  dentin mineralization was impaired to a great extent, as shown by light ( fig. 1c ) and electron microscopy. at 2 µ m  only predentin had been formed (not shown). no signs of enamel formation could be detected, and no mineral had been deposited in the newly formed dentin matrix (not shown).
          
 in the presence of ct 1166  we found similar differences to those seen with marimastat. however, here the effects on dentin and enamel were apparent at the lowest concentration (0.2 µ m ) of the inhibitor used. among the three concentrations, no major differences were noted. amelogenesis and dentinogenesis were both impaired. as with marimastat, no enamel was seen, and the dentin formed appeared non‐mineralized ( fig. 1d ). this was confirmed by electron microscopy ( fig. 2 ).
          
 
 
 figure 2 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 ultrastructural aspect of a tooth germ cultured for 10 d in the presence of 1 µm ct  1166 . stippled material (stars) is seen in the intercellular spaces located between secretory ameloblasts (a). no enamel is formed. the mantle dentin (d) located at the dentino‐enamel junction is not mineralized. original magnification × 27 000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  immunolabeling 
 after antiamelogenin labeling, in the control germs positive staining was seen at the surface of the forming enamel and in granules located in the apical portion of secretory ameloblasts ( fig. 3a ). in the presence of marimastat (2 µ m ) or ct 1166  intracellular labeling was enhanced, and both ameloblasts and odontoblasts were stained ( fig. 3b ).
          
 
 
 figure 3 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 immunostained sections of tooth germs cultured for 10 d in the absence (control; a) or in the presence (b) of 1 µ m  ct 1166 . in (b) immunostaining for amelogenin is enhanced by matrix metalloproteinase (mmp) inhibition both in secretory ameloblasts (a) and in odontoblasts (o). 
            
              (c) immunostaining with antibiglycan (bgn) of control section of a tooth germ cultured for 10 d. 
            
              (d) a tooth germ cultured for the same period of time in the presence of 1 µ m  ct 1166 ; the staining is limited to the predentin. 
            
              (e) the immunostaining of a control tooth germ stained with antidecorin (dcn). in the presence of 1 µ m  ct 1166 . (f) the immunostaining is seen in the predentin alone. 
 
 
 
 
 in germs not treated with mmp‐inhibitors, biglycan was seen to be present in all tissues of the tooth germs. however, staining was more intense in the predentin than in the dentin layers ( fig. 3c ). in the presence of marimastat, no major difference was detected, whereas with ct 1166 , the staining pattern was limited to the predentin with an increased intensity. the dentin formed in the presence of the inhibitor was totally unstained. with the exception of a few cells, the enamel organ and pulp appeared unstained ( fig. 3d ).
          
 in the control germs at a stage where enamel formation had just started,  xxxg612xxx  was seen intracellularly at the distal end of secretory ameloblasts. the predentin was positively stained, but to a lesser extend than for biglycan. the staining was slightly above background in the enamel organ and a few pulp cells were also stained. dentin had remained unstained ( fig. 3e ). in the tooth germs cultured in the presence of marimastat, staining was enhanced in the predentin and dentin compartments but not in the rest of the tooth germs (results not shown). in the presence of ct 1166 , as was the case also for biglycan, the staining was intense in the predentin, but the rest of the section was unstained ( fig. 3f ).
          
 
 
  western blot 
 as the immunostaining suggested amelogenin accumulation when the tooth germs were cultured in the presence of the inhibitors, western blots were carried out and stained with an anti‐mmp‐20. three bands were clearly identified, as expected, at 78 kda, 51 kda, and 46 kda in the control germs. these bands correspond to mmp‐20/timp2 complexes (unpubl. data), latent and activated forms of mmp‐20 (6). in tooth germs cultured in the presence of marimastat (2 µ m ) or ct 1166 , none of these bands were detectable, indicating that the inhibitors decreased the expression of the protease ( fig. 4 ).
          
 
 
 figure 4 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 western blot of control germs, stained with a anti‐mmp‐20 antibody. three bands are seen in the control, which are not detectable in the germs cultured in the presence of marimastat or ct 1166  (1 µ m  in both cases). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  discussion 
 as similar defects were induced in cultured tooth germs both with marimastat and ct 1166 , the present study indicates that mmps play a role in the early formation of dentin and enamel. our observations and the  k i  values of the inhibitors reported by k erkvliet et al . ( 13 ) would seem to suggest that it is at least mmp‐2, mmp‐3 and/or mmp‐9 which are involved in these events. however, care must be taken in interpreting our results, since it has been shown that prolonged culturing may result in expression of yet other mmps, such as mmp‐1, mmp‐8 and/or mmp‐13 ( 13 ). in addition, we provide here some data suggesting that  xxxg1429xxx  (mmp‐20) also may be involved in odontogenesis. in mmp‐20 knock‐out mice, an amelogenesis imperfecta phenotype was seen, but the dentin seemed apparently unaffected ( 18 ). the difference may be due to the multiple mmp inhibition by the inhibitors used.
          
 three concentrations of the inhibitors were arbitrarily chosen for this study: 0.2, 1 and 2 µ m , respectively. whereas a dose‐dependent effect was seen with marimastat, no dose dependency was detected with ct 1166 . however, in bone explants effects of ct 1166  were detected at concentrations as low as 10 n m  ( 19 ). we used concentrations of the inhibitor that were one fifth to one fiftieth of the limit where cytotoxic effects of dmso have been detected (v. everts, pers. comm.), and our electron microscopic evaluation did not reveal any cellular alterations.
          
 we have also immunostained sections with specific antibodies against mmp‐2 and mmp‐9, but no changes were detectable in the tooth germs treated with either inhibitor (results not shown). in contrast, on western blots and gelatin zymograms changes were observed both in the level of the latent and active forms of mmps and in the balance between the two gelatinases, mmp‐9 being higher expressed in the presence of the inhibitor (k. bourd, unpubl.data;  20 ,  21 ). therefore, it is clear that immunostaining for the two gelatinases is not appropriate to reveal subtle changes that may occur during culturing.
          
 inhibition of mmp‐3 may be crucial in inhibiting proteoglycan (pg) degradation and, consequently, in inducing accumulation of pgs acting as nucleation inhibitors ( 3 ). the role of pgs in nucleation and growth of hydroxyapatite is still a matter of debate. many  in vitro  and  in vivo  studies carried out on bone and cartilage have shown that degradation and/or removal of pgs is a prerequisite for hydroxyapatite formation ( 10 ,  11 ,  22 - 25 ). however, other data provide diverging views. when pgs are in solution they act as mineralization inhibitors; however, when immobilized on a surface, pgs induce mineral formation ( 26 ). in addition, there is no net loss of pgs during mineralization ( 27 ) and pgs may play a role as cation‐exchanging calcium reservoir ( 28 ,  29 ).
          
 it is also well documented that in dental tissues at least two distinct groups of pgs are present. a first group of pgs is associated with the predentin and secreted together with collagen. these pgs are likely to play a role in collagen fibril formation and in transport of collagen precursors towards the mineralization front. the pgs belonging to this group are characterized by a high turnover rate and probably act as mineralization inhibitor ( 30 ). the second group of pgs is secreted near the mineralization front within the dentin and is supposed to act as mineralization promoter ( 30 ,  31 ). from the results presented here, it seems that the group of predentin pgs that accumulated in the presence of mmp inhibitors are therefore under the control of mmps, whereas the group of pgs located in dentin and pulp may be degraded by enzymes other than mmps.
          
 in this context, it is of interest that a 25 kda metalloproteinase and two gelatinases have been identified in the predentin and mineralizing porcine dentin ( 32 ). there is also some evidence that matrix vesicles contain mmps that could perhaps degrade pgs prior to initial mineralization ( 33 ), and this may also be the case during the initial stages of dentinogenesis. the enhanced immunostaining for biglycan and  xxxg612xxx  in predentin reported here may perhaps be linked to mmp‐3 inhibition, since this mmp is specifically involved in pg degradation. as an alternative hypothesis, the lack of degradation of amelogenin and subsequent accumulation of amelogenin in dentin and pulp shown in the present report may be responsible for deficient dentin mineralization. in this context, there was high predictability that marimastat acts as an  xxxg1429xxx  (mmp‐20) inhibitor, and this was confirmed by western blotting. inhibition of mmp‐20 by ct 1166  is now also documented. consequently, the effects of mmp‐20 on dentin and enamel formation constitute an important information that has to be taken into account in future studies.
          
 the effects of mmp inhibitors may be indirect or direct. the lack of degradation of some extracellular matrix molecules seems to negatively influence dentin mineralization and enamel formation. using the same model of organotypic tooth germ culture, impaired dentin mineralization was observed by altering phosphorylation of dentin matrix proteins by a casein kinase inhibitor ( 14 ,  15 ). under those conditions, a dose‐dependent decrease in the formation of enamel was found, which was very similar to the one reported here with mmp inhibitors ( 16 ). altered amelogenesis may be the consequence of a direct inhibition of amelogenin phosphorylation on serine 16 ( 34 ), or may indirectly reflect the diffusion of enamel proteins throughout a porous, poorly mineralized dentin, which is unable to retain enamel proteins at the dentino‐enamel junction. the same series of events may apply to the results presented here after mmp inhibition. along this line of evidence, it has been reported that the synthetic mmp inhibitor  xxxd287xxx  markedly reduces the phosphorylation of proteins ( 35 ). whether or not this is also the case for marimastat and ct 1166  should be explored.
          
 in conclusion, the results presented in this study indicate that mmps are crucial in the formation/mineralization of murine dental hard tissues at the time of the onset dentin and enamel formation. our data would suggest that at least two gelatinases mmp‐2, mmp‐9, stromelysin‐1 (mmp‐3) and  xxxg1429xxx  (mmp‐20) are important in these processes. 
 
 
 acknowledgements –   this work results from a collaboration initiated during a meeting supported by cost action b8 odontogenesis.
