neurourology and urodynamics 23:258^264 (2004)

alteration of urothelial-mediated tone in the ischemic bladder:
role of eicosanoids
1

kazem m. azadzoi,1* vanessa k. heim,2 tufan tarcan,3 and mike b. siroky1
urology department, boston university school of medicine and va boston healthcare system, boston, massachusetts
2
boston university school of medicine, boston, massachusetts
3
marmara university school of medicine, istanbul, turkey
aims: previously we showed that ischemia alters bladder smooth muscle contractility in the rabbit.
this study investigates the role of urothelium and eicosanoid-release in ischemic bladder smooth
muscle instability. materials and methods: male new zealand white rabbits were divided into
treated (n ¼ 12) and age-matched control (n ¼ 10) groups. the treated group underwent balloon
endothelial injury of the iliac arteries, and then received 4 weeks of cholesterol diet, followed by
4 weeks of regular diet. the control group received a regular diet for 8 weeks. after 8 weeks, blood
£ow for both the iliac arteries and the bladder as well as bladder oxygen tension were recorded. in
one-half of each ischemic and control bladder, the urothelium was removed. bladder tissues were
processed for organ bath and enzyme-immunoassay (eia) of prostaglandins (pgs) and leukotrienes
(lts). results: a signi¢cant decrease in iliac arterial blood £ow, bladder wall blood £ow, and bladder oxygen tension was found in the treated group. bladder ischemia increased the frequency and
amplitude of baseline spontaneous smooth muscle contractility. ischemic tissues with urothelium
(uroþ) demonstrated signi¢cant increases in the contractile response to electrical ¢eld stimulation
(efs) and carbachol relative to control uroþ tissues. urothelial removal increased smooth muscle
contraction in the control tissues but had no signi¢cant e¡ect in the ischemic/hypoxic tissues. contraction of control tissues without urothelium (uro) was similar to contraction of ischemic uroþ
tissues. contractions of ischemic uroþ and control uro tissues were unchanged after treatment
with the cyclooxygenase (cox) inhibitor indomethacin, while they were signi¢cantly reduced by
the  xxxg147xxx  ( xxxg147xxx ) inhibitor  xxxd2748xxx . eia showed no change in pgs release from the
ischemic urothelium, but signi¢cant increase in pgf2-a and thromboxane a2 release from the
ischemic suburothelial tissue. ischemia increased the release of ltb 4, ltc4, and lte4 from both
urothelium and suburothelial tissue. conclusions: our studies suggest loss of urothelial-mediated
tone and lts-mediated smooth muscle instability in the chronically ischemic/hypoxic bladder.
neurourol. urodynam. 23:258 ^264, 2004. published 2004 wiley-liss, inc.y
key words: bladder ischemia; hypoxia; leukotrienes; prostaglandins; urothelium

introduction

clinical and basic studies have suggested that ischemia
may play a role in bladder dysfunction [pontari et al., 1999;
kershen et al., 2002]. atherosclerotic arterial occlusion as
well as arterial compression due to outlet obstruction have
been shown to cause signi¢cant bladder ischemia in the rabbit
[lin et al., 1995; azadzoi et al., 1999]. arterial atherosclerosis
produced long-term global bladder ischemia and bladder
overactivity, while outlet obstruction was found to cause
regional short-term ischemia. obstruction-associated functional changes closely correlated with the status of bladder
blood £ow [levin et al., 1983]. the authors reported that
obstruction-related ischemia lasted 2 weeks, and then bladder
blood £ow returned to normal, possibly due to local angiogenic reaction and collateral development. atherosclerosisinduced chronic ischemia altered bladder smooth muscle tone
and increased its contractile reactivity [azadzoi et al., 1999].
published 2004 wiley-liss, inc. ythisarticle isausgovernment work
and,as such, is in the public domain intheunited states of america.

urothelial regulation of bladder smooth muscle contractility has frequently been reported [ueda et al., 1985; bjorling
et al., 1994; krasnopolsky et al., 1995]. lts, the  xxxg147xxx 
( xxxg147xxx ) products and prostaglandins (pgs), and the cyclooxygenase (cox) products of  xxxd208xxx  have been shown to
play important roles [ueda et al., 1985; bjorling et al., 1994].
while cox-1 is expressed constitutively in many normal tissues, cox-2 has been shown to be expressed in both constitutive and inducible forms in the bladder [smith and dewitt,
grant sponsor: veterans a¡airs central o⁄ce; grant sponsor: nih; grant
number: nia/ag17165.
*correspondence to: kazem m. azadzoi, m.d., urology research (151),
bostonva medical center, 150 south huntington ave., boston, ma 02130.
e-mail: kazadzoi@bu.edu
received 4 september 2003; accepted 26 december 2003
published online inwiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
doi 10.1002/nau.20029

ischemia and bladder smooth muscle dysfunction

1995]. urothelium is known to be the main source of bladder
pgs [krasnopolsky et al., 1995]. lts and pgs were shown to
play important roles in bladder smooth muscle dysfunction
after ovalbumin sensitization [lee et al., 1995] and after outlet
obstruction [park et al., 1999]. in a recent study, we found that
ischemia increased the bladder cox-1, cox-2, and  xxxg147xxx  protein expression and altered the bladder urothelial structure
[azadzoi et al., 2003].
the goal of this study was to examine the roles of urothelium and the cox and  xxxg147xxx  products in ischemic bladder
smooth muscle instability.
materials and methods

new zealand white male rabbits (3 ^3.5 kg) were divided
into treatment and control groups. the treatment group
(n ¼ 12) underwent balloon endothelial injury of the iliac
arteries, received a cholesterol diet for 4 weeks and then a regular diet for 4 weeks, aimed at inducing arterial atherosclerotic occlusion and chronic bladder ischemia. the control group
(n ¼ 10) did not undergo balloon injury, received a regular
diet, and was used as age-matched control for the treated
group.
the animal model of bladder ischemia

the animal model of chronic bladder ischemia was developed as previously reported [azadzoi et al., 1999]. in brief,
the animals were anesthetized with intramuscular ketamine
(35 mg/kg) and xylazine (5 mg/kg) followed by intravenous
pentobarbital (25 mg/ml as needed). the anesthetized animals
received 100% oxygen throughout the procedure. bilateral
incisions were made on the medial aspect of the knee to
expose the femoral arteries. a fogarty catheter (3f) was
passed through femoral arteriotomies to the iliac arteries.
the catheter balloon was in£ated and withdrawn from iliac
arteries to the respective femoral arteries, a maneuver that
was repeated three-times on each side. subsequently, the animals received a 0.5% cholesterol diet for 4 weeks and then a
regular diet for 4 weeks. after 8 weeks, the treated and control
animals were anesthetized as described and the following
parameters were recorded.

259

surements were obtained at random bladder sites in each
animal. the average bladder blood £ow for each animal was
calculated as a mean from all measurements obtained.
bladder wall oxygen tension

oxygen tension (po2) was measured with a polarographic
oxygen sensing electrode contained in a 20 gauge needle.
the oxygen sensor was connected to a chemical microsensor
(diamond general, ann arbor, mi). the electrode was calibrated using saline at 37 c bubbled either with room air
(20.9% oxygen) or 100% nitrogen gas to produce zero oxygen
levels. the electrode was placed directly into the muscularis
layer of the bladder for continuous recording of bladder
wall po2.
after blood £ow and oxygen tension measurements, the
bladder was removed and processed for in vitro examination.
in one-half of each bladder, the urothelium was carefully
removed with a microscissor. the following studies were conducted using tissues with urothelium (uroþ), without urothelium (uro) and the removed urothelium.
isometric tension

uroþ and uro bladder tissue from treated and control
groups were submerged in 25 ml organ baths of krebs physiologic solution (nacl, 118.3 mm; kcl, 4.7 mm;  xxxd2534xxx ,
0.6 mm; kh2po4, 1.2 mm;  xxxg2125xxx  2, 2.5 mm; nahco3,
25 mm; cana2 edta, 0.026 mm; and glucose, 11.1 mm). the
ph of the solution was 7.4, and the temperature was maintained at 37 c. the bladder tissue was stretched incrementally
until the optimal resting isometric tension was achieved.
tissue tension was measured with grass ft03 force transducers. two parallel platinum electrodes positioned on either
side of the tissue and connected to a grass stimulator performed electrical ¢eld stimulation (efs, 10 v, 0.8 msec and
0.5 ^ 40 hz frequencies, 20 sec). baseline tension was recorded
while tissues were at rest. tissue reactivity to efs and carbachol was examined at baseline tension. after this half of the
tissues were treated with the cox inhibitor indomethacin
and the other half with the  xxxg147xxx  inhibitor  xxxd2748xxx . the e¡ect
of indomethacin and  xxxd2748xxx  on the contractile reactivity to
efs and carbachol was recorded.

iliac artery and bladder blood flow

a midline abdominal incision was made, and the right and
left iliac arteries were exposed. blood £ow through the right
and left iliac arteries was measured with perivascular £ow
sensors connected to an ultrasonic £owmeter (transonic
systems, inc., ithaca, ny). the £owmeter was calibrated
against an internal standard, which reads blood £ow in ml/min.
mean iliac artery blood £ow was calculated as the sum of the
right and left iliac blood £ow measurements divided by 2.
bladder blood £ow was measured with a laser doppler
probe placed directly into bladder wall and connected to a
laser doppler £owmeter (transonic systems, inc.). five mea-

enzyme-immunoassay (eia) of ecosanoids release

uroþ and uro tissues and isolated urothelium from the
ischemic and control bladders were equilibrated for 2 hr in
culture media ( xxxd1728xxx ) with 10 mm fatty-acid free albumin at
37 c. the media was exchanged with fresh media every 1/2 hr.
after the last 1/2 hr of incubation the media was collected
and centrifuged at 4 c, 1,500 rpm for 15 min. the supernatant
was used for measuring eicosanoids (pgs and lts) release.
the levels of eicosanoids in the media were assayed in triplicate with commercially available eia kits (cayman). microtiter assay plates were scanned with a computer-controlled

260

azadzoi et al.

microplate reader (spectra-max plus 384, ca). the quantity of
eicosanoids release was standardized as pg/100 mg wet weight
of tissue/30 min of incubation.
data recording and statistical analysis

in-vivo data was recorded on an eight-channel heat-writing
physiologic recorder (astromed, inc., west warwick, ri). permanent recording of isometric tension was obtained on an
eight-channel grass 7d polygraph (grass division, astromed, inc.). tissue tone is normalized for the wet weight of the
tissue then standardized for a ¢xed weight of 100 mg. data is
expressed as mean  standard error of the mean. statistically
signi¢cant di¡erences in treated groups compared with control groups were assessed by anova or unpaired student’s
t-test, where applicable. statistical signi¢cance was determined at the p < 0.05 level.
results

systemic arterial pressure in the treated group was similar to
the control group (table i). average iliac arterial blood £ow was
signi¢cantly less in the treated group than the control group
(table i). accordingly, bladder blood £ow was signi¢cantly
reduced in the treated group than the control group, suggesting
bladder ischemia in the treated group (table i). bladder wall oxygen tension (po2) was signi¢cantly lower in the treated group,
con¢rming reduced bladder arterial in£ow and hypoxia in the
treated group (table i). these po2 values were recorded while
the anesthetized animals were breathing 100% oxygen.
in the organ bath, signi¢cant di¡erences were noticed
between ischemic and control smooth muscle contractility
(fig. 1). at baseline tension, ischemic uroþ tissues demonstrated signi¢cant increases in the frequency and amplitude
of spontaneous contractions when compared with control
uroþ tissues (fig. 1). urothelial removal caused signi¢cant
increases in the frequency and amplitude of spontaneous contractions in the control tissues while having no signi¢cant
e¡ect on the ischemic tissues (fig. 1).
ischemic uroþ tissues showed signi¢cant increases in contractile responses to efs and carbachol in comparison with
control uroþ tissues (fig. 2). removal of the urothelium
increased the contractile reactivity of control tissues to carbachol and efs, but had no signi¢cant e¡ect in the ischemic tis-

sues (fig. 2). the contractile responses of control uro tissues
to carbachol and efs were similar to ischemic uroþ or uro
tissues (fig. 2).
tissue treatment with indomethacin increased the contractile responses of control uroþ tissues to the level of control
uro tissues (fig. 2). indomethacin treatment, however, had
no signi¢cant e¡ect on control uro and ischemic uroþ and
uro tissues (fig. 2). in contrast to indomethacin, tissue treatment with  xxxd2748xxx  diminished the contractile responses of
control uro and ischemic uroþ and uro tissues to the
level of control uroþ tissues (fig. 2).
eia revealed signi¢cantly greater pgs release from
ischemic tissues in comparison with control tissues (fig. 3).
in the control group, pgs release from removed urothelium
was equivalent to 70 ^ 75% of the total pgs release form uroþ
tissues (fig. 3). pgs release from the isolated control urothelium was approximately two-times greater than the pgs
release from control uro tissues, suggesting urothelium as
the main source of pgs in the control bladder. pgf2-a
and txa2 release from the ischemic uroþ and uro tissues
was signi¢cantly greater than control uroþ and uro tissues
(fig. 3). there was no signi¢cant di¡erence in pge2
release between the ischemic and control tissues. pgf2-a and
txa2 release from the ischemic urothelium was similar to the
control urothelium, suggesting that increased levels of pgs in
the ischemic bladder may originate from the suburothelial
layer.
lts release from control urothelium was equivalent to 20%
of the lts release from control uroþ tissues (fig. 3). lts
release from uro tissues was equivalent to 80% of total lts
release from control uroþ tissues. this may suggest the suburothelial layer as the main source of lts in the control bladder. ischemia caused dramatic increases in bladder ltb4,
ltc4, and lte4 release (fig. 3). lts release from ischemic
uroþ and uro tissues and ischemic urothelium was signi¢cantly greater than their release from counterpart control
tissues (fig. 3), suggesting increased lts production in both
ischemic urothelium and suburothelial layers.
discussion

our studies showed that ischemia altered basal bladder
smooth muscle tone causing a signi¢cant increase in the

table i. mean arterial pressure, mean iliac artery blood flow, bladder blood flow, and
bladder oxygen tension (po2) in the control (n ¼ 10) and treated (n ¼ 12) group

control bladder
ischemic bladder

mean arterial
pressure

mean iliac artery
blood £ow

bladder
blood £ow

bladder
po 2

102  5
96  7

41  3.7
19  2.6*

7.8  2.2
3.7  0.6*

44  4
28  6*

data is presented as mean  standard error of the mean. systemic arterial pressure is measured in mmhg. iliac
artery and bladder blood £ow is measured in ml/min and ml/min/100 g tissue, respectively. bladder wall po 2 is
measured in mmhg. po 2 levels were recorded while the anesthetized animals were breathing 100% oxygen.
*represents signi¢cant di¡erences in the ischemic group compared with the control group.

ischemia and bladder smooth muscle dysfunction

261

fig. 1. increased frequency and amplitude of baseline spontaneous smooth muscle contractions in the
control and ischemic uroþ and uro tissues. the left panel is copied from an original record. the right
panel shows statistically significant differences among the tissues. *, indicates significant differences in
comparison to control uroþ tissues. there was no significant difference between the control uro and
ischemic uroþ and uro tissues.

fig. 2. the upper panels show that urothelial removal increased the contractile reactivity of control tissues but did not produce a significant effect
on the ischemic tissues. the two lower panels show reaction differences between control and ischemic tissues after exposure to indomethacin
and  xxxd2748xxx . indomethacin increased contraction of control uroþ tissues but did not affect the control uro and ischemic uroþ and uro tissues.
 xxxd2748xxx  had no significant effect on control uroþ tissues but diminished contraction of control uro and ischemic uroþ and uro tissues.
*, indicates significant differences in the control uro and ischemic uroþ and uro tissues in comparison with control uroþ tissues.þ, indicates
significant difference after treatment in comparison to before treatment in a specific type of tissue.

262

azadzoi et al.

fig. 3. effect of ischemia on eicosanoids-release from uroþ and uro tissues and from removed
urothelium. *, indicates significant differences between ischemic and control tissues.

frequency and amplitude of spontaneous contractility.
ischemia increased the contractile response of bladder tissue
to pharmacological and electrical stimulation. ischemia appeared to impair urothelial regulation of bladder smooth muscle contractility. urothelial removal signi¢cantly increased
the contractile reactivity of control bladder tissues but did
not have a signi¢cant e¡ect on the ischemic tissues. after
urothelial removal, contraction of control tissues increased
to the level of ischemic tissues. these observations may suggest loss of urothelial-derived inhibitory factors in bladder
ischemia. our previous studies with the rabbit model have
shown that ischemic functional changes in the bladder were
associated with marked urothelial structural changes characterized by thickened urothelium, distorted mucosa and ¢brosis in the sub-urothelial layer [azadzoi et al., 1999].
atherosclerosis-induced bladder ischemia in our model
was associated with signi¢cant fall in bladder wall oxygen tension. our previous studies showed that bladder wall blood
£ow and po2 are greater at the base than the dome [azadzoi
et al., 1996; kozlowski et al., 2002]. we found that with ¢lling bladder dome blood £ow and po2 decreased to a greater
extent than base, reaching its nadir at the maximal capacity.
these ¢nding suggested that the bladder dome may be more
susceptible than the base to ischemia and hypoxia. a relationship between schemia/hypoxia-induced increase in penile
smooth muscle contraction and increase eicosanoids production has been documented [azadzoi et al., 1999]. the precise
role of reduced bladder wall po2 in bladder smooth muscle
contraction and its impact on eicosanoids production remains
unknown and may warrant further investigation.

to examine the role of urothelium in ischemic and control
bladder smooth muscle contractility, we removed the urothelium in one-half of each bladder and compared them with
their urothelium intact counterparts. in the control tissues,
urothelial removal altered basal spontaneous smooth muscle
contractility, which appeared similar to changes in the chronically ischemic tissues. indomethacin treatment increased
the contractile reactivity of uroþ control tissues while having
no signi¢cant e¡ect on the control uro tissues. in contrast,
 xxxd2748xxx  did not have a signi¢cant e¡ect on the reactivity of
control uroþ tissues but diminished contraction of control
uro tissues. one possibility is that inhibition of cox by
indomethacin might have shifted the  xxxd208xxx  substrate
towards the  xxxg147xxx  pathway for lts production. in contrary to
control tissues, indomethacin treatment had no signi¢cant
e¡ect on the ischemic tissues.  xxxd2748xxx , however, diminished
contraction of ischemic uro and uroþ tissues. this may
suggest a role of cox and  xxxg147xxx  products in ischemic bladder
smooth muscle instability and overreactivity.
eia of ischemic bladder tissues revealed marked changes in
both pgs and lts levels. signi¢cant increases in pgf2-a,
thromboxane and ltb4, ltc4, and lte4 release were evident.
in the control bladder, urothelium released signi¢cantly more
pgs than the suburothelial tissue while lts release from suburothelial tissue was signi¢cantly greater than the urothelium.
increased levels of pgs in the ischemic bladder appeared to
originate from the suburothelial tissue. ischemia appeared to
stimulate lts release to a much greater extent than the pgs
release. ischemia increased lts release from both the urothelium and the suburothelial layers.

ischemia and bladder smooth muscle dysfunction

the precise mechanism of structural, biochemical, and
functional changes in the ischemic bladder is unknown.
our studies suggest that ischemic insult to the urothelium
may be one of the earliest events that could trigger these
pathophysiological changes. it has been reported that urothelium is metabolically more active than the suburothelial
tissue, which may suggest greater sensitivity of urothelium
than the muscle to hypoxic/ischemic conditions [o’connor
et al., 1999]. studies of ischemic vascular smooth muscle may
provide some clues in support of this hypothesis [kwan et al.,
1990]. the authors reported that increased contraction of
ischemic coronary artery is mediated by endothelium via the
 xxxg147xxx  pathway. likewise, it was shown that hypoxic constriction of the sheep isolated intrapulmonary artery was, in part,
mediated by reduced release of endothelial-derived relaxatory
prostanoids [demiryurek et al., 1991].
urothelial regulation of bladder smooth muscle contractility may involve multiple biochemical and molecular mechanisms. among them, the cox and  xxxg147xxx  products appear to
play an important role. pgs and lts use the same substrate,
 xxxd208xxx , and, therefore, their substrate-dependent
physiological balance may be of great importance. pgs
and lts are di¡erentially synthesized in the urothelium and
smooth muscle, respectively.therefore, their natural balanced
levels may be of great importance in maintaining the physiologic urothelial^mesenchymal interactions [saban et al.,
1994]. it has been shown that the cox and  xxxg147xxx  products
are potent constrictors of the bladder smooth muscle where
lts appear more potent than pgs [ueda et al., 1985; bjorling
et al., 1994]. in certain cases, pgs and lts have shown opposing e¡ects under the same pathologic condition. for example,
pgs are shown to have cytoprotective properties whereas lts
lead to tissue in£ammation due to their chemotactic properties [saban et al., 1994].
disruption of pgs and lts natural balance may lead to signi¢cant structural and functional alterations in the bladder.
it has been shown in guinea pigs that bladder sensitization
with ovalbumin signi¢cantly increased leukotriene (lt) production [bjorling et al., 1994]. the authors found that lts contracted isolated guinea pig bladder tissues, and that they could
be inhibited by speci¢c lt receptor blockers [bjorling et al.,
1994]. their study suggested a role for endogenous lts in
non-infectious bladder in£ammation and bladder smooth
muscle instability. another study showed that in vivo administration of the ltreceptor antagonist ici 198,615 reversed the
urodynamic changes induced by ovalbumin challenge in
sensitized guinea pigs [lee et al., 1995]. the authors have
suggested that lts may play a primary role in sensitizationassociated decreased bladder capacity and increased intravesical pressure [lee et al., 1995]. our study also indicates that lts
release is signi¢cantly increased in the ischemic bladder. ischemia-induced overreactivity of bladder tissues diminished after
 xxxd2748xxx  treatment but not by indomethacin. in the control
bladder,  xxxd2748xxx  had no signi¢cant e¡ect whereas indomethacin increased the smooth muscle contraction. this suggests

263

that pgs may regulate smooth muscle contractility in the
healthy bladder. lts, however, appears to dominate bladder
tone in the ischemic bladder. this observation may raise questions about the possible side e¡ects of non-steroidal antiin£ammatory drugs on the urothelium. a recent study
showed that oral or intraperitoneal indomethacin caused histopathological changes similar to those seen in interstitial
cystitis in the rat, including leaky urothelium and mucosal
mastocystosis [cetinel et al., 2003]. the authors have suggested that chronic use of non-streoidal anti-in£ammatory
drugs may cause urothelial dysfunction.
other investigators have also reported di¡erential synthesis of cox and lox products from bladder layers. for
example, it has been shown that ovalbumin challenge induced
pg release that was signi¢cantly greater from the mucosa/submucosa than from the detrusor/serosa [saban et al., 1994].
in contrary, antigen challenge-induced release of lts was
predominantly from the detrusor/serosa [saban et al., 1994].
the authors suggested that the cytoprotective e¡ect of pge2
may be lost when the urothelium is damaged, where lt
released from suburothelial layer may contribute to symptoms of bladder in£ammation [saban et al., 1994]. incubation
of sensitized guinea pig bladder tissue with indomethacin was
shown to increase the force and duration of contraction, which
was thought to result from a shift of  xxxd208xxx  from the
cox pathway, towards the lo pathway [christensen et al.,
1990]. another study showed that urothelial removal had no
e¡ect on the ovalbumin-induced supersensitivity of bladder
tissues in guinea pigs [krasnopolsky et al., 1995]. the authors
concluded that tissue supersensitivity resulting from ovalbumin challenge may result from increased levels of lts originating from bladder smooth muscle [krasnopolsky et al., 1995].
conclusions

the di¡erence between ischemic and control tissues in
response to urothelial removal may suggest loss of urothelialmediated smooth muscle tone in the ischemic bladder. the
ischemic and control bladder tissues exhibited totally di¡erent
reactions to cox and  xxxg147xxx  inhibitors. chronic ischemia,
urothelial removal and indomethacin treatment produced
similar changes in bladder smooth muscle contraction. this
suggests alteration of bladder  xxxd208xxx  products in favor
of lts synthesis in all three instances. increased levels of lts
appear to play a leading role in smooth muscle overreactivity
in the ischemic bladder. reversal of ischemia-induced smooth
muscle overreactivity by  xxxd2748xxx  may suggest a role of speci¢c
ltreceptor antagonists in the treatment of overactive bladder.
references
azadzoi km, pontari m, vlachiotis j, et al. 1996. canine bladder blood £ow
and oxygenation: changes induced by ¢lling, contraction and outlet
obstruction. j urology 155:1459 ^ 465.
azadzoi km, tarcan t, kozlowski r, et al. 1999. overactivity and structural
changes in the chronically ischemic bladder. j urol 162:1768 ^ 778.

264

azadzoi et al.

azadzoi km, tarcan t, siroky mb, et al. 1999. atherosclerosis-induced
chronic ischemia causes bladder ¢brosis and non-compliance in the rabbit. j urol 161:1626 ^ 635.
azadzoi km, krane rj, saenz detejada i, et al. 1999. relative roles of eicosanoids and  xxxd2738xxx  synthase pathways in ischemia-induced increased
contraction of cavernosal smooth muscle. j urology 161:1324 ^328.
azadzoi km, shindev,tarcant, et al. 2003. increased leukotrienes and prostaglandins production and overactivity in the chronically ischemic bladder. j urol 169(5):1885 ^ 891.
bjorling de, saban mr, bruskewitz rc, et al. 1994. response of the isolated
guinea pig bladder to exogenous and endogenous leukotrienes. j urol
152(4):1281^ 286.
cetinel s, cetinel b, ercan f, et al. 2003. indomethacin-induced morphologic
changes in the rat urinary bladder epithelium. urol 61(1):236 ^ 42.
christensen mm, keith i, rhodes pr, et al. 1990. a guinea pig model for
study of bladder mast cell function: histamine release and smooth muscle
contraction. j urol 144(5):1293 ^300.
demiryurek at, wadsworth rm, kane ka. 1991. pharmacological evidence
for the role of mediators in hypoxia-induced vasoconstriction in sheep isolated intrapulmonary artery rings. eur j pharmacol 203(1):1^ 8.
kershen r, azadzoi km, siroky mb. 2002. blood £ow, pressure and compliance in the human bladder. j urol 168:121.
kozlowski r, siroky mb, krane rj, et al. 2002. regulation of blood £ow
and mircrocirculation resistance in rabbit bladder. j urology 168(4):
1608 ^ 614.
krasnopolsky l, levin rm, longhurst pa. 1995. the role of the mucosa in
the in vitro changes in guinea pig bladder function which occur after sensitization with ovalbumin. pharmacology 50(2):119 ^ 27.

kwan yw, wadsworth rm, kane ka. 1990. modi¢cation of the ischemiainduced contraction in the sheep circum£ex coronary artery by various
pharmacological antagonists. br j pharmacol 100(3):407^12.
lee jg, levin rm, krasnopolsky l, et al. 1995. e¡ects of the peptide leukotriene receptor antagonist ici 198,615 on the in vivo and in vitro changes in
guinea pig bladder function after sensitization with ovalbumin. j urol
154:1217.
levin rm, brendler k, van arsdalen kn, et al. 1983. functional response of
the rabbit bladder to ischemia and anoxia. neurourol urodyn 2:233.
lin at, chen mt, yang ch, et al. 1995. blood £ow of the urinary bladder:
e¡ect of outlet obstruction and correlation with bioenergetic metabolism.
neurourol urodyn 14:285 ^ 92.
o’connor lj, nicholas t, levin rm. 1999. subcellular distribution of free
 xxxd2154xxx , phospholipids, and endogenous lipase activity of rabbit urinary bladder smooth muscle and mucosa. adv exp med biol 462:265 ^ 73.
park jm,yangt, arend lj, et al. 1999. obstruction stimulates cox-2 expression in bladder smooth muscle cells via increased mechanical stretch. am
j physiol 276:129.
pontari ma, hanno pm, ruggieri mr. 1999. comparison of bladder blood
£ow in patients with and without interstitial cystitis. j urol 162(2):330.
saban r, undem bj, keith im, et al. 1994. di¡erential release of prostaglandins and leukotrienes by sensitized guinea pig urinary bladder layers upon
antigen challenge. j urol 152(2 pt. 1):544 ^ 49.
smith w, dewitt d. 1995. biochemistry of prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthase-1 and synthase-2 and their di¡erential susceptibility to nonsteriodal anti-in£ammatory drugs. semin nephrol 15:179.
ueda s, yoshida m, yano s, et al. 1985. comparison of the e¡ects of primary
prostaglandins on isolated human urinary bladder. j urol 133(1):114 ^16.

