cmls, cell. mol. life sci. 61 (2004) 1025– 1041
1420-682x/04/091025-17
doi 10.1007/s00018-004-4037-8
© birkhäuser verlag, basel, 2004

cmls

cellular and molecular life sciences

review
role of n-linked polymannose oligosaccharides in targeting
glycoproteins for endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation
r. g. spiro
departments of biological chemistry and medicine, harvard medical school and the joslin diabetes center, boston,
massachusetts 02215 (usa), fax: +1 617 732 2569, e-mail: robert.spiro@joslin.harvard.edu
received 26 january 2004; accepted 25 february 2004

abstract. misfolded or incompletely assembled multisubunit glycoproteins undergo endoplasmic reticulumassociated degradation (erad) regulated in large measure by their n-linked polymannose oligosaccharides. in
this quality control system lectin interaction with
glc3man9glcnac2 glycans after trimming with endoplasmic reticulum (er) a-glucosidases and a-mannosidases
sorts out persistently unfolded glycoproteins for n-deglycosylation and proteolytic degradation. monoglucosylated (glc1man9glcnac2) glycoproteins take part in the  xxxg334xxx / xxxg323xxx  glucosylation-deglucosylation cycle,
while the man8glcnac2  xxxd1725xxx  product of er mannosidase i interacts with edem. proteasomal degradation
requires retrotranslocation into the cytosol through a
sec61 channel and deglycosylation by peptide:n-glycosidase (pngase); in alternate models both pngase and proteasomes may be either free in the cytosol or er membrane-imbedded/attached. numerous proteins appear to
undergo nonproteasomal degradation in which deglycosy-

lation and proteolysis take place in the er lumen. the released free oligosaccharides (os) are transported to the
cytosol as os-glcnac2 along with similar components
produced by the hydrolytic action of the oligosaccharyltransferase, where they together with os from the proteasomal pathway are trimmed to man5glcnac1 by the action of cytosolic endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase and amannosidase before entering the lysosomes. some
misfolded glycoproteins can recycle between the er, intermediate and golgi compartments, where they are further processed before erad. moreover, properly folded
glycoproteins with mannose-trimmed glycans can be
deglucosylated in the golgi by endomannosidase, thereby
releasing  xxxg323xxx  and permitting formation of complex os. a number of regulatory controls have been described, including the glucosidase-glucosyltransferase
shuttle, which controls the level of glc3man9glcnac2-pp-dol, and the unfolded protein response, which enhances
synthesis of components of the quality control system.

key words. protein quality control; free polymannose oligosaccharides; n-glycanase; endomannosidase; protein
folding; er mannosidases; lectin chaperones; protein retrotranslocation.

introduction
it has become evident in recent years that the highly sophisticated processing that n-linked oligosaccharides of
proteins undergo shortly after their cotranslational attachment as glc3man9glcnac2 units is intimately involved in the molecular inspection known as quality con-

 xxxd3105xxx  [1–5]. this latter process selects misfolded or incompletely assembled multisubunit proteins for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (erad) and is
believed to be a characteristic of all eukaryotic cells
[6–10]. the early retention and subsequent destruction of
abnormal proteins is a major protective mechanism of
cells, as it prevents the passage of defective molecules

1026

r. g. spiro

through the secretory channels or their insertion into
membranes. enhanced proteolytic degradation has moreover been found to serve in the regulation of metabolic
pathways which are prone to wide physiological fluctuations [11–13] as well as in a number of pathological
states [14], including cystic fibrosis [15], a1-antitrypsin
deficiency [16] and congenital goiter [17], in which mutated proteins are produced; furthermore certain viruses
evade cellular immune defenses by promoting degradation of host components [18].
studies from a number of investigators have indicated that
the processing intermediates of n-linked oligosaccharides
produced by the a-glucosidases and a-mannosidases of
the endoplasmic reticulum (er) and pre- or cis-golgi
compartments [1–5, 19–22] provide specific retention or
recycling signals. thus, for the first time a biological rationale has been given to the now well delineated processing that the newly attached glucosylated polymannose
oligosaccharides undergo on their way to becoming mature n-linked units, which is a strikingly different approach from the simple sequential step-by-step sugar attachment which prevails in the biosynthesis of o-linked
oligosaccharides [23]. in particular it is now evident that
the glucosyl cap of the newly formed branched polymannose glycan is essential not only for the initial n-glycosylation but also for quality control [3].
since the first report that quality control of proteins is
brought about by proteolysis in the er [6], it has become
clear that in many well-defined cases this is accomplished by the ubiquitin-proteasome system after retrotranslocation of the protein destined for degradation
through a sec61 channel to the cytosolic side of the er
membrane [8–10, 24–26]; however, an increasing number of instances have also been reported in which erad
occurs without involving the proteasomes [12, 27–33.].
at some stage of erad, deglycosylation through the action of a peptide:n-glycanase (pngase) occurs with the
release of free oligosaccharides terminating at their reducing end in a di-n-acetylchitobiose moiety (os-glcnac2) [34, 35]. proteins subject to proteasome action are
believed to undergo oligosaccharide excision prior to
peptide degradation [36, 37]. indeed, the release of substantial amounts of such glucosylated and unglucosylated
polymannose oligosaccharides was observed in vivo and
in cell-free systems before the concept of erad was formulated [34]. subsequent studies indicated that these
oligosaccharides, which are released shortly after cotranslational n-glycosylation, are in fact to a large extent
the anticipated by-products of erad [35], and their disposal, constituting a major metabolic route of the cytosol,
has been described [35, 38].
while the subject of protein quality control presents a
very large field of active research, it is the purpose of this
review to focus on the continually expanding role which
the n-linked oligosaccharides play in erad, with partic-

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

ular emphasis on how they serve to target aberrant proteins for retention and degradation through their interaction with lectin-like proteins. the subcellular sites of
oligosaccharide release will be evaluated and put in context with other aspects of the erad machinery. the major disposal challenge which the release of oligosaccharides imposes on the metabolic machinery of the cell will
be delineated, and the role of the unfolded protein response (upr) on genes encoding glycan-binding and
processing proteins involved in the quality control system
will be indicated.

n-glycosylation of proteins and early processing
steps of asn-linked oligosaccharides
an understanding of the modifications which the
glc3man9glcnac2 glycans undergo shortly after their cotranslational attachment by the oligosaccharyltransferase
[39, 40] to asparagine residues in the asn-x-ser(thr)
consensus sequence on polypeptide chains [23] is important in evaluating the role which these n-linked intermediates play in erad (fig. 1). the pertinent glycosidases
which initiate the processing of the triglucosyl polymannose oligosaccharides have now been studied in some detail and are believed to be situated in the er and the pregolgi intermediate compartments (ic); since it has been
reported that er-golgi cycling can take place before
erad, the actions of golgi trimming enzymes may also
be relevant. various glycosidase inhibitors have been effectively employed in exploring the involvement of processing intermediates in the erad system (fig. 1).
glucosidase i, an integral membrane enzyme with a luminally oriented catalytic domain, rapidly acts to specifically remove the terminal a1-2-linked residue of the
triglucosyl sequence, which in almost all eukaryotes is
essential for the effective action of the oligosaccharyltransferase. the release of the remaining glucose components is effected by glucosidase ii, which in cleaving
the glc remove1-3glc and glc remove1-3man linkages
shows a dual specificity that has been attributed to two
distinct active sites [21]. this glycosidase is a soluble luminal enzyme which is primarily located in the er. glucosidase ii acts optimally on oligosaccharides with intact
mannose branches but manifests substantially reduced
activity on substrates with trimmed mannose branches
[41]. both glucosidases can be effectively inhibited by
castanospermine (cst) so that in the presence of this
agent the triglucosyl cap remains intact even if trimming
of the unglucosylated b and c branches has occurred.
glucose removal can also be achieved by endomannosidase, a processing enzyme that uniquely brings about an
internal cleavage between the glucose-substituted mannose and the remainder of branch a [42, 43] (fig. 1).
while this enzyme acts optimally on monoglucosylated

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 61, 2004

1027

figure 1. diagrammatic representation of the early processing of the triglucosylated polymannose oligosaccharides subsequent to their nglycosidic attachment to asparagine residues of proteins. the action of glucosidases (glcase), mannosidases (er manase) and endomannosidase (enman) are shown leading to the formation of glc1man9glcnac2 (g1m9), man9glcnac2 (m9) and the three distinct isomers of
man8glcnac2 (m8a, m8b and m8c). inhibitors that block these enzymatic steps are shown in parentheses. the three branches of the oligosaccharide are designated by the letters a, b and c, and, accordingly, the man8glcnac2 isomers resulting from the removal of the terminal
mannose residue from these chains are identified by the appropriate subscript.

oligosaccharides, with the release of glc remove1-3man
it can also act on the di- and triglucosylated polymannose species with the release of di- and triglucosylated
mannose, respectively [43]. in pronounced contrast to
glucosidase ii, the endomannosidase acts most favorably
on oligosaccharides with truncated mannose chains
down to glc1man5glcnac [43] (table 1). although the
endomannosidase has been found to be predominantly a
golgi enzyme [42], immunoelectron microscopic examination has localized this endoglycosidase to the ic in
addition to the cis/medial golgi cisternae [44]. in the
pre-golgi site it appears to be spatially situated apart
from glucosidase ii. in contrast to the wide phylogenetic
distribution of the glucosidases in eukaryotic cells, the
endomannosidase is primarily found among members of
the phylum chordata [45]. endomannosidase offers a
route of deglucosylation alternative to glucosidases i and
ii [46], which insures that the biologically important

complex oligosaccharides of higher organisms can be
formed. this enzyme is not inhibited by cst or mannosidase inhibitors [43], although glca1-3-deoxymannojirimycin (gdmj) and related glca1-3 derivatives
block its activity [47].
mannosidase trimming in mammalian cells is initiated in
the er by two distinct enzymes, er a1-2 mannosidases
i and ii [48, 49]. the primary action of the former enzyme is to remove the terminal sugar of the middle
branch to generate the man8glcnac2  xxxd1725xxx , while
mannosidase ii, which is related to the cytosolic enzyme,
preferentially releases the terminal mannose of the a1-6linked branch to yield man8glcnac2 isomer c (fig. 1).
although both enzymes can in vitro trim other mannose
residues to yield more extensively processed products,
their major action in vivo appears to be limited to the removal of a single specific residue. the two enzymes have
many distinguishing properties [49], but most relevant is

table 1 specificities of several components of the quality control system toward n-linked oligosaccharides*.
oligosaccharide

glc1man9glcnac
glc1man8glcnac
glc1man7glcnac
glc1man5glcnac

relative activity
glucosidase ii

glucosyltransferase

endomannosidase

 xxxg323xxx 

100
21
9
3

100
50
15
–

100
120
150
220

100
81
64
62

*data are taken from studies on rat liver, as indicated in the text.

1028

r. g. spiro

the fact that er mannosidase ii is resistant to  xxxd2424xxx  (kif) inhibition; both enzymes are, however, inhibited by 1-deoxymannojirimycin (dmj) (fig. 1). a third
a1-2 mannosidase that may be involved in early processing is man9 mannosidase, which can trim man9 to
man6 and eventually man5 [50]. this enzyme appears to
be present in the er and golgi, perhaps due to cycling
between these compartments; its activity is inhibited by
both kif and dmj. at least two a-mannosidases situated
in the golgi apparatus have the potential to cleave all
four a1-2-linked mannose residues to yield man5glcnac2, and they are inhibited by dmj as well as kif [19].
subsequently, attachment of a glcnac residue to the a
branch makes possible the cleavage of the a1-3 and a1-6
mannose residues by golgi mannosidase ii to yield a
core unit with three mannose residues [19]. the action of
this latter mannosidase does not appear to be pertinent to
erad.
in contrast to mammalian cells, yeast have only one er
a-mannosidase. this enzyme is similar to the er mannosidase i of higher eukaryotes and acts specifically to
remove one mannose residue from the b chain [51]; further trimming of the n-linked polymannose glycans does
not occur in yeast before the mature carbohydrate unit is
built up by multiple additions of single mannose residues.

interaction of glucosylated polymannose processing
intermediates with lectin chaperones
the first suggestion that the glucose residues on the
nascent n-linked glycans play a role in the quality control
system came from experiments which indicated that
blockage of glucose excision by inhibitors so as to retain
the triglucosyl cap intact resulted in an accelerated degradation of glycoproteins [52–54]. these observations
were clarified by the finding that the chaperones  xxxg334xxx 
and  xxxg323xxx  acting as lectins specifically bind nlinked monoglucosylated oligosaccharides in a large array of glycoproteins [55]. binding studies with  xxxg334xxx 
[56] as well as  xxxg323xxx  [57] indicated that this interaction did not occur with di- and triglucosylated polymannose oligosaccharides, and it was further shown that
even after extensive trimming of the 6¢-pentamannosyl
portion (branches b and c), the chaperone binding activity was retained [57] (table 1). however, excision of the
a1-6 mannose residue from glc1man5glcnac2 resulted a
complete loss of reactivity [57]. the two chaperones have
been observed in a variety of eukaryotic cells, although in
saccharomyces cerevisiae a gene that expresses a homologue of these two proteins is believed to be present [58].
while  xxxg334xxx  is located exclusively as an integral er
membrane protein,  xxxg323xxx  is a soluble chaperone
[55], which in addition to the er has also been observed
in the ic and the golgi apparatus [44, 57]. the two lectins

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

appear to interact in vivo with a different set of glycoproteins [55]. this may be attributed to the possibility that
oligosaccharides located in the proximity of the er membrane would more readily bind to the membrane-bound
 xxxg334xxx , while more distant luminally oriented glycans
would preferentially bind to the soluble  xxxg323xxx .
while the importance of the er in promoting the folding and oligomerization of newly synthesized proteins
through the action of a number of chaperones and the establishment of an oxidizing environment had been well
established [59], it became apparent from the unique
affinity of  xxxg334xxx  and  xxxg323xxx  for monoglucosylated oligosaccharides [55 – 57] and the discovery of the
 xxxd3474xxx :glycoprotein glucosyltransferase [60] that nlinked glycans can play a major role in those events
which underlie the quality control of proteins. since the
glucosyltransferase can reglucosylate man9glcnac2 glycans only when linked to misfolded proteins, it provides
the key component of a sensing apparatus that has the capacity to retain aberrant molecules and ultimately direct
them to degradation. a cyclic model has been formulated [1] in which this enzyme acts in concert with glucosidase ii and  xxxg323xxx / xxxg334xxx  (fig. 2). the terminal mannose of the a branch of man9glcnac2 oligosaccharides on the incompletely folded protein is
sequentially glucosylated and deglucosylated, permitting it alternatively to bind to and dissociate from the
lectin chaperones until the proper conformation has been
obtained. it is only when that stage has been reached that
reglucosylation will no longer occur that the now native
protein can proceed in its migration into the secretory
channels and thereby escape a degradative fate. because
it is known that the glycoprotein glucosyltransferase
[61], like glucosidase ii, acts poorly on trimmed
monoglucosylated n-linked glycans (table 1), the cyclic
model would not be effective if excision of mannose
residues from branches b and/or c through the action of
the er mannosidases i and ii had occurred. indeed, in
view of recent evidence, to be discussed below, that cycling between er and golgi takes place as part of the
quality control of certain proteins, the action of mannosidases in the latter compartment or the ic may also
trim the monoglucosylated glycans. to circumvent this
difficulty, it has been hypothesized [3, 57] that processed
monoglucosyl-containing glycoproteins still attached to
the soluble  xxxg323xxx , which can effectively bind
oligosaccharides down to glc1man5glcnac2 [57], would
be dissociated in post-er locations by endomannosidase, which like  xxxg323xxx  interacts well with such
trimmed glycans (table 1). the finding that endomannosidase and  xxxg323xxx  both occur in the golgi in similar amounts [57, 62] and have been colocalized in the ic
[44] is consistent with such a proposal.
while the absence of the glycoprotein glucosyltransferase in s. cerevisiae [63, 64] would suggest that the

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 61, 2004

review article

1029

figure 2. schematic representation of the role of n-linked oligosaccharides in regulating protein folding or degradation during quality control. the monoglucosylated (g1m9gn2) glycan linked to an unfolded protein (upr) interacts with  xxxg334xxx  (cnx) or  xxxg323xxx  (crt),
and this complex participates in a cycle involving glucose attachment and release catalyzed by glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (gp-glctr)
and glucosidase ii (glcase ii), which promotes formation of a folded protein (fpr) containing an m9gn2 oligosaccharide. this glycoprotein then undergoes trimming by er, ic and golgi mannosidases (manases) and ultimately is converted to a protein containing the mature
complex oligosaccharides (complex os-fpr) by golgi enzymes. if the g1m9gn2 glycan still attached to luminal crt is trimmed by er
mannosidases to truncated monoglucosylated glycans which are resistant to glucosidase ii action, an alternate deglucosylation is brought
about by golgi endomannosidase (enmanase) which then permits formation of complex carbohydrate units. if folding of the glycoprotein
does not occur or is extended over a long time period, a terminal mannose can be released through the action of er mannosidase i (manase i) or mannosidase ii (manase ii), leading to formation of m8bgn2 or m8cgn2, respectively. the former (m8bgn2-upr) then interacts
with the edem lectin followed by pngase (png)-catalyzed deglycosylation and proteolysis in proteasomes, while the latter (m8cgn2upr) undergoes nonproteasomal proteolysis. it is believed that the membrane-associated cnx attached to the unfolded protein can interact with edem, as indicated by the dashed arrow. recycling of unfolded glycoproteins between the er and post-er compartments can
lead to degradation of proteins with extensively trimmed glycans, as indicated by the dashed arrows. abbreviations for the monosaccharides are glc (g), man (m) and glcnac (gn).

deglucosylation-glucosylation cycle may not exist in this
organism, it has been reported that the glucosidase ii in
this yeast strain may take on a chaperone function by itself and discriminate between folded and unfolded proteins [64].

involvement of a man8glcnac2-specific lectin in er
quality control of glycoproteins
evidence that trimming of mannose residues is involved
in facilitating erad was first obtained by the observation that degradation of yeast prepro-a-factor expressed
in mammalian cells treated with the mannosidase inhibitor dmj was markedly inhibited, while in contrast, as
already indicated, inhibition of er glucosidases considerably enhanced its destruction [65]. subsequently mannosidase inhibitors have been found to arrest glycoprotein degradation in a number of mammalian cells and
yeast [30, 66–70]. the studies employing inhibition by
kif in mammalian cells, which contain two distinct er
mannose-trimming enzymes, provided more precise information than those which used exclusively dmj, as the
former agent is known to block the action of er man-

nosidase i but not er mannosidase ii [48, 49]. elegant
studies carried out with the misfolded mutants of human
a1-antitrypsin and yeast carboxypeptidase y (cpy*) in
the laboratories of sifers [4] and aebi [71], respectively,
implicated the man8glcnac2  xxxd1725xxx , which in mammalian cells is formed by er mannosidase i action, as the
signal that is involved in this mannosidase-promoted
degradation (fig. 2). recent studies in mammalian cells
have shown that erad is enhanced by overexpression of
this enzyme [69]. in an attempt to place these findings
into a conceptual framework of erad control, it has
been proposed that the action of the er mannosidase i
acts as a ‘timer’ of er glycoprotein residence [4]; in this
model the slow in vivo action of the er mannosidase i
would select proteins which spend an inordinate amount
of time in the er, presumably due to incomplete folding.
the above-mentioned studies led to the postulation of a
man8glcnac2  xxxd1725xxx -specific lectin that could in turn
transmit the message to the remainder of the erad apparatus (fig. 2). indeed, a recent study identified in the
mouse [72] and s. cerevisiae [73, 74] such a protein that
is a mannosidase i homologue but does not have glycosidase activity. overexpression of this receptor, which has
been called edem and mnl1/htm1 in mouse and yeast,

1030

r. g. spiro

respectively, has been shown to accelerate the degradation of misfolded proteins [75, 76], while the absence of
the receptor in yeast was found to stabilize such proteins
[73]. in contrast to the monoglucosyl polymannose-specific chaperones, the lectin directed toward the man8b
oligosaccharide has not yet been found to have the ability
to recognize misfolded proteins and thereby distinguish
them from molecules with a native configuration that
also contain such n-linked glycans. however, it has been
reported that edem reacts with the transmembrane
region of  xxxg334xxx , and it has been postulated that the
mannose-specific lectin accepts substrates from this
monoglucosyl polymannose-specific lectin [75, 76]
(fig. 2); overexpression of edem resulted in an enhanced
release of misfolded proteins from the  xxxg334xxx  cycle
with subsequent degradation [75, 76]. binding of edem
to  xxxg323xxx  was not observed, and this has been attributed to the fact that this chaperone, contrary to  xxxg334xxx ,
does not contain a transmembrane region [75]. if there
is a transfer of misfolded glycoproteins from  xxxg334xxx 
to edem, one might anticipate that the latter lectin would
bind glc1man8glcnac2; even though this has not been
directly tested, it is known that er mannosidase i can
act on glc1man9glcnac2 in mammalian cells [48] and
yeast [71], and it has been reported that proteins from
the last-mentioned cells containing the monoglucosylated product (glc1man8glcnac2) undergo quite rapid
degradation, in marked contrast to those which have
the n-linked diglucosylated isomer [71]. at this juncture
it is not known whether the cycle involving  xxxg334xxx  acts
in tandem with edem/mnl1(htm1) in designating proteins for erad or whether they represent alternate
routes. in favor of the latter concept may be the finding
that s. cerevisiae, while possessing a man8b detection
system [73, 74], lacks the glycoprotein glucosyltransferase [63, 64]. studies with a mutant thyroglobulin may
also be relevant to the state of glucosylation, as it was
shown that the extent of degradation of this protein in the
presence of kif was not affected by the further addition
of cst [67].

involvement of the golgi apparatus and other
post-er compartments in quality control
before discussing the n-deglycosylation and proteolysis
which are the ultimate events of the quality control system, the results of a number of recent studies will be presented which suggest that movement of misfolded and
unassembled proteins between the er and the golgi as
well as ic compartments takes place prior to erad
[77–83]. the kdel sequence has been shown to mediate the retrieval mechanism operative in erad [84], and
the mannose-specific ergic-53 lectin [85] has been implicated in the transport of glycoproteins to the ic.

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

if recycling of glycoproteins into post-er compartments
does take place, it would have the potential of exposing the
n-glycans of misfolded proteins to an array of glycosidases which can carry out processing reactions well beyond those which can occur in the er (fig. 2). recent reports have shown that proteins destined for degradation
can be trimmed down to man5-7glcnac2-n-linked glycans
[69, 70, 86], and moreover it was observed that in a misfolded ribophorin i variant, man5glcnac2 glycans can be
converted to man3-4glcnac2 prior to proteasomal degradation [87]. studies from the laboratory of lederkremer
have identified a ‘quality control’ compartment, distinct
from the ic and golgi, which functions as a gateway to
proteasomal degradation [88]. in any case it is evident that
misfolded proteins trafficking through golgi and early
post-er compartments could be cleaved by golgi mannosidases ia and ib as well as by the m9 mannosidase with
its broad specificity [19, 50, 89] (fig. 2). the movement of
the misfolded glycoproteins into the ic and golgi compartments would delegate their deglucosylation and dissociation from  xxxg323xxx  to the action of endomannosidase
[3] for the reasons already discussed (fig. 2). examination
of the ts045 g protein of vesicular stomatitis virus at nonpermissive temperature, at which it has been shown to recycle between the er and cis-golgi compartments [77],
indicated that it can be deglucosylated by endomannosidase although remaining endo h sensitive [32]. since endomannosidase cleaves the linkage between the glucosylated mannose residue and the remainder of branch a (fig.
1), reglucosylation cannot take place. in any event, even
though  xxxg323xxx  binds monoglucosylated mannosetrimmed glycans effectively [57], the udp-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase [61] and glucosidase ii [41]
do not act well on these truncated polymannose oligosaccharides (table 1). identification of extensively trimmed
oligosaccharides on erad-destined proteins has been
limited to mammalian systems, as in yeast only the terminal mannose of the b-chain is excised before the mature
n-linked polymannose glycans are formed [51]. although
erad involving signalling by oligosaccharides has been
investigated for a large array of glycoproteins, including
the mutants of a1-antitrypsin, yeast carboxypeptidase y,
and thyroglobulin, as well as yeast prepro-a-factor and
unassembled immunoglobulin subunits and major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i heavy chains, as indicated in the review of cabral et al. [4], the quality control of nonglycosylated proteins must be mediated by nonlectin chaperones through protein-protein interactions.
indeed, it has been postulated that even in the case of glycoproteins, the lectin binding may be followed by
polypeptide interactions [90].
it is apparent from the information presented so far that
n-linked polymannose oligosaccharides play a major role
in directing the quality control system, and accordingly
there are a large number of proteins in the form of en-

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 61, 2004

zymes and lectins, distributed among several subcellular
compartments, which interact directly with these glycans,
as summarized in table 2. the former are involved in the
transfer, trimming, release and disposal of these carbohydrate units, while the latter play a role in targeting proteins destined for degradation. moreover, several glycosidase inhibitors are currently available which have proved
to facilitate the exploration of the oligosaccharide interconversions (table 2).

proteolytic degradation in quality control
clearly, the ultimate step in quality control is the proteolysis of the misfolded or unassembled peptide chain which
has been recognized by a glycan signal as indicated
above. through the extensive work of a number of investigators with in vitro and in vivo systems it has been
shown that the ubiquitin-proteasome system is responsible for the degradation of an assortment of biologically
important proteins [8–10, 24–26]. from these studies a
model has been formulated, to a large extent through the
work of the ploegh laboratory on mhc class i molecules
in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells [24, 91], in
which the proteins destined for degradation are retrotranslocated via the channel provided by the sec61 complex. while the pore size of the translocon has been reported to be 40–60 å [92], which would be large enough
to accommodate the n-linked glycans of glycoproteins, a
recent study found the channel opening to be only 5–8 å
[93], which would preclude the passage of an n-glycosylated protein and would suggest that deglycosylation
takes place at the luminal face of the er membrane.

1031

however, no pore measurements have been made on the
channel involved in retrotranslocation, which may not be
identical to the translocon, as discussed in a subsequent
section. in any case, n-deglycosylation would have to
take place prior to entry of the protein into the lumen of
the 20s proteasomes, which is unlikely to be able to accommodate bulky carbohydrate units [37]. two distinct
models (fig. 3) have been formulated for the locale and
mechanism of this critical step in the proteasome system,
as will be discussed in a subsequent section.
although the role of proteasomes subsequent to retrotranslocation has so far received the most detailed attention, there is a growing body of evidence that an alternate
route of proteolytic degradation exists, and that this occurs in the er compartment [12, 27–33]. studies on the
pi z variant of a1-antitrypsin in murine hepatoma cells
[30] and more recently on mutant yeast carboxypeptidase
y (cpy*) in cho cells [33] have shown that a substantial portion of these misfolded proteins is degraded by a
nonproteasomal pathway. er membrane bound cysteine/serine proteases have been implicated in at least
some of the degradation of human  xxxg2320xxx  [31],
 xxxg1060xxx  [29] and an integral membrane protease in the er has been noted to proteolyze stearoylcoenzyme a desaturase [12]. furthermore, quality control of human p-glycoprotein has been found to be carried
out by a luminal er protease [28]. the nonproteasomal
degradation of er mannosidase i has most recently been
reported, although the proteolytic mechanism for this has
not yet been identified [69]. it is not yet evident in what
manner these nonproteasomal proteases distinguish between native and misfolded molecules which may coexist
inside the er; the finding that kif blocked the nonpro-

table 2. components of the quality control system which interact directly with n-linked oligosaccharides*.
enzyme/lectin

substrate/ligand

product

subcellular location

inhibitor

oligotrans/hydrol
glucosidase i
glucosidase ii
glucosyltrans
 xxxg334xxx 
 xxxg323xxx 
er manase i
er manase ii
m9-manase
endomanase
edem
ergic-53
gol manase ia,b
pngase
endognase
cyt manase

g3m9gn2-ppdol + protein/h2o
g3m9gn2-pr
g2-1m9gn2-pr
 xxxd3474xxx  + m9gn2-pr
g1m9-5gn2-pr
g1m9-5gn2-pr
m9gn2-pr
m9gn2-pr
m9gn2-pr
g1m9-5gn2-pr
m8bgn2-pr
er-m8-7gn2-pr
m9gn2-pr
os-gn2-pr
os-gn2
m9-6gn1

g3m9gn2-pr/g3m9gn2
g2m9gn2-pr
m9gn2-pr
g1m9gn2-pr
cnx- g1m9-5gn2-pr
crt-g1m9-5gn2-prm8bgn2-pr
m8cgn2-pr
m8-5gn2-pr
m8-4gn2-pr
edem-m8bgn2-pr
ic-m8-7gn2-pr
m8-5gn2-pr
os-gn2 + pr
os- xxxg1006xxx 
m5gn1

er
er
er, ic
er
er
er, ic, gol
er
er
er, ic, gol
er, ic, gol
er
er, ic
golgi
er, cyt
cyt
cyt

–
cst
cst
–
–
–
dmj, kif
dmj
dmj, kif
gdmj
–
–
dmj, kif
–
–
dmj

* references are given in text; abbreviations are g, glucose; m, mannose; gn, glcnac; oligotrans, g3m9gn2-transferase; os, polymannose oligosaccharide; ppdol, dolichylpyrophosphoryl; pr, protein; gol, golgi; cyt, cytosol; trans, transferase; hydrol, hydrolase; cnx,
 xxxg334xxx ; crt,  xxxg323xxx ; endognase, endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase. m8b and m8c refer to the b and c isomers of man8glcnac2, respectively. other abbreviations are defined in the text.

1032

r. g. spiro

figure 3. comparison of two proposals for the retrotranslocation,
n-deglycosylation and proteasomal degradation of misfolded glycoproteins during erad. in both models (a and b) the unfolded
polypeptide with its n-linked os-glcnac2 glycans (solid triangles)
is being translocated from the er lumen to cytosol through a sec61
channel. in model a both the pngase (png) and the proteasome
are free in the cytosol, and accordingly act on the retrotranslocated
protein in a sequential manner in that compartment. in contrast,
model b indicates that the pngase is situated in the er membrane
and releases the oligosaccharides in a co-retrotranslocational fashion, while the proteasomes are positioned on the cytosolic side of
the membrane. in both models the oligosaccharides are converted
from os-glcnac2 to os-glcnac1 (os- xxxg1006xxx ) by the action of the
cytosolic endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase (engnase) and are subsequently trimmed down to man5glcnac1 (m5gn1) by the mannosidase of the cytosol (manase), after which it can be transported
into the lysosomes for further degradation. os refers to polymannose oligosaccharides which can have undergone varying degrees
of processing by er glucosidases and mannosidases (glc3 – 0man9–7glcnac2) before being released by the pngase; the presence of glucose residues, however, prevents the cytosolic mannosidase-trimmed oligosaccharide (glc3–1man5glcnac1) from entering
the lysosomal compartment, as shown in a subsequent figure. due
to variation in the quality control of different glycoproteins and cell
types, models a and b are not mutually exclusive. the role of ubiquitin ligases and chaperones is not shown in these schemes.

teasomal pathway in cpy*-transfected cho cells suggests that man8  xxxd1725xxx  may play a signaling role [33].
in contrast, the nonproteasomal system involved in such
degradation in hepatoma cells was observed to be favored
by er mannosidase ii action, which produces man8 isomer c, and moreover was observed to be sensitive to tyrosine-phosphatase inhibition [30].

n-deglycosylation of glycoproteins during quality
control: action and location of n-glycanase
the observation that substantial amounts of free polymannose oligosaccharides were produced by mammalian
in vitro and in vivo systems suggested that they were the
products of the necessary deglycosylation stage of the
quality control system [34]. further work indicated that
indeed the oligosaccharides which appeared shortly after
n-glycosylation and terminated in a di-n-acetylchitobiose sequence (os-glcnac2) [35] were the product of

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

deglycosylation brought about by a peptide:n-glycanase,
which like the familiar enzyme from bacterial sources
[94] cleaves the b-aspartylglucosamine glycopeptide
bond. this important enzyme has been found in both the
er [95] and microsomes [96] as well as in the cytosol
[97]. the pngase from the latter compartment, in which
most of the recoverable activity of the cell is located, has
been purified and cloned from s. cerevisiae [98] by
lennarz and his collaborators, who furthermore identified its gene in higher eukaryotes [99]. while the er and
purified cytosolic pngase were assayed with  xxxd2811xxx , a recent report indicated that yeast enzyme or its
human homologue when transfected into mammalian
cells can act on intact glycoproteins [37]. this pngase
was found to act preferentially on polymannose oligosaccharides such as would be expected to be present on glycoproteins undergoing erad [37].
the reports that pngase has been observed in both the
cytosol and the er can be explained by the presence of alternate erad routes (fig. 3, models a and b). it would
certainly appear likely that those previously listed glycoproteins which undergo nonproteasomal degradation inside the er [12, 27–33, 66] would require an n-glycanase situated in this compartment, and indeed, the
n-glycanase observed in this subcellular compartment,
was found to have its catalytic site in a luminal orientation
[95]. moreover, studies in hepg2 cells infected with the
ts045 mutant of the vesicular stomatitis virus indicated
that degradation of its g protein in the presence of cst
resulted in the exclusive release of the characteristic
vesicular os-glcnac2 oligosaccharides which were then
trapped in the er. these components were shown to originate from this virus envelope glycoprotein [32]. since
n-glycanase action on er-situated proteins would need
to distinguish between glycoproteins with aberrant and
native configurations, a signal to identify the former
would appear to be required; such a determinant could be
situated in the unfolded polypeptide chain such as has
been found for the  xxxd3474xxx :glycoprotein glucosyltransferase. indeed it has recently been reported that the cytosolic n-glycanase can distinguish between native and
misfolded glycoproteins [37], although in this case in
which the protein is believed to have already been separated from those with normal configurations by retrotranslocation, it would not appear to be necessary.
the n-deglycosylation site of glycoproteins which undergo proteasomal degradation and accordingly need to
be retrotranslocated from the er to the cytosol by way of
the sec61 channel presents a more difficult interpretive
puzzle and has led to disparate although not mutually exclusive models (fig. 3, a and b) in which the n-glycanase
is either present in the cytosol and acts following the
translocation [24] or is situated in the membrane and
cleaves the glycopeptide bond in a co-retrotranslocational
manner [36], analogous to the function of the oligosac-

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 61, 2004

charyltransferase in the import of proteins through the
translocon of the er membrane. the former proposal
(model a) is based on the findings of studies which noted
that when proteasomal degradation of various glycoproteins is inhibited, the deglycosylated protein intermediates appear in the cytosol [24, 91, 100, 101]. however,
these investigations did not demonstrate in which location the oligosaccharide excision actually took place, and
the presence of the proteins in various stages of deglycosylation was noted in the microsomal fraction.
an increasing number of reports do suggest that the nglycanase is located in the er membrane itself (model b)
since in the presence of proteasome inhibitors the glycosylated protein or deglycosylated intermediates are either
exclusively or predominantly associated with the er
rather than the cytosol [67, 70, 88, 102–106]. these studies included such diverse glycoproteins as immunoglobulin (ig) subunits [106], mhc class i heavy chains [88], a
ribophorin i variant [70], cog thyroglobulin mutant [67],
cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator [104] and t-cell
receptor (tcr) a-subunits [105]. in fact, in the studies of
wiertz et al., [24] only the deglycosylated protein was
noted to be associated with the sec61 complex of the er
membrane, indicating that this channel must be accessible to the action of the n-glycanase. the studies from
ivessa’s laboratory on truncated ribophorin i have raised
the possibility that the cleavage of the n-glycans may actually take place in the lumen of the er prior to retrotranslocation [70, 102]. moreover, the site-specific
n-deglycosylation of diglycosylated ovalbumin can be attributed to an er situated n-glycanase [96], and a particulate pngase is also believed to convert  xxxd2620xxx 
to an active lectin by cleaving the n-glycan of the newly
synthesized protein [107, 108].
direct examination of the polymannose oligosaccharides
in mouse t-lymphoma cells in which accelerated degradation of the tcr a-subunit takes place indicated that
there was a reduction in their release into the cytosol in
the presence of proteasome inhibitors [36]. these findings suggest that n-deglycosylation and proteasome-mediated degradation of proteins are coupled events as further discussed below.
since the molecular properties of the cytosolic pngase
have been defined in much greater detail than those of the
enzyme present in the er, it is not possible at this time to
understand how the two are related to each other. it is conceivable that the cytosolic enzyme subsequent to its synthesis is translocated into the er compartment, as has
been found to be the case for the er mannosidase ii [49]
as well a number of other proteins (see [49, 109] for other
examples). in the case of the er mannosidase ii, its cytosolic form [110], like the soluble pngase [98], does not
contain a terminal hydrophobic signal sequence. a pertinent analogy can be made with the yeast vacuolar a-mannosidase which is similar in a number of ways to the

review article

1033

mammalian cytosolic/er ii mannosidase and like the latter does not contain a signal sequence or membrane-spanning domain [111]; furthermore, the yeast enzyme like
the er mannosidase ii appears to be imported into its
compartment by a route distinct from the secretory pathway and involves a proteolytic cleavage [112].

concerted function and subcellular location of
er-cytosol quality control system
in preparation for degradation by proteasomes, misfolded
or improperly oligomerized proteins need to be de-n-glycosylated and frequently to be polyubiquinated in addition to passing through the er membrane via a channel
provided by the sec61 complex. although the sequence
and location of these events may vary for different proteins and in different cells, a scheme (fig. 3, model b) in
which all the necessary components are closely attached
to or an integral part of the er membrane [36] would appear to merit consideration as an alternative to the proposal of wiertz et al. [24, 91] (model a), particularly in
view of numerous reports indicating that the steps in
quality control are closely coupled [9, 106, 113, 114]. in
the former scheme (model b), the relevant proteasomes
would be attached to the cytosolic side of the er membrane, as reported by rivett and associates [115, 116] in
mammalian cells and by enenkel et al. [117] in yeast. in
the integrated model (fig. 3b) the pngase would be associated with the translocon for the reasons discussed in
the previous section. ubiquitination, which has also been
reported to occur in the er [118], may take place on the
cytosolic side of the membrane in the vicinity of the proteasomes [119], and this event appears to take place in
concert with deglycosylation and proteasomal degradation. the action of the ubiquitin ligases and proteasomes
is believed to be the driving force of protein movement
through the sec61channel [102, 118–120]. these interactions of the degradative machinery in the er membrane may be reflected by the report that fbs2, a member
of the e3 ubiquitin ligase family, recognizes polymannose glycans which have the internal di-n-acetylchitobiose sequence (man7-9glcnac2) [121]. recently, park et
al., [122] reported that pngase can interact with a component of the ubiquitin complex, although co-immunoprecipitation of the n-glycanase with other proteins has
not been observed by other investigators [37]. while this
interaction, if it indeed occurs physiologically, was tested
with soluble pngase, it may reflect a similar potential of
the er-localized enzyme.
despite the abundant findings delineated above that
n-glycans plays an important role in directing aberrant
proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, the ultimate signal by which these molecules are
channeled into the er translocon has not yet been identi-

1034

r. g. spiro

fied. while the concept that a sec61 complex is involved
in the retrotranslocation of proteins destined for proteasomal degradation has been well established through the
work of a number of laboratories [24-26], it has not been
clearly determined whether this translocon is identical in
all respects to the channel through which newly synthesized proteins pass from the cytosol into the er lumen. it
is difficult to visualize how the identical translocon can
carry out such quite distinct operations with quite different signals [123]. studies of mutants have indicated that
deletion of certain components of the heteromeric sec61
complex can affect one process without altering the other
[124]. although it has been assumed that the sec61 channel operative in retrotranslocation is situated in the er, it
has been shown in mammalian cells by immunofluorescence microscopy and subcellular fractionation that its
core components are located in both the er and ic [125].
while these findings may simply indicate that the translocon cycles between these two subcellular sites but is primarily a resident of the er, it may also reflect the possibility that it performs a specific function in the post-er
compartment. if the latter situation pertains, it may have
important bearing on the subcellular site of retrotranslocation, as several studies have indicated that quality control occurs in an intermediate compartment [69, 70, 86,
88] and might suggest that misfolded or incorrectly assembled proteins may reach the cytosol in other than er
locations.

nature, origin and disposal of oligosaccharides
released during quality control
it has been known for some time now that mammalian
cells release substantial amounts of free polymannose
oligosaccharides into intracellular compartments and
that these occur predominantly as neutral components
which terminate with either a di-n-acetylchitobiose sequence (os-glcnac2) or a single n- xxxd2683xxx 
residue (os-glcnac1) at the reducing end [34]. further
studies with intact cells and in vitro systems [32, 34 – 36,
126] indicated that these glycans originate to a large extent from the n-deglycosylation of glycoproteins (figs 3,
4) although, as will be discussed in a subsequent section,
a portion of the os-glcnac2 species originate from
dolichyl pyrophosphate-linked glycans. a study with
hepg2 cells revealed that the os-glcnac2 components
occurred exclusively as large glycans, glc3man9glcnac2 to man8glcnac2, while the cytosolic species were
present as os-glcnac1 and ranged over a broader size
spectrum (glc1man9glcnac1 to man5glcnac1), with
a predominance of man9glcnac1 and man8glcnac1
glycans [35]. pulse-chase experiments in these cells
demonstrated that the os-glcnac2 species inside the
vesicles were expeditiously chased into the cytosol

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

figure 4. diagrammatic representation of nonproteasomal erad.
the unfolded protein with its attached n-linked oligosaccharides
(solid triangles) is being degraded by an er membrane pngase
and luminal proteases, such as described in the text, with the formation of peptides and the release of free oligosaccharides (osgn2). the latter, after glucose removal (see fig. 5), are then believed
to be translocated into the cytosol by a transporter where they are
degraded by endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase (engnase) and
mannosidase (manase) to yield man5glcnac1 (m5gn1), which is
taken up by the lysosome.

where they appeared as os-glcnac1 (figs 3, 4). the cytosolic os-glcnac1 glycans underwent demannosylation down to the man5glcnac1 stage, after which they
disappeared from the cytosol and entered into another
vesicular compartment that was believed to be the lysosomes [35] for further degradation (figs 3, 4). the identity of this compartment was directly demonstrated in a
subsequent study [127]. the free polymannose oligosaccharides are entirely metabolized within the cell and do
not enter the secretory channel or appear in the media of
cultured cells [35] except under abnormal conditions
such as glucosidase blockade, as discussed below.
oligosaccharides released by n-glycanase as os-glcnac2 within the lumen of the er are transported into the
cytosol where they would mix with the free oligosaccharides derived from the action of pngase located in the
er membrane or cytosol. this entire pool of oligosaccharides would undergo rapid conversion from the
os-glcnac2 product of n-glycanase to os-glcnac1
through cleavage of their di-n-acetylchitobiose sequence by the endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase, which
has been shown to be present in cytosol [128]. the excision of mannose residues down to man5glcnac is believed to be carried out by the kif-resistant cytosolic
a-mannosidase [49]. the characterization of the man5

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 61, 2004

glcnac cytosolic limit product as mana1-2mana1
-2mana1-3(mana1-6)manb1-4glcnac indicated that
it was distinct from the more extensively branched
n-linked man5glcnac formed by golgi enzymes [35].
while demannosylation of man9glcnac to the man5glc
nac can occur in the cytosol, entry into this compartment of glycan species already partially processed on the
glycoprotein by er, ic and golgi mannosidases can also
occur, as already discussed. characterization of the cytosolic man8glcnac1 component indicated that it occurred as about an equimolar mixture of  xxxd1725xxx  and c
in contrast to the man8glcnac2 constituent that was present exclusively as the b-isomer. since the cytosolic
mannosidase would yield only isomer c [49, 89], the
presence of the b-isomer [129] would suggest a contribution from partially processed glycoproteins and, as has
already been stated, the n-linked man8bglcnac2 in particular is involved as a signal for erad [4, 71].
it would appear that the cytosol does not contain an
a-glucosidase, and accordingly any glucosylated polymannose glycans which do enter into this subcellular
compartment (see next section) will not have the abranch trimmed by the cytosolic mannosidase. it was observed that pulse-chase experiments conducted in hepg2
cells under normal conditions resulted in the accumulation in the cytosol of glc1man5glcnac1 as well as the
characteristic man5glcnac1 glycan [35]. this phenomenon became more evident in cst-treated cells in which
there was a pronounced accumulation of the triglucosylated oligosaccharide (glc3man5glcnac1) as the cytosolic mannosidase end product [35], since apparently the
presence of glucose residues prevented its uptake into the
lysosomes. the transporter responsible for the transfer of
oligosaccharides from cytosol to lysosomes was found to
act optimally on glucose-free partially demannosylated
polymannose glycans, including the characteristic
man5glcnac1 [130] (fig. 5).
recently it was shown that free polymannose oligosaccharides are also produced in saccharomyces cerevisiae,
and that the man8glcnac2  xxxd1725xxx  is the predominant
species initially generated, as might be anticipated if it is
a product of protein quality control [131]. during an extended chase smaller degraded polymannose oligosaccharides appeared in wild-type cells, but this time-related
degradation did not occur in a vacuolar a-mannosidasedeficient mutant, suggesting that this second yeast amannosidase was involved in the ultimate catabolism of
the released polymannose oligosaccharides. since the
peptide sequence of yeast vacuolar mannosidase [111,
112] has little in common with that of mammalian lysosomal mannosidase but shows pronounced homology to
the a-mannosidase of mammalian cells [110], which is
involved in the degradation of cytosolic glycans originating in the er, it appears likely that the yeast vacuolar enzyme may carry out the trimming of the mannose chains

review article

1035

which are released during erad. a further analogy between the yeast vacuolar and mammalian cytosolic mannosidase can be found in the observations, already mentioned, that both enzymes while synthesized in the cytosol do not have signal sequences and appear to be
translocated into the vacuoles and er, respectively, by an
srp-independent targeting route which moreover involves a proteolytic cleavage [49, 112].

release of oligosaccharides from
oligosaccharide lipids
it has been shown that free intracellular polymannose
oligosaccharides, in addition to their genesis from
n-deglycosylation during protein quality control, can
originate from lipid-linked oligosaccharides and contribute to the oligosaccharide pool in the er lumen [132]
(fig. 5). it would appear that the release of glc3man9glcnac2 by cleavage of its linkage to dol-p-p through a hydrolytic action of the er oligosaccharyltransferase
serves to control the size of the lipid-oligosaccharide
pool [132], which is substantial [133, 134] and is in its
triglucosylated form responsible for the n-glycosylation
of proteins in almost all eukaryotic species [3]. the hydrolytic action of oligosaccharyltransferase was demonstrated in thyroid microsomes [34] and er vesicles as
well as intact cells [132]; in the latter case the os-glcnac2 glycans were observed to be released, albeit at a reduced rate, when protein synthesis and its attendant
n-glycosylation were inhibited by  xxxd3041xxx  [132]. further studies in thyroid with the use of cst indicated that
there was a preferential turnover of the glucose residues
of the dolichol-linked glc3man9glcnac2, and these
findings led to the postulation of a glucosidase-glucosyltransferase shuttle that operates through a selective
removal and readdition of glucose residues by the action
of the er glucosidases and glucosyltransferases [132]
(fig. 5). the observation that there is an accumulation of
deglucosylated oligosaccharide lipids in cells exposed to
an energy-deficient state [133] can be attributed to inhibition of the glucosylation aspect of this shuttle. the
state of glucosylation of free and lipid-linked oligosaccharides as well as of n-linked glycans can readily be assessed with the use of recombinant endomannosidase,
which by cleaving the linkage between the tri- di- or
monoglucosylated mannose residue of chain a and the
rest of the polymannose glycan releases the characteristic cleavage products of lipid-linked or free oligosaccharides and brings about changes in the electrophoretic
mobility of glycoproteins [135].
in addition to the neutral oligosaccharides it has been reported that a specific pyrophosphatase located on the cytosolic face of the er releases small nonglucosylated
os-glcnac2-p, in particular man5glcnac2-p, from the

1036

r. g. spiro

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

figure 5. schematic portrayal of the glucosyltransferase-glucosidase shuttle and hydrolytic action of oligosaccharyltransferase involved
in regulating the level of the dolichylpyrophosphate (dol-p-p)-linked glc3man9glcnac2 (g3m9gn2) n-glycosylation precursor. the addition and removal of glucose residues by the er-situated glucosyltransferases (glc-trs) and glucosidases (glcase), respectively, are shown.
moreover, the transfer and hydrolytic activities of the oligosaccharyltransferase (ol-trs) are depicted, leading to an n-glycosylated unfolded protein (upr) or the release of the free triglucosylated polymannose glycan (g3m9gn2). the latter product cannot exit into the cytosol (indicated by an x) unless it is deglucosylated by the er glucosidases. subsequently, with or without trimming of the mannose
residues by the er mannosidases (manases), the free glycan can be translocated into the cytosol by an oligosaccharide transporter where
it, along with the os-gn2 from the proteasomal and nonproteasomal degradation pathways (figs 3, 4), is trimmed to the man5glcnac1
(m5gn1) species by the action of the cytoplasmic endo-b-n-acetylglucosaminidase (engnase) and mannosidase before entering the lysosomes. in the glucosidase i-deficient mutant or in the presence of cst (mutant/cst) the g3m9gn2 can enter the golgi compartment where
through the action of endomannosidase (enman) it can be converted to man8glcnac2 (m8gn2). the latter can be converted to m5gn2,
which in turn can be processed by golgi enzymes into sialylated complex oligosaccharides which are then secreted by the cell along with
the glc3man (g3m) product of endomannosidase action. in the presence of cst or a glucosidase-deficient mutant, the n-glycosylated unfolded protein (g3m9gn2-upr) can, however, be deglycosylated by pngase (png) and exit through the sec61 channel to undergo proteasomal degradation (see fig. 3). the g3m5gn1 glycan which is ultimately formed is, however, precluded from entering the lysosomes due
to its glucosylated state (indicated by an x).

 xxxd2090xxx  attachment; these are subsequently degraded to os-glcnac1 in the cytosolic compartment [136].

transport of polymannose oligosaccharides and
 xxxd2811xxx  from er to cytosol and the effect of
glucosidase blockade on their translocation
it is apparent from the information already presented that
polymannose glycans in the os-glcnac2 form are released into the lumen of the er through the hydrolysis by
the oligosaccharyltransferase of oligosaccharide lipids as
well as by the action of pngase on a number of glycoproteins which undergo nonproteasomal degradation
(figs 4, 5). since such oligosaccharides do not enter the
secretory channels under normal conditions, they must be
translocated through the er membrane into the cytosol
where they can undergo further degradation by the
endo-b -n-acetylglucosaminidase and a-mannosidase situated in that compartment (figs 4, 5). the requirements

for this translocation have been studied by moore et al.
[137] and shown to be atp as well as ca++ dependent;
moreover, it was shown that while the polymannose glycans (man9 – 8glcnac2) were readily transported through
the er membrane, this did not occur when these
oligosaccharides were in their triglucosylated form
(glc3man9 – 8glcnac2) (fig. 5). the inability of glucosylated oligosaccharides to move from the er lumen to the
cytosol appears to account for the finding that in csttreated or glucosidase i-deficient cells free triglucosylated polymannose glycans were secreted into the
medium [138]; furthermore, it was reported that sialylated complex oligosaccharides also appeared in the extracellular space (fig. 5). the presence of the latter components was attributed to their passage through the secretory channels where they would be deglucosylated by the
golgi-situated endomannosidase, which would permit
further processing by the mannosidases and glycosyltransferases that are known to generate complex carbohydrate units. the appearance of the characteristic endo-

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 61, 2004

mannosidase cleavage product, glc3man, in the medium
supported this contention, particularly since this component was no longer evident in the presence of brefeldin,
which inhibits the secretory pathway by fusing the golgi
cisternae with the er. an analogous situation appears to
exist in a human congenital disorder of glycosylation
caused by glucosidase i deficiency [139]; in this disease
a pronounced accumulation of the glc3man occurs in the
urine. the occurrence of this tetrasaccharide reflects the
operation of the alternate pathway of deglucosylation
provided by endomannosidase [46, 140] without which
processing of n-linked oligosaccharides would be totally
precluded in this glucosidase-deficient disorder.
since studies on a number of proteins that have already
been cited have indicated that their proteolysis by the
quality control system occurs within the er compartment
rather than by the proteasomal pathway, it is possible that
 xxxd2811xxx  could be generated which would have to be
translocated to the cytosol through the er membrane for
ultimate degradation. indeed, a number of investigations
have focused on glycopeptide export into the cytosol
[141–145], and it has become evident that a transport
mechanism distinct from that employed for oligosaccharide translocation is involved. although atp is required
for both transporters, their cation requirements differ, and
the glycopeptide unlike the oligosaccharide transporter
required cytosolic factors. most prominently it was observed that fully glucosylated  xxxd2811xxx  were translocated through the er membrane [142, 143] in contrast to
the oligosaccharides that did not pass through the er
membrane in the glucosylated state [137]. studies with
yeast mutants have further defined the glycopeptide
transporter; these investigations indicated that although
the sec61 channel involved in glycoprotein translocation
also mediates glycopeptide transport, deletion of various
components of the sec61 complex affected the transport
of these two types of molecules differently [144, 145].
in view of the finding that glucosylated free oligosaccharides cannot exit the er into the cytosol [137], the observation that glucosylated polymannose oligosaccharides
can appear in the cytosol during glucosidase blockade
[35, 138] suggests that their export from the er can occur while they are still attached to peptide alternatively to
their entering the secretory channel as free glycans.

unfolded protein response as a regulator of
glycoprotein quality control
the activation of upr by the accumulation of aberrant
proteins in the er is a characteristic of all eukaryotic
cells which have so far been examined [10, 146, 147]. it
represents an er-to-nucleus signalling pathway which
upregulates a large number of genes involved in the various aspects of protein folding and the erad system so

review article

1037

that the cellular damage by the aggregation of abnormal
proteins induced by various stress situations, such as heat
shock, inhibition of n-glycosylation, disruption of calcium homeostasis and reduction of disulfide bonds, can
be avoided. although an extensive literature dealing with
all aspects of upr, employing yeast and mammalian
cells, has emerged over several decades, the present review will only comment on those studies which have
dealt with aspects which relate directly to the role of
n-linked glycans. the investigations of lehrman’s laboratory have shown that the incomplete or inhibited formation of the dolichol-linked glc3man9glcnac2 glycans,
induced by glucose deprivation or tunicamycin, as well as
interference by cst with their processing subsequent to
n-glycosylation, brings about glycoprotein misfolding
and induces the upr response which counteracts these
stress situations [5, 148]. furthermore it was shown that
cells from humans with type i congenital disorders of glycosylation that have defects in oligosaccharide-lipid synthesis underwent a chronic er stress in which synthesis
of the dolichol-linked saccharides was continuously activated [149]. the upr response has also been shown to
bring about enhanced synthesis of various lectin-like proteins including the mannose specific ergic-53 cargo receptor [150], the man8-specific edem [72] as well as the
glc1man9 – 5glcnac2-binding  xxxg334xxx  [151]. furthermore, activation of the  xxxd3474xxx :glycoprotein glucosyltransferase [152] and the glycan-binding ubiquitin ligase
e3 [153] have been shown to be activated by the upr, indicating that these components play a major role in the
quality control system.
1 helenius a. (1994) how n-linked oligosaccharides affect glycoprotein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. mol. biol.
cell 5: 253 – 265
2 parodi a. j. (2000) protein glucosylation and its role in protein
folding. ann. rev. biochem. 69: 69 – 93
3 spiro r. g. (2000) glucose residues as key determinants in
the biosynthesis and quality control of glycoproteins with nlinked oligosaccharides. j. biol. chem. 275: 35657 – 35660
4 cabral c. m., liu y. and sifers r. n. (2001) dissecting glycoprotein quality control in the secretory pathway. trends
biochem. sci. 26: 619 – 624
5 lehrman m. a. (2001) oligosaccharide-based information in
endoplasmic reticulum quality control and other biological
systems. j. biol. chem. 276: 8623 – 8626
6 klausner r. d. and sitia r. (1990) protein degradation in the
endoplasmic reticulum. cell 62: 611 – 614
7 bonifacino j. s. and lippincott-schwartz j. (1991) degradation of proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum. curr. opin.
cell biol. 3: 592-600
8 werner e. d., brodsky j. l. and mccracken a. a. (1996) proteasome-dependent endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein
degradation: an unconventional route to a familiar fate. proc.
natl. acad. sci. usa 93: 13797 – 13801
9 kopito r. r. (1997) er quality control. the cytoplasmic connection. cell 88: 427 – 430
10 jarosch e., lenk u. and sommer t. (2003) endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation. int. rev. cytol. 223:
39 – 81

1038

r. g. spiro

11 hampton r. y., gardner r. g. and rine j. (1996) role of 26s
proteasome and hrd genes in the degradation of 3-hydroxyl3-methylglutaryl-coa reductase, an integral endoplasmic
reticulum membrane protein. mol. biol. cell 7: 2029 – 2044
12 heinemann f. s. and ozols j. (1998) degradation of stearoylcoenzyme a desaturase: endoproteolytic cleavage by an integral membrane protease. mol. biol. cell 9: 3445 – 3453
13 yao z., tran k. and mcleod r. s. (1997) intracellular degradation of newly synthesized  xxxg175xxx . j. lipid res.
38: 1937–1953
14 kuznetsov g. and nigam s. k. (1998) folding of secretory
and membrane proteins. n. engl. j. med. 339: 1688 – 1695
15 ward c. l., omura s. and kopito r. r. (1995) degradation of
cftr by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. cell 83: 121 –
127
16 sifers r. n., finegold m. j. and woo s. l. (1992) molecular
biology and genetics of alpha 1-antrypsin deficiency. semin.
liv. dis. 12: 301–310
17 kim p. s., kwon o.y. and arvan p. (1996) an endoplasmic
reticulum storage disease causing congenital goiter with hypothyroidism. j. cell biol. 133: 517–527
18 tortorella d., gewurz b. e., furman m. h., schust d. j. and
ploegh h. l. (2000) viral subversion of the immune system.
ann. rev. immunol. 18: 861–926
19 moremen k. w., trimble r. b. and herscovics a. (1994) glycosidases of the asparagine-linked oligosaccharide pathway.
glycobiology 4: 113–125
20 burda p. and aebi m. (1999) the dolichol pathway of nlinked glycosylation. biochim. biophys. acta 1426: 239 – 257
21 spiro r. g. (2000) processing enzymes involved in the deglucosylation of n-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins: glucosidase i and ii and endomannosidase. in: carbohydrates in
chemistry and biology, vol. 3, pp. 65– 79, ernst b., hart g.
w. and sinay p. (eds), wiley, weinheim
22 herscovics a. (1999) importance of glycosidases in mammalian glycoprotein biosynthesis. biochim. biophys. acta
1473: 96–107
23 spiro r. g. (2002) protein glycosylation: nature, distribution,
enzymatic formation and disease implications of glycopeptide
bonds. glycobiology 12: 43r–56r
24 wiertz e. j., tortorella d., bogyo m., yu j., mothes w., jones
t. r. et al. (1996) sec61-mediated transfer of a membrane
protein from the endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome for
destruction. nature 384: 432–438
25 pilon m., schekman r. and römisch k. (1997) sec61p mediates export of a misfolded secretory protein from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol for degradation. embo j. 16:
4540–4548
26 plemper r. k. and wolf d. h. (1999) retrograde protein
translocation: eradication of secretory proteins in health
and disease. trends biochem. sci. 24: 266–270
27 urade r., takenaka y. and kito m. (1993) protein degradation
by erp72 from rat and mouse endoplasmic reticulum. j. biol.
chem. 268: 22004–22009
28 loo t. w. and clarke d. m. (1998) quality control by proteases in the endoplasmic reticulum. removal of a proteasesensitive site enhances expression of human p-glycoprotein. j.
biol. chem. 273: 32373–32376
29 moriyama t., sather s. k., mcgee t. p. and simoni r. d.
(1998) degradation of hmg- xxxd1739xxx  reductase in vitro. cleavage in the membrane domain by a membrane-bound cysteine
protease. j. biol. chem. 273: 22037–22043
30 cabral c. m., choudhury p., liu y. and sifers r. n. (2000)
processing by endoplasmic reticulum mannosidases partitions
a secretion-impaired glycoprotein into distinct disposal pathways. j. biol. chem. 275: 25015–25022
31 fayadat l., siffroi-fernandez s., lanet j. and franc j. l.
(2000) degradation of human  xxxg2320xxx  in the endoplasmic reticulum involves two different pathways depending

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

32

33

34
35

36

37
38

39
40
41
42
43
44

45

46

47

48

49

on the folding state of the protein. j. biol. chem. 275:
15948 – 15954
spiro m. j. and spiro r. g. (2001) release of polymannose
oligosaccharides from vesicular stomatitis virus g protein
during endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation. glycobiology 11: 803 – 811
mancini r., aebi m. and helenius a. (2003) multiple endoplasmic reticulum-associated pathways degrade mutant yeast
carboxypeptidase y in mammalian cells. j. biol. chem. 278:
46895 – 46905
anumula k. r. and spiro r. g. (1983) release of glucosecontaining polymannose oligosaccharides during glycoprotein biosynthesis. j. biol. chem. 258: 15274 – 15282
moore s. e. h. and spiro r. g. (1994) intracellular compartmentalization and degradation of free polymannose oligosaccharides during glycoprotein biosynthesis. j. biol. chem. 269:
12715 – 12721
karaivanova v. k. and spiro r. g. (2000) effect of proteasome inhibition on the release into the cytosol of free polymannose oligosaccharides from glycoproteins. glycobiology
10: 727 – 735
hirsch c., blom d. and ploegh h. l. (2003) a role for n-glycanase in the cytosolic turnover of glycoproteins. embo j.
22: 1036 – 1046
grard t., herman v., saint-pol a., kmiecik d., labiau o., mir
a. m. et al. (1996) oligomannosides or oligosaccharide-lipids
as potential substrates for rat liver cytosol a-d-mannosidase.
biochem. j. 316: 787 – 792
silberstein s. and gilmore r. (1996) biochemistry, molecular
biology and genetics of the oligosaccharyltransferase. faseb
j. 10: 849 – 858
yan q. and lennarz w. j. (1999) oligosaccharyltransferase: a
complex multisubunit enzyme of the endoplasmic reticulum.
biochem. biophys. res. commun. 266: 684 – 689
grinna l. s. and robbins p. w. (1980) substrate specificities
of rat liver microsomal glucosidases which process glycoproteins. j. biol. chem. 255: 2255 – 2258
lubas w. a. and spiro r. g. (1987) golgi endo-a-d-mannosidase from rat liver, a novel n-linked carbohydrate unit
processing enzyme. j. biol. chem. 262: 3775 – 3781
lubas w. a. and spiro r. g. (1988) evaluation of the role of
rat liver golgi endo-a-mannosidase in processing n-linked
oligosaccharides. j. biol. chem. 263: 3990 – 3998
zuber c., spiro m. j., guhl b., spiro r. g. and roth j. (2000)
golgi apparatus immunolocalization of endomannosidase
suggests post-endoplasmic reticulum glucose trimming: implications for quality control. mol. biol. cell 11: 4227 – 4240
dairaku k. and spiro r. g. (1997) phylogenetic survey of endomannosidase indicates late evolutionary appearance of this
n-linked oligosaccharide processing enzyme. glycobiology
7: 579 – 586
moore s. e. h. and spiro r. g. (1990) demonstration that
golgi endo-a-d-mannosidase provides a glucosidase-independent pathway for the formation of complex n-linked
oligosaccharides of glycoproteins. j. biol. chem. 265:
13104 – 13112
hiraizumi s., spohr u. and spiro r. g. (1993) characterization of endomannosidase inhibitors and evaluation of their effect on n-linked oligosaccharide processing during glycoprotein biosynthesis. j. biol. chem. 268: 9927 – 9935
weng s. and spiro r. g. (1993) demonstration that a  xxxd2424xxx -resistant a-mannosidase with a unique processing action on n-linked oligosaccharides occurs in rat liver endoplasmic reticulum and various cultured cells. j. biol. chem. 268:
25656 – 25663
weng s. and spiro r. g. (1996) endoplasmic reticulum  xxxd2424xxx -resistant a-mannosidase is enzymatically and immunologically related to the cytosolic a-mannosidase. arch.
biochem. biophys. 325: 113 – 123

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 61, 2004

50 bause e., breuer w., schweden j., roeser r. and geyer r.
(1992) effect of substrate structure on the activity of m9-mannosidase from pig liver involved in n-linked oligosaccharide
processing. eur. j. biochem. 208: 451–457
51 herscovics a. (1999) processing glycosidases of saccharomyces cerevisiae. biochim. biophys. acta 1426: 275 – 285
52 moore s. e. h. and spiro r. g. (1993) inhibition of glucose
trimming by castanospermine resulted in rapid degradation of
unassembled major histocompatibility complex class i molecules. j. biol. chem. 268: 3809–3812
53 kearse k. p., williams d. b. and singer a. (1994) persistence
of glucose residues on core oligosaccharides prevents association of tcr alpha and tcr beta proteins with  xxxg334xxx  and
results in specifically accelerated degradation of nascent tcr
proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum. embo j. 13:
3678–3686
54 keller s. h., lindstrom j. and taylor p. (1998) inhibition of
glucose trimming with castanospermine reduces  xxxg334xxx  association and promotes proteasome degradation of the a-subunit of the  xxxg456xxx . j. biol. chem.
273: 17064–17072
55 helenius a., trombetta e. s., hebert d. n. and simons j. f.
(1997)  xxxg334xxx  and  xxxg323xxx  and the folding of glycoproteins. trends cell biol. 7: 193–200
56 ware f. e., vassilakos a., peterson p.a., jackson, m. r.,
lehrman m. a. and williams d. b. (1995) the molecular
chaperone  xxxg334xxx  binds glc1man9glcnac2 oligosaccharide
as an initial step in recognizing unfolded glycoproteins. j.
biol. chem. 270: 4697–4704
57 spiro r. g., zhu q., bhoyroo v. d. and söling h. d. (1996)
definition of the lectin-like properties of the molecular chaperone,  xxxg323xxx , and demonstration of its copurification
with endomannosidase from rat liver golgi. j. biol. chem.
271: 11588–11594
58 parlati f., dominguez m., bergeron j. j. and thomas d.y.
(1995) saccharomyces cerevisiae cne1 encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (er) membrane protein with sequence similarity to  xxxg334xxx  and  xxxg323xxx  and functions as a constituent of the er quality control apparatus. j. biol. chem.
270: 244–253
59 gething m. j., mccammon k. and sambrook j. (1986) expression of wild-type and mutant forms of influenza hemagglutinin:
the role of folding in intracellular transport. cell 46: 939–950
60 trombetta s. e. and parodi a. j. (1992) purification to apparent homogeneity and partial characterization of rat liver udpglucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase. j. biol. chem. 267:
9236–9240
61 sousa m. c., ferrero-garcia m. a. and parodi a. j. (1992)
recognition of the oligosaccharide and protein moieties of
glycoproteins by udp-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase. biochemistry 31: 97–105
62 hiraizumi s., spohr u. and spiro r. g. (1994) ligand affinity
chromatographic purification of rat liver golgi endomannosidase. j. biol. chem. 269: 4697–4700
63 fernandez f. s., trombetta s. e., hellman u. and parodi a. j.
(1994) purification to homogeneity of udp-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase from schizosaccharomyces
pombe and apparent absence of the enzyme from saccharomyces cerevisiae. j. biol. chem. 269: 30701–30706
64 jakob c.a., burda p., te heesen s., aebi m. and roth j. (1998)
genetic tailoring of n-linked oligosaccharides: the role of glucose residues in glycoprotein processing of saccharomyces
cerevisiae in vivo. glycobiology 8: 155–164
65 su k., stoller t., rocco j., zemsky j. and green r. (1993) pregolgi degradation of yeast prepro-a-factor expressed in a mammalian cell. influence of cell type-specific oligosaccharide processing on intracellular fate. j. biol. chem. 268: 14301–14309
66 liu y., choudhury p., cabral c. m. and sifers r. n. (1999)
oligosaccharide modification in the early secretory pathway

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75
76
77

78

79

80
81
82

83

1039

directs the selection of a misfolded glycoprotein for degradation by the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 274: 5861 – 5867
tokunaga f., brostrom c., koide t. and arvan p. (2000) endoplasmic reticulum (er)-associated degradation of misfolded n-linked glycoproteins is suppressed upon inhibition
of er mannosidase i. j. biol. chem. 275: 40757 – 40764
fagioli c. and sitia r. (2001) glycoprotein quality control in
the endoplasmic reticulum. mannose trimming by endoplasmic reticulum mannosidase i times the proteasomal degradation of unassembled immunoglobulin subunits. j. biol. chem.
276: 12885 – 12892
hosokawa n., tremblay l. o., you z., herscovics a., wada i.
and nagata k. (2003) enhancement of endoplasmic reticulum
(er) degradation of misfolded null hong kong a1-antitrypsin by human er mannosidase i. j. biol. chem. 278:
26287 – 26294
kitzmüller c., caprini a., moore, s. e. h., frénoy, j. p.,
schwaiger e., kellermann o., et al. (2003) processing of nlinked glycans during endoplasmic reticulum associated
degradation of a short-lived variant of ribophorin i. biochem.
j. 376: 687 – 696.
jakob c. a., burda p., roth j. and aebi m. (1998) degradation
of misfolded endoplasmic reticulum glycoprotein of saccharomyces cerevisiae is determined by a specific oligosaccharide structure. j. cell biol. 142: 1223 – 1233
hosokawa n., wada i., hasegawa k., yorihuzi t., tremblay l.
o., herscovics a. et al. (2001) a novel er a-mannosidaselike protein accelerates er-associated degradation. embo
rep. 2: 425 – 422
jakob c. a., bodmer d., spirig u., bättig p., marcil a., dignard d. et al. (2001) htm1p, a mannosidase-like protein, is involved in glycoprotein degradation in yeast. embo rep. 2:
423 – 430
nakatsukasa k., nishikawa s. i., hosokawa n., nagata k. and
endo t. (2001) mnl1p, an a-mannosidase-like protein in yeast
saccharomyces cerevisiae, is required for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of glycoproteins. j. biol. chem.
276: 8635 – 8638
oda y., hosokawa n., wada i. and nagata k. (2003) edem
as an acceptor of terminally misfolded glycoproteins released
from  xxxg334xxx . science 299: 1394 – 1397
molinari m., calanca v., galli c., lucca p. and paganetti p.
(2003) role of edem in the release of misfolded glycoproteins from the  xxxg334xxx  cycle. science 299: 1397 – 1400
hammond c. and helenius a. (1994) quality control in the
secretory pathway: retention of a misfolded viral membrane
glycoprotein involves cycling between the er, intermediate
compartment, and golgi apparatus. j. cell biol. 126: 41 – 52
caldwell s. r., hill k. j. and cooper a. a. (2001) degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (er) quality control substrates
requires transport between the er and golgi. j. biol. chem.
276: 23296 – 23303
vashist s., kim w., belden w. j., spear e. d., barlowe c. and
ng d. t. w. (2001) distinct retrieval and retention mechanisms are required for quality control of endoplasmic reticulum folding. j. cell biol. 155: 355 – 368
arvan p., zhao x., ramos-castaneda j. and chang a. (2002)
secretory pathway quality control operating in golgi, plasmalemmal and endosomal systems. traffic 3: 771 – 790
taxis c., vogel f. and wolf d. h. (2002) er-golgi traffic is a
prerequisite for efficient er degradation. mol. biol. cell 13:
1806 – 1818
haynes c. m., caldwell s. and cooper a. a. (2002) an
hrd/der-independent er quality control mechanism involves rsp5p-dependent ubiquitination and er-golgi transport. j. cell biol. 158: 91 – 101
elkabetz y., kerem a., tencer l., winitz d., kopito r. r. and
bar-nun s. (2003) immunoglobulin light chains dictate vesicular transport-dependent and -independent routes for igm

1040

84

85
86

87

88

89
90

91

92

93
94

95
96

97

98

99

100

r. g. spiro

degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. j. biol.
chem. 278: 18922–18929
yamamoto k., fujii r., toyofuku y., saito t., koseki h., hsu
v. w. et al. (2001) the kdel receptor mediates a retrieval
mechanism that contributes to quality control at the endoplasmic reticulum. embo j. 20: 3082–3091
appenzeller c., andersson h., kappeler f. and hauri h.p
(1999) the lectin ergic-53 is a cargo transport receptor for
glycoproteins. nat. cell biol. 1: 330–334
frenkel z., gregory w., kornfeld s. and lederkremer g.s.
(2003) endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of
mammalian glycoproteins involves sugar chain trimming to
man6– 5glcnac2. j. biol. chem. 278: 34119–34124
ermonval m., kitzmüller c, mir a.m., cacan r. and ivessa
n.e. (2001) n-glycan structure of a short-lived variant of ribophorin i expressed in the madia214 glycosylation-defective cell line reveals the role of a mannosidase that is not er
mannosidase i in the process of glycoproteins degradation.
glycobiology 11: 565–576
kamhi-nesher s., shenkman m., tolchinsky s., fromm s.v.,
ehrlich r. and lederkremer g. z. (2001) a novel quality control compartment derived from the endoplasmic reticulum.
mol. biol. cell. 12: 1711–1723
daniel p. f., winchester b. and warren c.d. (1994) mammalian alpha-mannosidases–multiple forms but a common
purpose? glycobiology. 4: 551–566
danilczyk u. g. and williams d. b. (2001) the lectin chaperone  xxxg334xxx  utilizes polypeptide-based interactions to associate with many of its substrates in vivo. j. biol. chem. 276:
25532–25540
wiertz e. j, jones t. r., sun l., bogyo m., geuze h. j. and
ploegh h. l. (1996) the human cytomegalovirus us11 gene
product dislocates mhc class i heavy chains from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol. cell. 84: 769–779
hamman b. d., chen j. c., johnson e. e. and johnson a. e.
(1997) the aqueous pore through the translocon has a diameter of 40-60 å during cotranslational protein translocation at
the er membrane. cell. 89: 535–544
van den berg b., clemons w. m. jr, collinson i, modis y.,
hartmann e., harrison s. c. et al. (2004) x-ray structure of a
protein-conducting channel. nature 427: 36–44
maley f., trimble r. b., tarentino a. l. and plummer t. h.,
jr. (1989) characterization of glycoproteins and their associated oligosaccharides through the use of endoglycosidases.
anal. biochem. 180: 195–204
weng s. and spiro r. g. (1997) demonstration of a peptide:n-glycosidase in the endoplasmic reticulum of rat liver.
biochem. j. 322: 655–661
suzuki t., kitajima k., emori y., inoue y. and inoue s. (1997)
site-specific de-n-glycosylation of diglycosylated ovalbumin
in hen oviduct by endogenous peptide: n-glycanase as a quality control system for newly synthesized proteins. proc. natl.
acad. sci. usa 94: 6244–6249
suzuki t., park h., kitajima k. and lennarz w. j. (1998) peptides glycosylated in the endoplasmic reticulum of yeast are
subsequently deglycosylated by a soluble peptide: n-glycanase activity. j. biol. chem. 273: 21526–21530
suzuki t., park h., hollingsworth n. m., sternglanz r. and
lennarz w. j. (2000) png1, a yeast gene encoding a highly
conserved peptide:n-glycanase. j. cell biol. 149: 1039 –
1051
suzuki t., kwofie m. a. and lennarz w. j. (2003) ngly1, a
mouse gene encoding a deglycosylating enzyme implicated in
proteasomal degradation: expression, genomic organization
and chromosomal mapping. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 304: 326–332
huppa j. b. and ploegh h. l. (1997) the a chain of the t cell
antigen receptor is degraded in the cytosol. immunity 7: 113 –
122

role of n-linked oligosaccarides in glycoprotein quality control

101 halaban r., cheng e., zhang y., moellmann g., hanlon d.,
michalak m. et al. (1997) aberrant retention of tyrosinase in
the endoplasmic reticulum mediates accelerated degradation
of the enzyme and contributes to the dedifferentiated phenotype of amelanotic melanoma cells. proc. natl. acad. sci.
usa 94: 6210 – 6215
102 de virgilio m., weninger h. and ivessa n. e. (1998) ubiquitination is required for the retrotranslocation of a short-lived luminal endoplasmic reticulum glycoprotein to the cytosol for
degradation by the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 273: 9734–9743
103 schubert u., anton l. c., bacik i., cox j. h., bour s., bennink j. r. et al. (1998) cd4 glycoprotein degradation induced
by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 vpu protein requires the function of proteasomes and the ubiquitin-conjugating pathway. j. virol. 72: 2280 – 2288
104 xiong x., chong e. and skach w. r. (1999) evidence that endoplasmic reticulum (er)-associated degradation of  xxxg437xxx  is linked to retrograde translocation from the er membrane. j. biol. chem.
274: 2616 – 2624
105 yu h., kaung g., kobayashi s. and kopito r. r. (1997) cytosolic degradation of t-cell receptor alpha chains by the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 272: 20800 – 20804
106 mancini r., fagioli c., fra a. m., maggioni c. and sitia r.
(2000) degradation of unassembled soluble ig subunits by cytosolic proteasomes: evidence that retrotranslocation and
degradation are coupled events. faseb j. 14: 769 – 778
107 sheldon p.s. and bowles d. j. (1992) the glycoprotein precursor of  xxxd2620xxx  is converted to an active lectin by
deglycosylation. embo j. 11: 1297 – 1301
108 sheldon p. s., keen j. n. and bowles d. j. (1998) purification
and characterization of n-glycanase, a  xxxd2620xxx  binding protein from jackbean (canavalia ensiformis). biochem.
j. 330: 13 – 20
109 walter p. and johnson a. e. (1994) signal sequence recognition and protein targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. ann. rev. cell biol. 10: 87 – 119
110 bischoff j., moremen k. and lodish h. f. (1990) isolation,
characterization and expression of cdna encoding a rat liver
endoplasmic reticulum alpha-mannosidase. j. biol. chem.
265: 17110 – 17117
111 yoshihisa t. and anraku y. (1989) nucleotide sequence of
 xxxg1378xxx , the structure gene of vacuolar alpha-mannosidase of
saccharomyces cerevisiae. biochem. biophys. res. commun.
163: 908 – 915
112 yoshihisa t. and anraku y. (1990) a novel pathway of import of
alpha-mannosidase, a marker enzyme of vacuolar membrane, in
saccharomyces cerevisiae. j. biol. chem. 265: 22418–22425
113 plemper r. k., egner r., kuchler k. and wolf d. h. (1998)
endoplasmic reticulum degradation of a mutated atp-binding cassette transporter. pdr5 proceeds in a concerted action of
sec61 and the proteasome. j. biol. chem. 273: 32848 – 32856
114 mayer t. u., braun t. and jentsch s. (1998) role of the proteasome in membrane extraction of a short-lived er-transmembrane protein. embo j. 17: 3251 – 3257
115 rivett a. j., palmer a. and knecht e. (1992) electron microscopic localization of the multicatalytic proteinase complex in
rat liver and cultured cells. j. histochem. cytochem. 40:
1165 – 1172
116 rivett a. j. (1992) intracellular distribution of proteasomes.
curr. opin. immunol. 10: 110 – 114
117 enenkel c., lehmann a. and kloetzel p. m. (1998) subcellular distribution of proteasomes implicates a major location of
protein degradation in the nuclear envelope-er network in
yeast. embo j. 17: 6144 – 6154
118 tiwari s. and weissman a. m. (2001) endoplasmic reticulum
(er)-associated degradation of t cell receptor subunits. involvement of er-associated ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes
(e2s). j. biol. chem. 276: 16193 – 16200

cmls, cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 61, 2004

119 tsai b., ye y. and rapoport t. a. (2002) retro-translocation of
proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. nat.
rev. mol. cell biol. 3: 246–255
120 yu h. and kopito r. r. (1999) the role of multiubiquitination
in dislocation and degradation of the  xxxg216xxx  of the t
cell antigen receptor. j. biol. chem. 274: 36852–36858
121 yoshida y., tokunaga f., chiba t., iwai k., tanaka k. and tai t.
(2003) fbs2 is a new member of the e3 ubiquitin ligase family
that recognizes sugar chains. j. biol. chem. 278: 43877–43884
122 park h., suzuki t. and lennarz w. j. (2001) identification of
proteins that interact with mammalian peptide:n-glycanase
and implicate this hydrolase in the proteasome-dependent
pathway for protein degradation. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa
98: 11163–11168
123 johnson a. e. and haigh n. g. (2000) the er translocon and
retrotranslocation: is the shift into reverse manual or automatic? cell 102: 709–712
124 wilkinson b. m., tyson j. r., reid p.j. and stirling c. j. (2000)
distinct domains within yeast sec61p involved in post-translational translocation and protein dislocation. j. biol. chem.
275: 521–529
125 greenfield j. j. and high s. (1999) the sec61 complex is located in both the er and the er-golgi intermediate compartment. j. cell sci. 112: 1477–1486
126 duvet s., labiau o., mir a. m., kmiecik d., krag s. s., verbert a. et al. (1998) cytosolic deglycosylation process of
newly synthesized glycoproteins generates oligomannosides
possessing one glcnac residue at the reducing end. biochem.
j. 335: 389–396
127 saint-pol a., bauvy c., codogno p. and moore s. e. h. (1997)
transfer of free polymannose oligosaccharides from the cytosol to lysosomes in cultured human hepatocellular carcinoma hepg2 cells. j. cell biol. 136: 45–59
128 pierce r. j., spik g. and montreuil j. (1979) cytosolic location of an endo-n-acetyl-b-d-glucosaminidase activity in rat
liver and kidney. biochem. j. 180: 673–676
129 weng s. and spiro r. g. (1996) evaluation of the early processing routes of n-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins
through the characterization of man8glcnac2 isomers: evidence that endomannosidase functions in vivo in the absence
of a glucosidase blockade. glycobiology 6: 861–868
130 saint-pol a., codogno p. and moore s. e. h. (1999) cytosolto-lysosome transport of free polymannose-type oligosaccharides. kinetic and specificity studies using rat liver lysosomes.
j. biol. chem. 274: 13547–13555
131 chantret i., frénoy j. p. and moore s. e. h. (2003) freeoligosaccharide control in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae: roles for peptide: n-glycanase (png1p) and vacuolar
mannosidase (ams1p). biochem. j. 373: 901–908
132 spiro m. j. and spiro r. g. (1991) potential regulation of nglycosylation precursor through oligosaccharide-lipid hydrolase action and glucosyltransferase-glucosidase shuttle. j.
biol. chem. 266: 5311–5317
133 spiro r. g., spiro m. j. and bhoyroo v. d. (1983) studies on
the regulation of the biosynthesis of glucose-containing
oligosaccharide-lipids. effect of energy deprivation. j. biol.
chem. 258: 9469–9476
134 gao n. and lehrman m. a. (2002) analyses of dolichol pyrophosphate-linked oligosaccharides in cell cultures and tissues by fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis.
glycobiology 12: 353–360
135 spiro m. j. and spiro r. g. (2000) use of recombinant endomannosidase for evaluation of the processing of n-linked
oligosaccharides of glycoproteins and their oligosaccharidelipid precursors. glycobiology 10: 521–529
136 cacan r. and verbert a. (1999) free and n-linked oligom
annosides as markers of the quality control of newly synthesized glycoproteins. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 258:
1–5

review article

1041

137 moore s. e., bauvy c. and codogno p. (1995) endoplasmic
reticulum-to-cytosol transport of free polymannose oligosaccharides in permeabilized hepg2 cells. embo j. 14: 6034–6042
138 durrant c. and moore s. e. h. (2002) perturbation of free
oligosaccharide trafficking in endoplasmic reticulum glucosidase i-deficient and castanospermine-treated cells. biochem
j. 365: 239 – 247
139 de praeter c. m., gerwig g. j., bause e., nuytinck l. k.,
vliegenthart j. f. breuer w. et al., (2000) a novel disorder
caused by defective biosynthesis of n-linked oligosaccharides
due to glucosidase i deficiency. am. j. hum. genet. 66:
1744 – 1756
140 moore s. e. h. and spiro r. g. (1992) characterization of the
endomannosidase pathway for the processing of n-linked
oligosaccharides in glucosidase ii-deficient and parent mouse
lymphoma cells. j. biol. chem. 267: 8443 – 8451
141 römisch k. and ali b. r. (1997) similar processes mediate
glycopeptide export from the endoplasmic reticulum in mammalian cells and saccharomyces cerevisiae. proc. natl. acad.
sci. usa 94: 6730 – 6734
142 suzuki t. and lennarz w. j. (2000) in yeast the export of small
 xxxd2811xxx  from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol is not affected by the structure of their oligosaccharide
chains. glycobiology 10: 51 – 58
143 ali b. r. and field m. c. (2000) glycopeptide export from
mammalian microsomes is independent of calcium and is distinct from oligosaccharide export. glycobiology 10: 383 – 391
144 gillece p., pilon m. and römisch k. (2000) the protein
translocation channel mediates glycopeptide export across the
endoplasmic reticulum membrane. proc. natl. acad. sci.
usa 97: 4609 – 4614
145 suzuki t. and lennarz w. j. (2002) glycopeptide export from
the endoplasmic reticulum into cytosol is mediated by a
mechanism distinct from that for export of misfolded glycoprotein. glycobiology 12: 803 – 811
146 travers k. j., patil c. k., wodicka l., lockhart d. j., weissman j. s. and walter p. (2000) functional and genomic analyses reveal an essential coordination between the unfolded protein response and er-associated degradation. cell 101: 249 –
258
147 ng d. t., spear e. d. and walter p. (2000) the unfolded protein response regulates multiple aspects of secretory and
membrane protein biogenesis and endoplasmic reticulum
quality control. j. cell biol. 150: 77 – 88
148 doerrler w. t. and lehrman m. a. (1999) regulation of the
dolichol pathway in human fibroblasts by the endoplasmic
reticulum unfolded protein response. proc. natl. acad. sci.
usa 96: 13050 – 13055
149 shang j., korner c., freeze h. and lehrman m. a. (2002) extension of lipid-linked oligosaccharides is a high-priority aspect of the unfolded protein response: endoplasmic reticulum
stress in type i congenital disorder of glycosylation fibroblasts. glycobiology 12: 307 – 317
150 nyfeler b., nufer o., matsui t., mori k. and hauri h. p.
(2003) the cargo receptor ergic-53 is a target of the unfolded protein response. biochem. biophys. res. commun.
304: 599 – 604
151 parlati f., dignard d., bergeron j. j. and thomas d. y. (1995)
the  xxxg334xxx  homologue cnx1+ in schizosaccharomyces
pombe is an essential gene which can be complemented by its
soluble er domain. embo j. 14: 3064 – 3072
152 fernandez f., jannatipour m., hellman u., rokeach l. a. and
parodi a. j. (1996) a new stress protein: synthesis of schizosaccharomyces pombe  xxxd3474xxx :glycoprotein glucosyltransferase
mrna is induced by stress conditions but the enzyme is not essential for cell viability. embo j. 15: 705–713
153 imai y., soda m. and takahashi r. (2000) parkin suppresses
unfolded protein stress-induced cell death through its e3 ubiquitin-protein ligase activity. j. biol. chem. 275: 35661 – 35664

