 xxxd248xxx  increases apoptosis and ischaemia–reperfusion injury in the rat isolated heart - venardos - 2004 - clinical and experimental pharmacology and physiology - wiley online library 
 
 summary 
 
 1.  xxxd248xxx , an antirheumatic gold compound, is an inhibitor of selenocysteine enzymes, such as  xxxg1826xxx  and glutathione peroxidase. these enzymes play an important role in protecting cardiac tissue from oxidative stress generated during ischaemia–reperfusion. 
 2.  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) was administered to rats and their hearts were subjected to an  in vitro  model of ischaemia–reperfusion. the activity of  xxxg1826xxx  and glutathione peroxidase was determined in liver and heart tissues in an attempt to correlate enzymatic activity with heart recovery after ischaemia–reperfusion. 
 3. there was significantly less  xxxg1826xxx  activity in rat liver extracts, whereas the level of glutathione activity remained unchanged, demonstrating that the dose of  xxxd248xxx  used was able to selectively inhibit one of these enzyme systems. rats administered  xxxd248xxx  displayed significantly impaired recovery from ischaemic insult. the end diastolic pressure was increased, whereas the rate pressure product was significantly decreased. 
 4. the level of postischaemic apoptosis was also assessed by examining caspase‐3 activity in tissue homogenates.  xxxd248xxx  significantly increased the degree of postischaemic apoptosis, leading to poor postischaemic recovery. 
 
 
 
  introduction 
 cardiac tissues are subjected to ischaemia–reperfusion injury during clinical procedures such as angioplasty, by‐pass surgery and transplantation. the introduction of oxygen into transiently ischaemic tissue results in the generation of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress. the degree of oxidative stress and, hence, tissue damage is dependent on the ability of the cellular anti‐oxidant defences to cope with this oxidative burden. 1  in our laboratory, we have been studying the role of glutathione peroxidase (gpx) and  xxxg1826xxx  in the functional recovery of cardiac tissue after ischaemia–reperfusion.
          
 glutathione peroxidase is an important anti‐oxidant enzyme, present in the cytosol and mitochondria of most mammalian cells, capable of converting  xxxd2298xxx  to water. during this reaction, gpx is oxidized to an inactive state and must be regenerated by electron shuffling through glutathione,  xxxg981xxx  and nadph. glutathione peroxidase has a selenocysteine residue within the active site that is essential for catalytic activity. 2   xxxg1826xxx  also contains selenocysteine in the active site and activity is dependent upon the presence of this amino acid.  xxxg1826xxx  is an anti‐oxidant protein, which can act through the thioredoxin peroxidase/thioredoxin system or act directly to reduce lipid hydroperoxides.  xxxg1826xxx  is able to reduce dihydroascorbate to  xxxd228xxx  and help in recycling  xxxd228xxx , which can be oxidized when reacting with oxidized  xxxd3521xxx . therefore,  xxxg1826xxx  acts directly as an anti‐oxidant or has a secondary role in the regeneration of exogenous anti‐oxidants such as vitamins c and e. 3 
 we have recently reported that removing selenium from the diet of rats can downregulate the endogenous activity of these two enzymes and that this correlated with poor cardiac recovery following ischaemia–reperfusion. 4  in the present study, we have examined the functional recovery of hearts from rats that were administered  xxxd248xxx , an inhibitor of selenocysteine‐based enzymes.  xxxd248xxx  (2,3,4,6‐tetra‐ o ‐acetyl‐1‐thio‐beta‐ d ‐glucopyranoside‐ s ‐triethyl‐phosphine gold) is a lipophilic gold compound often prescribed in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. 5  it has anti‐inflammatory properties and may act through the regulation of nuclear factor (nf)‐kappab. 6  gold compounds such as  xxxd248xxx  are also potent inhibitors of selenocysteine‐containing enzymes, such as gpx and  xxxg1826xxx . glutathione peroxidase is inhibited by  xxxd248xxx  with a k i  of 11.7 µmol/l, 7  whereas thiorexodoxin reductase has a k i  of 4 nmol/l. 8  this substantial difference in k i  provides a mechanism whereby one enzyme can be inhibited at certain concentrations of  xxxd248xxx  whereas the other remains active. given our previous findings on the poor functional recovery after reducing the activity of both enzymes, 2  in the present study we have used  xxxd248xxx  to selectively inhibit  xxxg1826xxx  in rats while glutathione activity remained unaltered. we have then subjected the hearts from these animals to an experimental model of ischaemia–reperfusion and measured a variety of physiological functions to assess postischaemic cardiac recovery. we have also examined these tissues, after ischaemia–reperfusion, for evidence of apoptosis.
          
 
 
  methods 
 
  animals and treatments 
 adult male wistar rats (10 weeks of age) were randomly assigned to one of three experimental groups: (i) control group ( n  = 12); (ii)  xxxd248xxx  treated ( n  = 7); and (iii) sham‐treated controls ( n  = 4). the  xxxd248xxx  group was administered 100 mg  xxxd248xxx /kg via an oral gavage needle (provet, brisbane, qld, australia).  xxxd248xxx  was suspended in corn oil and was administered to rats 24 h before they were killed. a group of sham control rats was gavaged with corn oil 24 h before being killed. the control group received no treatment prior to being killed. rats were housed in an animal facility complying with the  australian code of practice for the care and use of animals for scientific purposes  under conditions of constant temperature and humidity with 12 h light–dark cycles, with free access to food and water. approval for this research was granted by the griffith university animal ethics committee.
             
 
 
  isolated heart preparations 
 animals were anaesthetized with 60 mg/kg sodium pentobarbitone (nembutal; lyppards, brisbane, qld, australia) via an intraperitoneal injection. a thoracotomy was performed and hearts were removed rapidly and immersed in ice‐cold perfusion fluid. the aorta was cannulated and hearts were perfused in a retrograde fashion at a hydrostatic pressure of 100 mmhg with modified krebs'–henseleit buffer containing (in mmol/l): nacl 119; nahco 3  22; kcl 4.7; kh 2 po 4  1.2; mgcl 2  1.2;  xxxg2125xxx  2  1.75; edta 0.5; glucose 11. the perfusion buffer was prepared and filtered through 0.45 µm pores immediately before use. the perfusate was equilibrated with 95% o 2  and 5% co 2  at 37°c to give a ph of 7.4. the perfusion buffer was maintained at 37°c and hearts were bathed constantly in perfusate within a water‐jacketed organ chamber also maintained at 37°c. the left ventricle was vented with a polyethylene drain for drainage of venous flow. a fluid‐filled balloon constructed of latex was inserted into the left ventricle via the mitral valve. the balloon was connected to a pressure transducer (adinstruments, castle hill, nsw, australia) by a fluid‐filled polyethylene tube, permitting measurement of left ventricular pressure. balloon volume was initially increased to an end diastolic pressure of approximately 5 mmhg. aortic perfusion pressure was monitored using a second pressure transducer (adinstruments) connected to a probe inserted in the perfusion line just above the cannula. both pressure transducers were connected to a 4/s maclab data acquisition unit (adinstruments) connected to an apple computer (apple computers, brisbane, qld, australia) and all functional data were recorded at 1 khz. functional parameters measured included peak systolic ventricular pressure (psvp), end diastolic pressure (edp), left ventricular developed pressure (lvdp), heart rate (hr), rate pressure product (rpp) and ischaemic contracture. coronary flow rates were measured manually by timed collection of effluent from the heart.
             
 
 
  experimental time‐course 
 hearts were perfused for an initial 20 min normoxic period to allow them to stabilize. coronary flow was then stopped to generate global ischaemia. ischaemia was maintained for 22.5 min (a period shown in pilot studies to result in approximately 50% recovery of contractile function) and hearts were maintained at 37°c in the temperature‐controlled organ chamber. flow was then returned to the heart and reperfusion continued for 45 min. for the purpose of monitoring baseline enzyme activities, we also included control ( n  = 6) and  xxxd248xxx ‐treated ( n  = 6) normoxic groups that were subjected to 87.5 min of normoxic perfusion only. at the end of reperfusion/perfusion, hearts were removed from the cannula, blotted rapidly, weighed and then frozen at −80°c until subsequent biochemical analysis.
             
 
 
  tissue preparation 
 the liver was also removed from rats when they were killed, weighed and kept at −80°c until use. liver and heart tissues were homogenized in 4 volumes of 50 mmol/l tris‐hcl ph 7.5 and 2 mmol/l edta using an ultra turax (john morris scientific, brisbane, qld, australia) homogenizer. samples were then centrifuged for 30 min at 3500  g  to separate proteins from cellular debris. supernatants were collected into 1 ml aliquots and stored at −80°c until analysis. prior to use, tissue extracts were thawed and centrifuged for 15 min at 14 500  g .
             
 
 
  glutathione peroxidase assay 
 glutathione peroxidase activity was determined using a modification of the method of flohe and gunzler. 9  activity was determined spectrophotometrically at 340 nm over 3 min. tissue extracts (50 µl of 1/10 dilution) were added to 900 µl assay mix containing 0.1 mol/l kpi ph 7.0, 2 mmol/l edta, 0.5 u/ml  xxxg981xxx , 10 mmol/l glutathione and 0.3 mmol/l nadph. tert‐butyl hydroperoxide (50 µl of 20 mmol/l) was added as a substrate for gpx. rate calculations and protein estimations were then performed on samples and gpx activity was expressed as mmol/min per mg protein.
             
 
 
   xxxg1826xxx  assay: insulin reduction 
  xxxg1826xxx  activity was determined using a modification of the method of arner et al. 10  tissue extracts (20 µl of 1/10 dilution) were incubated for 20 min at 37°c in 120 µl assay mix containing 50 mmol/l kpi, 5 mmol/l edta and 0.324 mg/ml insulin in a 96‐well plate. thioredoxin (10 µl of 1.4 mg/ml) was added to duplicate wells of each sample, while a further 10 µl assay mix was added to a second series of wells to measure background absorbance. after incubation, reactions were stopped by the addition of 50 µl of 0.4 mg/ml 5,5‐dithiobis(2‐nitrobenzoic acid) (dtnb) in 6 mol/l guanidine hcl. the 96‐well plates were incubated at room temperature for 10 min in the dark and then read at 412 nm. protein estimations were performed on samples and  xxxg1826xxx  activity was expressed as mol/min per mg protein.
             
 
 
  caspase‐3 assays 
 apoptotic activity in heart tissue extracts was measured using a bd apoalert tm  caspase‐3 fluorescent assay kit (clontech, palo alto, ca, usa) according to the manufacturers protocol. caspase‐3 is an active cell death  xxxg548xxx  involved in the execution phase of apoptosis and is activated by other upstream caspases, such as caspase‐8 and caspase‐9. the kit detects the emission shift of 7‐amino‐4‐trifluoromethyl coumarin (afc). the afc–substrate conjugate usually emits blue light (lambda max  = 400 nm); however, cleavage of the substrate by caspase‐3 in the samples liberates afc, which fluoresces yellow–green (lambda max  = 505 nm). each kit includes a specific caspase inhibitor, which was used as a negative control. quantification of caspase‐3 activity was determined by constructing an afc calibration curve and using tissue extraction buffer for background calibration. protein estimations were performed on samples and activity was expressed as units/mg protein.
             
 
 
  protein estimations 
 protein estimations were performed using a bca protein assay reagent kit (peirce, rockford, il, usa) according to the manufacturer's instructions. the method relies on bicinchoninic acid (bca) for colourimetric detection and quantification of total protein. the colour complex produced exhibits a strong absorbance at 540 nm that is linear with increasing protein concentrations. bovine  xxxg124xxx  was used as the standard and assayed alongside the unknown samples, allowing for the construction of a standard curve and quantification of the unknowns. protein concentrations were expressed as mg protein/ml tissue extract. 
 
 
  statistical analysis 
 all data were analysed with one‐way analysis of variance followed by dunnett's and bonferonni post hoc tests for multiple comparisons when initial differences were detected. all statistical tests were performed using graphpad prism program version 3.0a (graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa) and  p  < 0.05 was considered indicative of statistical significance. all data values are reported as the mean±sem.
             
 
 
 
  results 
 
  glutathione peroxidase activity 
 as shown in  fig. 1 , gpx activity in rat livers was not affected by  xxxd248xxx  administered at a dose of 100 mg/kg. there was no difference in activity observed between the control group and either the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated or the corn oil‐treated groups. similar results were also found in tissue homogenates from hearts following both normoxic perfusion ( fig. 1b ) and ischaemia–reperfusion ( fig. 1c ). these results were predicted because the dose of  xxxd248xxx  we chose to use had been shown, in pilot studies, to be insufficient to inhibit gpx.
             
 
 
 figure 1 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 effect of  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) and corn oil on glutathione peroxidase (gpx) activity in rat (a) liver extracts and (b,c) heart extracts. hearts were subjected to either normoxic perfusion (b) or subjected to ischaemia–reperfusion (c).  xxxd248xxx  was suspended in corn oil and was administered to rats 24 h before they were killed. a group of sham control rats was gavaged with corn oil 24 h before being killed (vehicle). the control group received no treatment prior to being killed. data are the mean±sem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   xxxg1826xxx  activity 
  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) induced a significant decrease ( p  < 0.05) in  xxxg1826xxx  activity in rat livers compared with vehicle and control groups (approximately 50  vs  70 mol/min per mg protein in untreated groups). there were no differences in activity between the control group and the corn oil‐treated group ( fig. 2a ). significant decreases ( p  < 0.01) were also found in the heart following normoxic perfusion ( fig. 2b ), with  xxxd248xxx  treatment reducing activity to approximately 19 mol/min per mg ( vs  approximately 54 mol/min per mg in the control group). following ischaemia–reperfusion,  xxxg1826xxx  activity in the heart was similar in all three groups ( fig. 2c ), but had increased significantly from the levels seen during normoxic perfusion (50  vs  100 mol/min per mg protein).
             
 
 
 figure 2 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 effect of  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) and corn oil on thioredoxin (trx) reductase activity in rat (a) liver extracts and (b,c) heart extracts. hearts were subjected to either normoxic perfusion (b) or to ischaemia–reperfusion (c).  xxxd248xxx  was suspended in corn oil and was administered to rats 24 h before they were killed. a group of sham control rats was gavaged with corn oil 24 h before being killed (vehicle). the control group received no treatment prior to being killed. data are the mean±sem. * p  < 0.05,  † p  < 0.01 compared with control. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  langendorff experiments 
 there were no differences in bodyweights between the experimental groups at the time animals were killed, with all animals weighing between 380 and 460 g.  xxxd248xxx  and corn oil had no effect on initial heart function in relation to coronary flow, heart rate and developed pressure. although heart rates were similar between all experimental groups during equilibration, hearts were not paced and, as a result, we have chosen to monitor rpp as opposed to developed pressure as an indicator of myocardial function. all hearts displayed an initial rpp of between 56 and 59 × 10 3  mmhg/min, whereas coronary flow was approximately 23–26 ml/min.
             
   figure 3  illustrates the degree of ischaemic contracture sustained by each experimental group at the end of the 22.5 min ischaemic period. ischaemic contracture arises as a result of sustained contraction of the ventricle and is an indicator of the severity of ischaemic damage. the degree of contracture was greater in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group (74 mmhg), suggestive of a reduced tolerance to ischaemic insult; however, this did not reach statistical significance. there were no differences in contracture between the control group (68 mmhg) and the vehicle‐treated control group (66 mmhg).
             
 
 
 figure 3 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 effect of  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) and corn oil (vehicle) on ischaemic contracture after 22.5 min of ischaemia in the rat isolated perfused heart. data are the mean±sem. 
 
 
 
 
 postischaemic contractile function is shown in  fig. 4 , where recoveries for edp and rpp (relative to baseline) after 45 min reperfusion are shown. increased edp ( fig. 4a ) reflects residual diastolic dysfunction and is representative of the inability of the left ventricle to relax during diastole. the edp was significantly greater ( p  < 0.001) in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group (approximately 80 mmhg) compared with controls (approximately 50 mmhg). there were no differences between the controls and the vehicle‐treated group (49  vs  48 mmhg, respectively). the relative recovery of rpp after 45 min reperfusion ( fig. 4b ) was significantly reduced ( p  < 0.001) in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group (approximately 10%) compared with the vehicle‐treated and control groups (both approximately 50%). the period of ischaemic insult used ensured an expected recovery of approximately 50% for control experiments and the administration of  xxxd248xxx  significantly inhibited this recovery.
             
 
 
 figure 4 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 effect of  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) and corn oil (vehicle) on contractile function following 22.5 min of ischaemia and 45 min reperfusion in rat isolated perfused hearts. contractile function was measured either as (a) end diastolic pressure after 45 min reperfusion or (b) percentage recovery of the rate pressure product (rpp) after 45 min reperfusion. data are the mean±sem. ** p  < 0.001 compared with control and vehicle‐treated groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  caspase‐3 activity 
 caspase‐3 activity in heart tissue homogenates was significantly increased ( p  < 0.05) in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group to 17 µmol/l afc units per mg protein compared with 8 µmol/l afc units per mg protein in the controls ( fig. 5 ). there were no differences in activity between the controls and the vehicle‐treated group. this indicates a greater level of apoptosis in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated hearts and correlates with their poor recovery from ischaemia–reperfusion injury.
             
 
 
 figure 5 
 open in figure viewer powerpoint 
 
 
 effect of  xxxd248xxx  (100 mg/kg) and corn oil (vehicle) on caspase‐3 activation in the rat isolated heart following 22.5 min ischaemia and 45 min reperfusion. data are the mean±sem. * p  < 0.05 compared with control and vehicle‐treated groups. afc, 7‐amino‐4‐trifluoromethyl coumarin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  discussion 
 in previous studies by ourselves 4  and others, 11  it has been demonstrated that decreases in endogenous anti‐oxidant enzyme activity lead to poor functional recovery of cardiac tissue after ischaemia–reperfusion. presumably this is due to the decreased capacity of these tissues to counteract the damaging effects of reactive oxygen species generated post‐reperfusion. in the present study, we have used an inhibitor of gpx and  xxxg1826xxx  ( xxxd248xxx ) to investigate the role that these enzymes may play in ischaemia–reperfusion injury. using  xxxd248xxx  at a dose of 100 mg/kg, we found that the systemic level of  xxxg1826xxx  activity was significantly decreased. this was also seen in heart tissues during normoxic perfusion, where  xxxd248xxx  significantly depressed  xxxg1826xxx  activity. there was no significant change in the endogenous activity of gpx in either heart or liver tissues. using 100 mg/kg  xxxd248xxx , we were able to selectively alter  xxxg1826xxx  activity owing to the differential responses of these two enzymes. glutathione peroxidase is inhibited by  xxxd248xxx  with a k i  of 11.7 µmol/l, 7  whereas  xxxg1826xxx  has a k i  of 4 nmol/l. 8  in pilot experiments, we found that using a higher dose of  xxxd248xxx  depressed the endogenous activity of both enzymes, whereas a lower concentration of  xxxd248xxx  did not adequately suppress the activity of  xxxg1826xxx  (data not shown).
          
 in the present study, we observed a change in the expression of  xxxg1826xxx  activity following ischaemia–reperfusion. the baseline level of  xxxg1826xxx  activity in perfused hearts was 53.8 ± 7 mol/min per mg protein, which decreased to 18.7 ± 4 mol/min per mg protein following the administration of  xxxd248xxx . however, when all hearts were subjected to a period of ischaemia and reperfusion, the endogenous activity of  xxxg1826xxx  rose significantly to over 100 mol/min per mg protein. we have further investigated this increase and observed a 1.7‐fold increase in  xxxg1826xxx ‐1 mrna expression and a 4.0‐fold increase in  xxxg1826xxx ‐2 expression post ischaemia/reperfusion (k venardos  et al. , unpubl. obs., 2003). this explains the result observed in  fig. 2c , where it would appear that  xxxd248xxx ‐treated hearts subjected to ischaemia–reperfusion do not display significantly reduced levels of  xxxg1826xxx . this is because there is a marked increase in  xxxg1826xxx  expression at this time overcoming the effect of the drug. these data form part of a larger study on the mrna expression and activity of both gpx and  xxxg1826xxx  during ischaemia–reperfusion that has been submitted for publication (k venardos  et al. , unpubl. obs., 2003).
          
 there was significant changes in the ability of cardiac tissue to recover from ischaemia–reperfusion following the administration of 100 mg/kg  xxxd248xxx . in particular, postischaemic diastolic dysfunction was significantly increased. this was associated with a decrease in the rpp, which recovered to less than 10% of pre‐ischaemic levels in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group compared with approximately 50% in the control groups. we used an ischaemic period of 22.5 min, which, under our experimental conditions, results in approximately 50% recovery of rpp, allowing for increases and decreases in recovery to be observed. under these conditions, our results clearly indicate that  xxxd248xxx  negatively impacts on the ability of cardiac tissue to recover from ischaemic insult. 
 in an attempt to investigate the molecular mechanism underlying this change in functional recovery, we examined indicators of myocardial apoptosis. tissue levels of caspase‐3 after ischaemia–reperfusion were found to be substantially elevated in the  xxxd248xxx ‐treated group. this observation suggests that  xxxd248xxx  is directly pro‐apoptotic or counters the effects of endogenous anti‐apoptotic processes (such as anti‐oxidant enzyme systems). 
 several reports have now confirmed that cardiomyocyte apoptosis is induced during ischaemia–reperfusion, contributing to poor cardiac recovery. 12 ,  13  several mechanisms have been suggested to explain this observation, including the release of pro‐apoptotic factors from neutrophils and macrophages during reperfusion. 13  because we examined a blood‐free model, it is probable that intrinsic activators of apoptosis are involved as opposed to extrinsic processes. changes in intracellular oxygen availability can radically affect the way in which mitochondria function. periods of ischaemia or hypoxia followed by re‐oxygenation have been shown to generate superoxide and other free radicals. 14  the production of h 2 o 2  within the mitochondria poses a second threat, with h 2 o 2  being able to diffuse into the mitochondrial membrane, where it abstracts electrons from fe 2+ ‐centred electron transporters to produce oh –  radicals that initiate lipid peroxidation within the mitochondrial membrane. loss of integrity of the mitochondrial membrane results in leakage of cytochrome  c  and the initiation of apoptosis.
          
 ischaemia–reperfusion and the accompanying oxidative stress also leads to changes in the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, leading to loss of cytochrome  c  and the induction of apoptosis. the mitochondrial transition pore and its role in ischaemia–reperfusion has been the subject of considerable research. 15 - 17  interestingly,  xxxd248xxx  has also been shown to induce the opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores, resulting in mitochondrial swelling and loss of membrane potential. 18  such a process could explain our observation of enhanced caspase‐3 activity and impaired contractile recovery in  xxxd248xxx ‐treated hearts. given that  xxxd248xxx  is prescribed as an antirheumatic drug, often to older patients at risk of cardiovascular disease, these data would suggest that such patients would recover poorly from an ischaemic insult, such as myocardial infarction.
