downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015
received 10 march 2003
accepted 18 july 2003
published online 30 january 2004

the n-methyl d-aspartate receptor glycine site and
 xxxd5xxx  metabolism: an evolutionary perspective
michael j. schell
department of pharmacology, university of cambridge, tennis court road, cambridge cb2 1pd, uk (mjs54@cam.ac.uk)
the n-methyl d-aspartate (nmda) type of  xxxg981xxx  requires two distinct agonists to operate.
glycine is assumed to be the endogenous ligand for the nmda receptor glycine site, but this notion has
been challenged by the discovery of high levels of endogenous  xxxd5xxx  in the mammalian forebrain. i
have outlined an evolutionary framework for the appearance of a glycine site in animals and the metabolic
events leading to high levels of  xxxd5xxx  in brain. sequence alignments of the glycine-binding regions,
along with the scant experimental data available, suggest that the properties of invertebrate nmda receptor glycine sites are probably different from those in vertebrates. the synthesis of  xxxd5xxx  in brain is due
to a pyridoxal-5⬘-phosphate (b6)-requiring  xxxg2204xxx  in glia. although it remains unknown when
 xxxg2204xxx  first evolved, data concerning the evolution of b6 enzymes, along with the known occurrences of serine racemases in animals, point to  xxxd5xxx  synthesis arising around the divergence time of
arthropods.  xxxd5xxx  catabolism occurs via the ancient peroxisomal enzyme  xxxg602xxx  (dao),
whose ontogenetic expression in the hindbrain of mammals is delayed until the postnatal period and
absent from the forebrain. the phylogeny of  xxxd5xxx  metabolism has relevance to our understanding of
brain ontogeny, schizophrenia and neurotransmitter dynamics.
keywords: glutamate; glycine;  xxxd5xxx ; racemase; d-amino acid; schizophrenia
1. introduction

(laube et al. 1998; banke & traynelis 2003), consisting
of two nmda receptor 1 (nr1) subunits and two nr2
subunits (figure 1a). two molecules of the neurotransmitter glutamate bind to the nr2 subunits and two
molecules of a different agonist bind to the nr1 subunit
at the so-called ‘glycine site’ (also known as the glycineb
site and reviewed comprehensively in danysz & parsons
(1998)). the glycine site can be activated not only by glycine but also by the d-isomer of serine, and this explains
the early observations of curtis et al. (1961). at some glycine sites,  xxxd5xxx  is in fact more efficacious than glycine
itself (matsui et al. 1995; priestley et al. 1995).  xxxd5xxx 
is often used in experiments as a glycine mimic because
it does not bind to strychnine sites nor is it rapidly taken
up into cells and metabolized.
in binding experiments using rodent cerebral cortex, the
dissociation constants at the glycine site are 126 nm for
glycine (kishimoto et al. 1981) and 355 nm for  xxxd5xxx 
(danysz et al. 1990). despite glycine’s higher affinity, dserine is often more effective at gating expressed channels
(matsui et al. 1995). presumably this is due to the relative
lack of uptake and metabolism systems for  xxxd5xxx  compared with those for glycine (danysz & parsons 1998).
the concentrations of glycine in the cerebrospinal fluid
are in the low micromolar range (ferraro & hare 1985;
westergren et al. 1994); likewise, microdialysis experiments of the extracellular fluid from rat frontal cortex
report the concentrations of both glycine and  xxxd5xxx  to
be ca. 7 ␮m (matsui et al. 1995). based on the reasoning
that micromolar concentrations of ligand would saturate
the glycine sites in vivo, it was suggested that the glycine
site might be constantly occupied and therefore physiologically silent ( johnson & ascher 1987), and at least one

in their early studies of excitatory and depressant amino
acids in brain, curtis et al. (1961) noted that the d-isomer
of serine (but not the natural l-isomer) excited preparations of toad spinal cord, while glycine was a depressant. these researchers later showed that the depressant
effect of glycine was due to its action at inhibitory receptors that could be blocked by the poison strychnine
(curtis & johnston 1970), but they did not pursue the
excitatory effects of  xxxd5xxx  further. with the advent of
receptor binding methods, it was confirmed that glycine
and strychnine bound to the same receptor complex, an
inhibitory chloride channel, located mainly in the brainstem and spinal cord (young & snyder 1973). soon thereafter, however, it was noticed that glycine and strychnine
binding sites were not always the same (defeudis et al.
1978). a number of researchers described a ‘strychnineinsensitive’ binding site for glycine in brain that was displaced by  xxxd5xxx  and was concentrated in the forebrain
(kishimoto et al. 1981; bristow et al. 1986). these early
reports remained orphan until johnson & ascher (1987)
demonstrated that the n-methyl d-aspartate (nmda)
subtype of glutamate receptors required the presence of
a small, heat-stable factor from their conditioned culture
media in order to operate. they concluded that this factor
was probably glycine.
subsequent work has demonstrated that the nmda
receptor channel is unusual among ligand-gated ion channels in that the channel opens to allow calcium and
sodium influx only when two different ligands bind the
receptor simultaneously (kleckner & dingledine 1988).
the channel complex itself is almost certainly a tetramer
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004) 359, 943–964
doi 10.1098/rstb.2003.1399

943

 2004 the royal society

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

944 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

(a)

(b)
2+

+

ca , na

 xxxd5xxx /gly

n
 xxxd5xxx /gly

 xxxd2431xxx /nmda

s2

s1

nr1
nr2

tm
1

tm
2

tm
3

c

figure 1. schematic depictions of the nmda receptor
glycine site. (a) nmda receptor channel. these channels
are composed of two nr1 subunits and two nr2 subunits.
gating of the channel requires the simultaneous occupation
of two types of ligand binding sites: a glutamate site on nr2
for binding l-glutamate (and also capable of binding
nmda), plus a glycine site on nr1 (also capable of binding
 xxxd5xxx ). (b) structure of a glycine binding site. the s1 and
s2 regions of the nr1 subunit surround and bind the
ligand, causing channel gating followed by desensitization.

study has reported that exogenous glycine has no
enhancing effect on nmda receptor activity in vivo
(obrenovitch et al. 1997). however, this view is untenable
in light of the more than 40 studies in the literature demonstrating that this site is not saturated in vivo (czepita et
al. 1996; wilcox et al. 1996; nilsson et al. 1997; berger
et al. 1998; bergeron et al. 1998; de souza et al. 1998;
murray et al. 2000, ahmadi et al. 2003; chen et al. 2003).
(see wood (1995), hashimoto & oka (1997) and danysz & parsons (1998, table 7) for references to the many
excellent earlier studies and a more detailed discussion.)
the importance of the glycine site is also emphasized
by the phenotypes of transgenic mice carrying point
mutations that reduce the receptor’s affinity for glycine/dserine (kew et al. 2000; ballard et al. 2002). a mutation
that reduces the affinity 86-fold (k483q) causes the animals to die within a few days after birth (due to failure to
feed), whereas mice carrying a receptor with a less severe,
fivefold reduction in affinity (d481n) survive but have
behavioural deficits. the selective advantage of having a
 xxxg981xxx  that also must recognize a second, different ligand is unclear. perhaps it functions in coincidence detection during brain development or learning.
alternatively, it might be a sort of ‘fail safe’ system for a
receptor well known to promote excitotoxic cell death
when over-stimulated (rothman & olney 1995).
recently, it was reported that ligand binding at the glycine site leads to a priming of the endocytic machinery
that internalizes the nmda receptor following activation
(nong et al. 2003); this points to an exciting new physiological role for the glycine site. the trafficking of nonnmda glutamate receptors regulates some forms of
synaptic plasticity (malinow 2003), and similar mechanisms might also regulate surface expression or turnover
of nmda receptors. because the glutamate and glycine
sites reside on different subunits, one can envision
situations where different ligands could influence the
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

trafficking of their cognate receptors. whatever the reason
for the existence of the glycine site, the nmda subtype
of the  xxxg981xxx  is a key component of many
developmental, learning and memory processes in mammals—and endogenous agonists acting at its glycine site
participate in the modulation of these processes. however,
the physiological role of the glycine site agonists is less
studied compared with glutamate because many physiologists routinely supplement their recording buffers with
micromolar concentrations of glycine. under these conditions the glycine site can be conveniently ignored.
the surprising discovery that the ‘wrong isomer’ of serine occurs naturally in brain grew out of advances in techniques to assay small quantities of d-amino acid isomers
against the high background of l-isomers present in biological samples (hashimoto et al. 1992; nagata 1992;
chouinard et al. 1993; reviewed in hashimoto & oka
1997). the high correlation between  xxxd5xxx  levels and
nmda receptor binding in brain suggested that  xxxd5xxx 
might be an endogenous glycine site agonist (hashimoto
et al. 1993a). substantial evidence for this proposal has
accumulated since 1993. immunohistochemistry revealed
that endogenous  xxxd5xxx  is localized in astrocytes of the
forebrain grey matter, near or ensheathing nmda receptor synapses (schell et al. 1995, 1997b). agonists of the
non-nmda subtypes of the  xxxg981xxx  promote
the release of preloaded  xxxd5xxx  from cultured astrocytes
(schell et al. 1995). treatment of brain slices with damino acid oxidase (dao), which selectively destroys
endogenous  xxxd5xxx  but not glycine, reduces nmda
receptor responses, demonstrating that some glycine sites
are occupied by  xxxd5xxx  in vivo (mothet et al. 2000). a
strong case for  xxxd5xxx ’s regulation of nmda receptors
has also been made for the retina, where  xxxd5xxx  is
localized in the muller glia, and dao treatment reduces
the nmda response (stevens et al. 2003). perhaps the
most compelling evidence for a physiological role for dserine was the discovery and characterization of the brain
enzyme  xxxg2204xxx , which converts l-serine into dserine (wolosker et al. 1999a,b). because  xxxd5xxx  has no
known function in normal metabolism, has it evolved in
brain specifically for the purpose of modulating nmda
receptors? to address this question it is useful to compare
the phylogeny of the nmda receptor glycine-binding site
with the phylogeny of  xxxd5xxx  metabolism.
2. phylogeny of the glycine site
the ligand-binding domains of probably all glutamate
receptors are structurally related to the family of bacterial
periplasmic binding proteins (madden 2002). this idea,
first proposed in 1990 (nakanishi et al. 1990), became
supported by multiple lines of experimentation during the
subsequent decade and now applies to most subtypes of
glutamate receptors subunits: metabotropic receptors
(o’hara et al. 1993), ␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazole  xxxd3029xxx  (ampa)/kainate receptors
(stern-bach et al. 1994; lampinen et al. 1998), nr2 subunits (laube et al. 1997) and the glycine binding site of
the nr1 subunit (kuryatov et al. 1994; paas et al. 1996).
all glutamate receptors bind their ligands through the
concerted action of two amino acid domains called s1 and
s2. in ionotropic  xxxg981xxx  subunits, s1 is

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 945

located roughly 400 amino acids away from the amino terminus, while s2 is located in an extracellular loop between
transmembrane domains 2 and 3 (figure 1b). s1 and s2
grasp their amino acid ligands in a cleft and close around
it upon binding in a way that has been likened variously
to a venus fly-trap (felder et al. 1999), ‘pac-man’, or ‘a
hinged, clamshell-like gorge’ (dingledine et al. 1999).
ligand binding initiates conformational changes in the
channel that result in gating and desensitization. the
related bacterial periplasmic binding proteins are soluble,
and the three-dimensional structures of a number of members of this protein family have been solved (tam & saier
1993). glutamate receptors, of course, are polytopic
transmembrane proteins, and two transmembrane
domains separate s1 and s2; only when they come
together do they create a ligand-binding site. the formidable difficulty of solving the structure of a glutamate
receptor-binding site was overcome by the engineering of
small linkers between s1 and s2, to create a soluble protein, which can be more easily expressed (kuusinen et al.
1995; ivanovic et al. 1998). remarkably, these proteins
retain their pharmacological profiles (chen & gouaux
1997; miyazaki et al. 1999). this line of investigation produced the first crystal structures of a  xxxg981xxx 
bound to its ligand (armstrong et al. 1998; armstrong &
gouaux 2000) and has now culminated in the cocrystal
structure of the nr1 glycine site with its ligand
(furukawa & gouaux 2003). as predicted from earlier
work using mutagenesis and molecular modelling (paas et
al. 2000), the structure resembles its bacterial counterpart
remarkably. thus the glycine site can now be described
structurally with high precision.
the ionotropic glutamate receptors comprise a related
gene superfamily, which consists not only of nmda,
ampa and kainate receptors but also of a more primitive
plant variety of  xxxg981xxx  (lam et al. 1998; turano et al. 2001; chiu et al. 2002). this fact alone implies
that eukaryotes used glutamate or some other amino acid
as a signalling molecule before they evolved nervous systems. the plant  xxxg981xxx  signals to mechanisms
controlling carbon and nitrogen metabolism (kang &
turano 2003). an even more primordial glutamate-gated
 xxxg1232xxx  related to eukaryotic glutamate receptors occurs in bacteria (chen et al. 1999). the various
branches of the  xxxg981xxx  phylogenetic tree
nicely recapitulate the various receptor subtypes and subunits defined by pharmacology and physiology; the nr1
subunits, containing the glycine site, comprise a discrete
branch of this tree (chiu et al. 1999). thus clues to when
a glycine site evolved should be contained in the sequence
genealogy of nr1. more explicitly, the phylogenetic information about glycine site evolution should be found in
the amino acid sequences of the s1 and s2 domains that
comprise the ligand-binding site.
figure 2 is an alignment of nr1 s1 and s2 domains
from various species, along with two  xxxg965xxx  subunits, which
have recently been shown to recognize glycine (chatterton
et al. (2002) see below). the arrows in figure 2 point to
15 amino acids that have been shown by mutagenesis to
be important for recognizing glycine (kuryatov et al. 1994;
wafford et al. 1995; hirai et al. 1996; williams et al. 1996;
ivanovic et al. 1998; miyazaki et al. 1999; wood et al.
1999; foucaud et al. 2003). every key amino acid present
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

in mammalian nr1 is conserved in the duck, fish and frog
versions of nr1. thus one can be almost certain that
these vertebrates have nmda receptors with glycine sites
that resemble those in mammals. this idea is supported
by the physiological data. birds have nmda receptors
that can be enhanced by d-cycloserine, a  xxxd5xxx  analogue (steele et al. 1996). likewise, in the knife fish the
physiological properties of the nmda receptor resemble
mammals (harvey-girard & dunn 2003). frog and turtle
central neurons express nmda receptors with properties
almost identical to those of mammals (blanton et al. 1990;
cline & tsien 1991; skatchkov et al. 1994), but the specific requirement for glycine has not been reported
because glycine was present in all recording buffers. and
of course, the initial study showing the excitatory effects
of  xxxd5xxx  was carried out on the toad spinal cord (curtis
et al. 1961).
however, as one moves towards earlier-diverging
eukaryotes, the presence of a glycine site becomes equivocal. certain aromatic residues that are important for all
glutamate receptors to recognize amino acids are conserved in invertebrate nr1s (asterisks in figure 2) (paas
et al. 2000), suggesting that these proteins probably do
bind amino acid ligands but might exhibit a different pharmacology compared with mammals. note that position
f484 in caenorhabditis elegans is a y, a conservative
change, and a f484y mutation has been shown not to
affect glycine binding (laube et al. 1997). overall,
drosophila and c. elegans nr1 subunits have residues
identical to those in mammals at only 10 and 8 of the 15
crucial amino acid sites, respectively. at the position that
corresponds to a glutamine in rat nr1a (q405), flies have
a glutamate (e) and nematodes have an aspartate (d).
the effects of mutation to an acidic amino acid at this site
have not been reported, but changing it to a basic lysine
residue reduces the efficacy of glycine 14 000-fold
(kuryatov et al. 1994), while mutation to cysteine reduces
efficacy 547-fold (foucaud et al. 2003). the aspartate at
position  xxxd481xxx  of vertebrates is an asparagine in the nematode; this mutation (d481n) has been reported to reduce
the efficacy of glycine about sevenfold (wafford et al.
1995). the lysine at position k483 in vertebrates is a glutamine (q) in the fly and a serine (s) in the nematode
(the alignment of the nematode sequence in this region
is somewhat ambiguous). the fly-like mutation (k483q)
reduces the efficacy of glycine 125-fold (wafford et al.
1995). in the s2 loop region, position e712 in the rat is
not conserved in invertebrate nr1s, and mutation to an
alanine (e712a, as in flies) produces a modest 2.6-fold
reduction in glycine’s efficacy (wood et al. 1997). position
v735 is an arginine (r) in flies and nematodes, and
mutation of this site to a cysteine (a less drastic mutation)
reduces the efficacy of glycine 4.4-fold (foucaud et al.
2003). finally, a phenylalanine at position f736 is a glycine in both the nematode and the fly. the effect of this
mutation (f736g) has not been reported, but mutation
of this site to alanine or serine reduces the efficacy of glycine about 20-fold (hirai et al. 1996).
these important differences between vertebrate and
invertebrate receptors raise the possibility that if invertebrates do have glycine sites, they might not have the same
properties as their vertebrate counterparts. indeed, the
sequence alignment in figure 2 also reveals that some key

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

946 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

(a)

k483
 xxxd481xxx 

q405

**

ratnr1a
ducknr1
fishnr1
frognr1
flynr1
wormnr1
ratnr3a
ratnr3b

(b)

ratnr1a
ducknr1
fishnr1
frognr1
flynr1
wormnr1
ratnr3a
ratnr3b

*

402tihqepfvyvkptmsdgtckee..ftvngdpvkkvictgpndtspgspr....htvpqccygfcidlliklar.....tmnftyevhlvadgkfgtqer489
402tihqepfvyvkptqadgtcree..ftingdpvkkvfctgpnetipgrp......tvalccygfcidllirlag.....vmnftyevhlvadgkfgtqer487
420tihqepfvyvkptlmdgtckee..htpngvlikkvictgpnetipgrp......tvpqccygfcidlliklam.....tmnftyevhlvadgkfgtqer505
423tihqepfvyvrpttsdgtcree..ytingdpikkvicngpnetipgrp......tvpqccygfcvdlliklar.....emnftyevhlvadgkfgtqer508
424tieekpfvyvrrmgddefrcep..derpcplfnnsdatan................efccrgycidllielsk.....rinftydlalspdgqfghyil499
401tvadppfvyttpigspsqcaelgntvvewsifdkivvsgpwyscpltlen...steyfccaglaidllsnlslpeannsidtsftfslhlnesygvvqa496
519tliehpfvftrevddeglcpag..qlcldpmtndssmldrlfsslhssndtvpikfkkccygycidlleqlae.....dmnfdfdlyivgdgkygawkn610
421tlvehpfvftresdedgqcpag..qlcldpgtndsarldalfaalvng..svprtlrrccygycidllerlae.....dlafdfelyivgdgkygalrd510

e712

v735

*

f754

670:prlrnpsdkfiyatvkqssvdiyfrrqvelstmyrhmekhnyesaaeaiqavrdn..klhafiwdsavlefea..sqkcdlvttgelffrsgfgig:761
668:prlrnpsdkfiyatvkqssvdiyfrrqvelstmyrhmekhnyesaaeaiqavrdn..klhafiwdsavlefea..sqkcdlvttgelffrsgfgig:759
686:prlrnpsdkfiyatvkqssvdiyfrrqvelstmyrhmekhnyesaaeaiqavrdn..klhafiwdsavlefea..sqkcdlvttgelffrsgfgig:777
689:prlrnpsdkfiyatvkqssvdiyfrrqvelstmyrhmekhnyesaaeaiqavrdn..klhafiwdsavlefea..sqkcdlvttgelffrsgfgig:780
686:arlrntmenltcatvkgssvdmyfrrqvelsnmyrtmeannyataeqaiqdvkkg..klmafiwdssrleyea..skdcelvtagelfgrsgygig:777
652:prlrnpsanfsfgtvlnsnvyqyfkrhvelssmfrkmephnvrraseavhsllng..sldafiwdstrlefea..arhcelrtrgslfgrsaygig:743
783:pklhhpsqgfrfgtvressaedyvr..qsfpemheymrrynvpatpdgvqylkndpekldafimdkalldyevsidadcklltvgkpfaiegygig:876
691:pklhhpsqgfrfgtvwessaeayik..asfpemhahmrrhsapttphgvamltsdppklnafimdkslldyevsidadcklltvgkpfaiegygig:784

figure 2. alignment of the glycine site ligand binding regions of nr1 and  xxxg965xxx  subunits of various species: (a) s1 region, and
(b) s2 region. arrows point to amino acid residues shown by mutagenesis to be important for ligand binding. numbered
arrows point to residues not conserved between vertebrates and invertebrates, but in which mutagenesis of the vertebrate
residue produces a significant reduction in the efficacy of glycine. dots over arrows indicate residues conserved in all nr1
subunits. asterisks over arrows denote conserved aromatic residues thought to be important for the recognition of amino acid
ligands in all members of the  xxxg981xxx  family (note that position f484 in rat is a y in the worm; this is a
conservative change that has been shown not to effect ligand binding). amino acid numbering is based on the rat nr1
subunit (genbank accession number npf058706).

glycine site residues are different in the rat  xxxg965xxx  subunits,
but that rat  xxxg965xxx  is more similar to rat nr1 than are
nematode and fly nr1.  xxxg965xxx  subunits form channels with
nr1 that are gated by glycine alone (with slightly lower
affinity than typical nr1 glycine sites) and produce currents that desensitize very rapidly. at these channels dserine seems to act as a partial antagonist rather than a
full agonist (chatterton et al. 2002). thus even if glycine
sites do exist in invertebrates, one cannot be certain that
they are also  xxxd5xxx  sites.
what do the binding, physiological and behavioural
data say about the existence of a vertebrate-like nmda
receptor with a glycine site in invertebrates? some neuromuscular synapses in invertebrates use glutamate as a neurotransmitter, but the receptors involved do not have
nmda receptor-like properties (heckmann & dudel
1995; feinstein et al. 1998; fox & lloyd 1999). nmdalike receptors have been reported to occur at certain
synapses in the central nervous systems of nematodes,
arthropods and molluscs. table 1 compiles their reported
properties, focusing on those glutamate receptors that
have at least one nmda receptor-selective trait, such as
activation by nmda, blockage by mk801 or related
drugs, a voltage-dependent magnesium block or a glycine
requirement. fly larvae and nematodes have a type of
nmda receptor-like channel that can be gated by
nmda but is not blocked by the glutamate site antagonist
2-amino-5-phosphonopropionic acid ( xxxd1353xxx ) (brockie et al.
2001; cattaert & birman 2001). perhaps surprisingly, no
study, to my knowledge, has yet reported either the presence or the absence of an nmda-associated glycine/dserine site in these commonly studied organisms. the
most complete study of nmda receptors in c. elegans
included 20 ␮m glycine in the patch pipette for all channel
recordings, thereby avoiding the glycine site question
(brockie et al. 2001).
some marine invertebrates possess receptors that can
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

be activated by nmda but not blocked by  xxxd1353xxx . some
of these receptors have certain characteristics of nmda
receptors—such as a usage-dependent mk-801 block or
a voltage-dependent magnesium block—but lack other
properties of nmda receptors in vertebrates. in the parietal ganglion of the snail, for example, co-application of
glycine enhances the inward currents elicited by nmda,
but other nmda receptor properties are not observed
(moroz et al. 1993). the first invertebrate nmda-like
receptor ever reported, located in the interneurons of the
crayfish visual system, remains the one with properties
most like its vertebrate counterparts (pfeiffer-linn &
glantz 1991). these receptors are activated by nmda,
blocked by  xxxd1353xxx , blocked by mg2⫹, enhanced by glycine
and blocked by a glycine site antagonist. the mg2⫹ block
is not relieved by depolarization and the channels appear
to gate outward currents preferentially.
the final verdict on this topic awaits a more thorough
testing of the pharmacology and physiology of nmda
receptor-like channels in invertebrates and in very early
diverging vertebrates. such studies will most probably
come from work in drosophila or c. elegans, because the
data from sequenced genomes clearly indicates the occurrence of nr1 and nr2-like channel subunits in these
creatures. in these studies, it would be interesting to test
the effects of not only glycine but also  xxxd5xxx . in summary, the scant experimental data available are consistent
with what the sequence alignments tell us: they do not
support the notion of an nmda receptor-associated
coagonist binding site similar to the glycine/ xxxd5xxx  site
found in vertebrates; however, this possibility has not been
rigorously refuted either. we are left with the tentative
conclusion that, on the evolutionary time-scale, the
nmda receptor glycine site is probably a recent elaboration on an ancient amino acid binding domain and
evolved some time after the divergence of arthropods but
before amphibians or fishes.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 947
table 1. reported occurrences of nmda-like receptors in invertebrates.
(mk-801, nmda-selective channel blocker).
mg2⫹
block

 xxxd1353xxx 

species

preparation/assay

nmda

mk801

caenorhabditis
elegans
drosophila larvae

ava interneuron

yes

yes

no

no

?

?

brockie et al. (2001)

central locomotor
rhythm
corpus allatrum
interneurons

?

yes

?

no

?

?

cattaert & birman (2001)

yes

yes

yes

?

no

?

pszczolkowski et al.
(1999); chiang et al.
(2002)
pfeiffer-linn & glantz
(1991)
moroz et al. (1993)
dale & kandel (1993)
burgess & derby (1997)
pierobon et al. (2001)

cockroach

glycine  xxxd5xxx 

crayfish

optic lobe interneurons

yes

?

yes

yes

yes

?

snail
aplysia
lobster
hydra

parietal ganglion
sensory neurons
olfactory organ
binding, feeding

yes
blocks
yes
?

?
?
?
?

no
yes
?
?

no
no
no
?

yes
no
?
yes

?
?
no
yes

l-amino

acids

racemases

d-amino

acids

transaminase

dehydrogenase,
oxidase

peptidoglycans

2-oxo acids

figure 3. d-amino acid metabolism in prokaryotes. various
types of amino acid racemases occur in bacteria and produce
d-amino acids, chiefly d-alanine, d-proline and d-glutamate.
these are incorporated into peptidoglycans of the cell wall
via d-amino acid dehydrogenases. bacterial d-amino acids
can also be degraded to achiral 2-oxo acids via d-amino acid
dehydrogenases or dao. not shown is bacterial d-amino
acid dehydratase, which also produces achiral acid
metabolites.

3. phylogeny of  xxxd5xxx  synthesis
prokaryotic genomes contain a variety of amino acid
racemases which produce d-amino acid substrates for
incorporation into the cell wall peptidoglycan via the
action of d-amino acid transaminase, an enzyme found
only in bacteria (figure 3). bacterial racemases can be subdivided into those that require pyridoxal-5⬘-phosphate
(b6) as a cofactor (alanine racemase) and those that do
not (glutamate, aspartate and proline racemases). the
mammalian  xxxg2204xxx , which converts l-serine to
 xxxd5xxx  (but not the inverse), requires b6 (wolosker et al.
1999b). thus at first glance it might seem that the serine
racemase of mammals has evolved from the alanine racemase of prokaryotes, because the two enzymes use the
same cofactor to catalyse closely related reactions.
however, the bacterial proteins with the greatest amino
acid similarity to mammalian  xxxg2204xxx  are not
racemases at all but rather serine/threonine dehydratases,
which also use b6 (wolosker et al. 1999a). a careful
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

reference

analysis of the evolution of the b6 enzyme family indicates
that the distinction between bacterial b6-requiring
racemases and dehydratases is not trivial (mehta &
christen 2000). using a combination of sequence and
structural information, christen and colleagues have
classified the various b6 enzymes into four distinct groups.
the alpha group is by far the largest and consists mostly
of aminotransferases and decarboxylases, but not racemases or dehydratases. mammalian  xxxg2204xxx  falls
into the beta group (alternatively called the fold type 2
group), which also includes serine and threonine dehydratases, threonine ammonia-lyases and diaminoproprionate ammonia lyases; see http://pfam.wustl.edu/cgi-bin/get
desc?name=palp. a third group consists of d-alanine
aminotransferases, and a fourth group consists of alanine
racemases. importantly for this discussion, despite sharing
a common cofactor, these four groups of prokaryotic b6
enzymes evolved as independent lineages and had already
diverged into their characteristic enzymatic groups long
before the appearance of eukaryotes (sandmeier et al.
1994). in other words, the four groups of b6-using
enzymes are mutually unrelated. in this context, the cytosolic  xxxg2204xxx  of mammals (being a member of the
beta group rather than the alanine racemase group) is
likely to be an example of convergent evolution: it catalyses a reaction similar to the alanine racemase in bacteria,
but this activity has evolved independently via a separate
protein lineage, and probably emerged long after the
divergence of prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
because mammalian  xxxg2204xxx  most closely
resembles prokaryotic serine and threonine dehydratases,
perhaps it is not surprising that it can also act as an eliminase and catalyse a dehydratase reaction to produce pyruvate from l-serine (panizzutti et al. 2001; neidle & dunlop
2002; strisovsky et al. 2003). the major function of this
lineage of enzyme in most cells throughout most evolution
was probably to produce pyruvate from l-serine or 2oxobutanoate from  xxxd3361xxx , while the production of
 xxxd5xxx  evolved as a side reaction typical of enzymes of
this class (alexander et al. 1994; o’brien & herschlag
1999). proteins with substantial homology to serine
racemase are found in other eukaryotes, notably in yeast,

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

948 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

plants, and nematodes (wolosker et al. 1999a), but it is
unknown what enzymatic activity (or activities) they possess. thus one cannot put a very precise date on when dserine synthesis arose in eukaryotes until these putative
racemases are expressed and assayed.
in lieu of this information, one can get some idea of
the genealogy of racemase activity by asking which species
contain substantial levels of free  xxxd5xxx . plants in particular have a  xxxg2204xxx -related gene in their genomes, but only a trace of  xxxd5xxx  occurs in plants
(robinson 1976; bruckner & westhauser 2003). likewise,  xxxg2204xxx -related genes occur in yeast, c. elegans and drosophila, but there are as yet no reports of these
species producing substantial quantities of  xxxd5xxx . by
contrast, strong evidence exists for  xxxd5xxx  production in
annelids and insect larvae. earthworms (allen & rosenberg 1968) and silkworms (srinivasan 1965; uo et al.
1998) possess a b6-dependent  xxxg2204xxx  activity;
also, racemase activity appears to increase drastically in
lepidopterans at the time of pupation (corrigan & srinivasan 1966), reviewed in corrigan (1969). earthworms
incorporate  xxxd5xxx  into a compound called lombricine,
which is a phosphodiester of guanidoethanol and  xxxd5xxx 
and whose function is unknown. thus at least some annelids and insects have the capacity to synthesize  xxxd5xxx 
during certain times in development; whether this occurs
in their nervous systems is unknown.
it has recently been suggested that under physiological
conditions (in the presence of normal levels of magnesium, atp and slightly basic ph), for every four molecules
of l-serine turned over by mammalian  xxxg2204xxx ,
three end up as pyruvate and one as  xxxd5xxx  (de miranda
et al. 2002). because the km values for the dehydratase
and racemase reactions are identical, perhaps it is inaccurate to categorize the racemase activity in mammals as a
mere ‘side reaction’;  xxxg2204xxx /dehydratase is better
described as a bifunctional enzyme. no data yet exist concerning whether the enzyme can be regulated to preferentially produce one or the other product, and it is assumed
that, in the tissues that express it (liver and brain), serine
racemase produces a steady trickle of both pyruvate and
 xxxd5xxx . the cells that produce  xxxd5xxx  are those with a
very high glycolytic activity and high l-serine levels,
namely hepatocytes and astrocytes. in liver, steady-state
levels of  xxxd5xxx  are very low despite high levels of serine
racemase, and this is partly due to the presence of the
enzyme dao in the peroxisomes of hepatocytes of most
species. metabolism of  xxxd5xxx  by dao produces the
achiral metabolite hydroxypyruvate, which re-enters glycolytic or gluconeogenic pathways for use in normal
metabolism.
4. release and uptake of  xxxd5xxx 
 xxxd5xxx  is also found in the serum, and the likely
source for this  xxxd5xxx  is hepatic, because liver is the only
other tissue besides brain that expresses appreciable levels
of  xxxg2204xxx  (wolosker et al. 1999a). certain species, notably mice, have little or no dao activity in liver
(konno et al. 1997), but levels of  xxxd5xxx  remain low in
this tissue, despite the presence of  xxxg2204xxx . the
probable explanation is that the  xxxd5xxx  that is synthesized but not oxidized is released from hepatocytes into
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

the blood. from there, the clearance of  xxxd5xxx  is
accomplished by the kidney, where  xxxd5xxx  is taken up
by the pars recta (the straight part) of the proximal tubule;
this contrasts to kidney l-serine uptake, which occurs
mainly via stereospecific transporters located in the convoluted part of the tubule (silbernagl et al. 1999). the
kidney pars recta transport system has a low affinity for
 xxxd5xxx  (km = 20 mm) and low stereospecificity (kraghhansen & sheikh 1984; silbernagl et al. 1999), and uses
a sodium gradient to drive  xxxd5xxx  transport. the cells in
kidney that take up  xxxd5xxx  possess very high levels of
dao (usuda et al. 1986), which destroys the  xxxd5xxx  and
produces h2o2 in the process; excessive  xxxd5xxx  uptake
in fact leads h2o2-dependent oxidative damage to these
cells (silbernagl et al. 1997).
despite uptake and catabolism in the kidneys, considerable quantities of  xxxd5xxx  pass through the kidneys and
reach the urine. natural mutant mice exist that lack dao;
 xxxd5xxx  levels in the serum of these mice are about five
times higher than in normal mice (hashimoto et al.
1993b), while total d-amino acid levels in these mice are
about twofold higher in the liver and about 13-fold higher
in the urine (nagata et al. 1989). about 40% of the serine
in normal urine is in the d-conformation, and the concentration of  xxxd5xxx  in the urine of normal humans varies
between 30 and 380 ␮m with an average of 188 ␮m
(bruckner et al. 1994; huang et al. 1998). if one assumes
a typical human urine production of ca. 2.5 l d⫺1, then we
excrete ca. 50 mg of  xxxd5xxx  daily as a normal by-product
of our metabolism!
the mechanisms underlying  xxxd5xxx  uptake and release
from tissues are only partly defined and require further
study. besides the low-affinity, sodium-dependent uptake
system in the kidney, a number of other transporters and
exchangers have been described in peripheral tissues which
may contribute to the movements of endogenous  xxxd5xxx 
into and out of cells; surprisingly, the system operating in
hepatocytes remains undetermined (utsunomiya-tate et al.
1996; segawa et al. 1999; fukasawa et al. 2000; nakauchi
et al. 2000; hatanaka et al. 2002). these systems can be
broadly subdivided into those that are electrogenic (i.e. they
use the energy stored in the sodium concentration gradient
across the plasma membrane to drive  xxxd5xxx  transport),
and exchangers, which move a molecule of  xxxd5xxx  in one
direction while moving a different molecule in the opposite
direction while not affecting the net charge difference
(christensen 1990). transporters of this second class are
intriguing because often the transport of one stereoisomer
of serine drives the opposite movements of the other stereoisomer, creating complex situations whereby the movement
of serine enatiomers through sodium-dependent transporters can influence the activity of sodium-independent
ones (verrey 2003).
electrogenic, stereoblind transport of serine (km =
150 ␮m) occurs in colonocytes of the intestinal lumen
(hatanaka et al. 2002). this system is suggested to remove
the small amounts of  xxxd5xxx  produced by intestinal bacteria. radiolabelled l- and  xxxd5xxx  administered intravenously to rats distribute similarly among the tissues,
with the highest levels in the pancreas (imai et al. 1998).
neutral amino acid transporters of the system l amino
acid transporter type 2 ( xxxg2160xxx ) family such as  xxxg1983xxx  (km
for  xxxd5xxx  = 52 ␮m (segawa et al. 1999)) function as

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 949

exchangers that require an association with the cd98 surface antigen to operate (verrey 2003). why some peripheral tissues produce, release and degrade/excrete  xxxd5xxx 
is unclear. most peripheral tissues express the nr1 subunit of nmda receptors (nedergaard et al. 2002), as do
megakaryocytes (genever et al. 1999) and osteoclasts
(espinosa et al. 1999; itzstein et al. 2001); conceivably,
peripheral  xxxd5xxx  interacts with peripheral nr1 subunits.
what about the metabolism of  xxxd5xxx  made in the
brain? here, the  xxxd5xxx  is produced mainly or exclusively
in the cytosolic matrix of astroglia, which occur in close
vicinity to nmda receptors in the synapse-rich grey matter (schell et al. 1997b). these  xxxd5xxx -producing cells
are also concentrated close to blood vessels, and they
probably help to mediate the metabolism and transfer of
fuel to serve the high-energy requirements of neurotransmission (figure 4). this phenomenon of ‘metabolic
coupling’ is a well-established principle in the central nervous system (schousboe et al. 1993; tsacopoulos & magistretti 1996). glucose, the main energy source for brain,
is transported from the blood and into astrocytes, where
it undergoes glycolytic (anaerobic) metabolism in the
cytosol. in glia, the products of this metabolism (pyruvate,
lactate, glutamine, alanine and serine) are released
through transporters or exchangers into the extracellular
space, where they are taken up by nearby neurons to feed
into aerobic mitochondrial metabolism, producing a supply of atp for neurotransmission and carbon backbones
for the synthesis of neurotransmitters. glutamate and ␥ xxxd2177xxx  (gaba) are transported back to glia
via high-affinity uptake systems, which also serve to clear
neurotransmitter from the extracellular space. the importance of metabolic coupling in brain is also emphasized
by recent studies that demonstrate a neurotrophic role for
glial-derived l-serine (savoca et al. 1995; mitoma et al.
1998; furuya et al. 2000; reviewed in de koning et al.
2003). in the course of such metabolic coupling, the astrocytes produce and release  xxxd5xxx .
similar to the situation in peripheral tissues, the mechanisms regulating  xxxd5xxx  release and uptake in brain
remain incompletely defined.  xxxd5xxx  injected to the lateral ventricles of rats accumulates exclusively in glia, as
judged by immunohistochemistry (wako et al. 1995). dserine is not thought to be stored in vesicles, based on
the lack of ultrastructural evidence for  xxxd5xxx -containing
vesicles (schell et al. 1997b). in cultured astrocytes, the
uptake of radiolabelled  xxxd5xxx  occurs less efficiently than
l-serine uptake, and depolarization with  xxxd2988xxx  (kcl) does not promote the rate of basal efflux (schell
et al. 1995). likewise, in microdialysis experiments in rabbit cerebral cortex, kcl does not promote  xxxd5xxx  efflux
but  xxxd5xxx  levels do rise following ischaemia–reperfusion
(lo et al. 1998). when  xxxd5xxx  is preloaded into type 2
astrocytes, which express non-nmda receptors (gallo et
al. 1994), treatment with agonists of these receptors
(kainate and ampa) enhances the rate of  xxxd5xxx  efflux
(schell et al. 1995). this result is probably explained by
the agonists causing sodium influx through non-nmda
receptors into the glia, which then causes sodiumdependent amino acid transporters to act in reverse; this
is a general mechanism for amino acid release in cultured
glia (levi & patrizio 1992; levi et al. 1992).
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

glucose

blood
astrocyte

 xxxd3193xxx 

glycolysis

(peroxisome)
hydroxypyruvate

serine
racemase

dao
 xxxd5xxx 

lactate

pyruvate
 xxxd2431xxx 
 xxxd3193xxx 
 xxxd2431xxx 

l-gln

+
+

 xxxd2431xxx 

dendrite
nmda-r

tca cycle

atp

synapse
figure 4.  xxxd5xxx  metabolism in brain. glucose from the
blood is metabolized via glycolysis in glia to produce lactate,
pyruvate and l-serine; these are released from glia through
transporters and exchangers and are taken up into neurons
to fuel aerobic metabolism via the mitochondrial
tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle (ovals with squiggles). glial
 xxxg2204xxx , when it catalyses the dehydratase reaction
with l-serine, contributes to pyruvate production. when
catalysing the racemase reaction with the same substrate,
 xxxg2204xxx  produces  xxxd5xxx , which escapes glia
through transporters or exchangers and enhances the
activation of nmda receptors located on neurons. the
precise mechanisms of  xxxd5xxx  release remain unclear, but
in some cases  xxxd5xxx  release is promoted by the action of
neuronal glutamate on glial glutamate receptors via reversal
of sodium-dependent transporters following sodium influx
(plus symbol); extracellular l-serine can also promote dserine release, via transporter exchange (plus symbol). in
some brain regions in adult brain, the  xxxd5xxx  produced in
glia is oxidized in peroxisomes by dao, and the product
hydroxypyruvate is returned to metabolic pathways.
glutamate, following its release from neurons, is rapidly
removed from the synapse by high-affinity uptake into glia,
which metabolize it to glutamine through the action of
 xxxg913xxx .

however, in microdialysis experiments in rat striatum,
kainate and also the sodium channel activator veratridine
actually reduce the efflux of  xxxd5xxx  by ca. 50%
(hashimoto et al. 2000). a number of different  xxxd5xxx 
uptake and/or release systems have been described in brain
cells, and it remains unclear which of these systems predominate in physiological situations (hayashi et al. 1997;
nakauchi et al. 2000; yamamoto et al. 2001; javitt et al.
2002; ribeiro et al. 2002). some require sodium and/or
potassium, while others operate as exchangers. the affinities for  xxxd5xxx  of these various systems are generally low,

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

950 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

ranging between 22.8 ␮m (nakauchi et al. 2000) and
2.5 mm (hayashi et al. 1997), and they show little or no
selectivity for  xxxd5xxx  over l-serine. two uptake systems
characterized in rat brain synaptosome fractions report km
values in the hundreds of micromolar (yamamoto et al.
2001) or low millimolar ( javitt et al. 2002) range.
notably, in astrocyte cultures, l-serine was reported to be
more efficacious than kainate at promoting  xxxd5xxx 
release (ribeiro et al. 2002). overall, there is currently no
strong evidence to support the existence of a  xxxd5xxx 
uptake system with high affinity and selectivity in brain.
the release and uptake of  xxxd5xxx  in brain neuropil is
likely to be both inefficient and complex, involving counterion fluxes and the movements of serine stereoisomers
through multiple amino acid transport systems present on
multiple cell types.
in neuropil, once  xxxd5xxx  is released into the extracellular spaces, it cannot be swept away by the blood (as is the
case with hepatocytes), and immunohistochemical studies
have reported either no (wako et al. 1995; schell et al.
1997b) or low (schell et al. 1995; yasuda et al. 2001)
staining for  xxxd5xxx  in neurons, suggesting that uptake
of  xxxd5xxx  into neurons does not represent an important
mechanism for removal of  xxxd5xxx  from the extracellular
spaces in vivo. instead, astrocytic  xxxd5xxx  acts at the surface of neurons to activate nearby nmda receptor glycine
sites and thereby modulate their activity (figure 4).
although nmda receptors are mainly neuronal, glial
nmda receptors also occur (gallo & russell 1995),
especially following brain injury (krebs et al. 2003).
therefore one cannot exclude a role for  xxxd5xxx  in some
forms of autocrine or glia–glia communication. as discussed above,  xxxd5xxx  transport systems are low affinity.
thus compared with typical neurotransmitters such as
glutamate, gaba and glycine,  xxxd5xxx  may remain in the
extracellular spaces of brain for a very long time, its concentration at the synapse influenced mainly by synthesis
and diffusion.
the relationship between the pools of  xxxd5xxx  in brain
and peripheral tissues remains unclear. in adult rats, dserine injected intraperitoneally raises the concentration in
brain, but only when given at very high concentrations
(takahashi et al. 1997; hashimoto 2002). it has long been
known that  xxxd5xxx  crosses the blood–brain barrier poorly
(oldendorf 1973). notably, intraperitoneal injection of lserine, which more easily enters brain, increases the levels
of  xxxd5xxx , especially in juvenile animals (takahashi et al.
1997; hashimoto 2002). presumably this is because the
glial racemase (km of ca. 10 mm) is not normally saturated with substrate. because the systemic administration
of  xxxd5xxx  has long been known to cause nephrotoxicity
(fishman & artom 1942; ganote et al. 1974; carone &
ganote 1975; silbernagl et al. 1999), giving l-serine systemically may be the safest and best way to increase dserine levels in brain. the therapeutic (or nootropic or
neurotoxic) effects of such an approach merit further
investigation.
another interesting and unanswered question is
whether endogenous  xxxd5xxx  moves in the other direction, from brain to blood and ultimately to the kidneys for
destruction or excretion. the presence of neurotransmitter metabolites in the urine, such as those of
monoamines, is well known (goldstein et al. 1996). a
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

substantial  xxxd5xxx  concentration gradient exists between
the forebrain, where levels of  xxxd5xxx  approach
300 nmol g⫺1 wet weight, and peripheral tissues, where dserine levels are below 10 nmol g⫺1 and are often undetectable (see hashimoto & oka (1997) and references
therein). the striking difference between  xxxd5xxx  levels in
the brain and periphery is also due to the different
expression patterns of dao, the only known enzyme capable of destroying  xxxd5xxx . the phylogenetic history of
dao provides important clues about the relationship
between the nmda receptor glycine site and  xxxd5xxx 
during evolution.
5. the importance of  xxxg602xxx 
when sir hans krebs accidentally discovered an
enzyme from kidney that recognized ‘non-natural’ damino acids (but not their l-counterparts), it was not clear
why nature would have created such an enzyme (krebs
1935, 1948). perhaps bacteria in the gut or in food produced d-amino acids and it was the job of dao to eliminate them. or perhaps enzymes occasionally made
stereochemical mistakes and dao destroyed the evidence.
dao is the prototypic member of the flavin adenine
dinucleotide (fad)-dependent oxidoreductase family,
which also includes glycine oxidases, sarcosine oxidases
and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenases (http://pfam.
wustl.edu/cgi-bin/getdesc?name=dao; accession number
pf01266). most prokaryotic genomes contain at least one
gene coding for an fad-dependent oxidoreductase structurally related to dao; it is from one or more of these
that eukaryotic daos must have evolved (figure 5).
archaea do not possess a eukaryotic-like dao activity but
rather a bacterial-like d-amino acid dehydrogenase activity
(nagata et al. 1999). nor has dao been clearly demonstrated in plants, although plant genomes do contain genes
coding for structurally related proteins. a fungal dao has
been crystallized; it is a flavoprotein that has an enzymatic
activity similar to that of daos in metazoans, with some
differences in enzymatic mechanism (pollegioni et al.
2002). insects possess dao activities in many tissues, but
dao activity in insect brain is very low (corrigan et al.
1963). the existence of  xxxg2204xxx  activity in insect
brain is unknown.
the presence of dao enzymes in single-celled creatures allows them to grow on d-amino acid substrates, via
the oxidation to achiral products. the selective advantage
of being able to metabolize the d-amino acids made in
bacteria has probably directed the evolution daos in animals. the most commonly found neutral d-amino acids
in prokaryotes are alanine and proline (bruckner et al.
1993). the substrate specificity of dao varies among
species, but typically the best substrates are proline, methionine and alanine. using data that krebs (1948) reported
for pig kidney dao, if d-proline is assigned a value of
100, the rates of oxidation of the d-isomers of methionine,
phenylalanine, alanine, valine and serine are 71, 38, 36,
28 and 21, respectively. these relative rates of oxidation
have been largely confirmed for the daos of various
mammalian tissues and species (neims et al. 1966; de
marchi & johnston 1969; gaunt & de duve 1976). nonmammalian species have a similar profile, and sometimes
 xxxd5xxx  is oxidized even less efficiently than in mammals

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 951

0.1

staphaglyox
archaeofulgsarcox
mycobactdax
m.lepraedax
m.tuberdax
99
strepcoeldax
pombedax
80
60
trigonovaridax
neurosporadao
fussolanidax
dictydao
celegf88486
94
celegdax
celegdax2
drosdax
66
drosdax2
100
mosqdax
hdao
99 pigdao
rdao
mdao
100 mdaspo
hdaspo

(a)

]
]

]
]]

prokaryote

fungal

(b)

invertebrate

vert. dao

vert. daspo

figure 5. clustalx neighbour-joining tree depicting the
evolutionary relationships among flavin-dependent dao
enzymes and their relatives. the bacterial dao enzymes are
related to bacterial sarcosine oxidase and glycine oxidase,
shown on this tree as outgroups. eukaryotes have evolved
two members of the dao family: dao, which oxidizes
neutral d-amino acids, and daspo, which oxidizes the
acidic d-amino acid aspartate. dax, dao family member of
uncharacterized substrate specificity. numbers at the tree
branches indicate bootstrap support (100 replications). scale
bar, 0.1 substitutions per site.

(auclair 1959; sarower et al. 2003). no dao activity yet
reported prefers  xxxd5xxx  over other neutral d-amino acid
substrates, suggesting that the primordial substrate preference was not for the specific metabolism of  xxxd5xxx , but
rather to destroy and/or use other d-amino acids from bacteria. vertebrates have one gene coding for dao, which
is a soluble enzyme containing a c-terminal motif that
targets the enzyme to peroxisomes, whose lumens have an
alkaline ph that is optimal for dao enzymatic activity
(dansen et al. 2000).
the acidic d-amino acids d-glutamate and d-aspartate
are also abundant in bacteria but are very poor substrates
for dao, and metazoans have evolved a second daorelated gene, d-aspartate oxidase (daspo), to deal with
this. the various daspos destroy d-aspartate and
nmda efficiently, d-glutamate less efficiently, but no
other d-amino acids are oxidized (van veldhoven et al.
1991; kera et al. 2001). one exception to this substrate
preference occurs in the snail, where d-glutamate is preferred (parveen et al. 2001). it is perhaps surprising that
d-aspartate is usually the preferred substrate, because dglutamate is much more abundant in bacteria (bruckner
et al. 1993). however, in eukaryotes d-aspartate is overall
the most frequently encountered free d-amino acid and dglutamate is less common (hashimoto & oka 1997;
nagata et al. 1999; kera et al. 2001). these observations
suggest that eukaryotes evolved daspo much more
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

figure 6. contrasting localizations of endogenous  xxxd5xxx 
and dao in adult rat brain. (a)  xxxd5xxx  was visualized with
an antibody that recognizes glutaraldehyde-fixed  xxxd5xxx .
(b) dao was visualized in fixed brain slices by enzyme
histochemistry.

recently than dao, probably as an elaboration of the
dao structure, perhaps via gene duplication. dao
(human chromosome 12q24) and daspo (chromosome
6q21) share 30% sequence identity and comprise a small
family in vertebrate genomes (figure 5); see www.
ensembl.org/homofsapiens/familyview?family=ensf000
00001055. most lower eukaryotes also possess two daofamily genes, although the substrate preferences of the
expressed proteins have not been determined.  xxxd5xxx 
and d-aspartate are the two major d-amino acids synthesized in substantial quantities in mammals (hashimoto &
oka 1997), so it makes sense that a means to metabolize
these molecules has been conserved and elaborated during evolution.
the contrasting maps of  xxxd5xxx  immunoreactivity and
dao activity in adult rat brain dramatically illustrate the
influence of dao on  xxxd5xxx  levels (figure 6). in a way
similar to the situation in the liver and kidney, dao in
the brainstem, medulla and spinal cord keeps the  xxxd5xxx 
levels low. in these brain regions, dao appears exclusively in astrocytes (horiike et al. 1987, 1994), so the dserine produced in these cells rapidly enters peroxisomes
and is destroyed; it is not known whether the movement
of  xxxd5xxx  into peroxisomes is an active or passive process. the lack of  xxxd5xxx  staining in the midbrain regions
shown in figure 6 (notably in the inferior and superior
colliculi) is explained by a combination of there being low
levels of  xxxg2204xxx  in this region (wolosker et al.
1999a) and a reduction in sensitivity of the dao histochemical technique owing to fixation.
by striking contrast, forebrain dao activity is undetected and  xxxd5xxx  levels are very high, strongly implying
that dao is the major enzyme capable of destroying the
endogenous  xxxd5xxx  in brain. this basic observation, that
 xxxd5xxx  levels are the inverse of dao levels, has been
reported using a variety of methodologies and approaches.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

952 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

biochemical studies show the dramatic differences
between forebrain (ca. 300 ␮g g⫺1) and hindbrain (less
than 10 ␮g g⫺1) (hashimoto et al. 1993a, 1995a,b; nagata
et al. 1994). mutant mice lacking dao have drastically
increased levels of  xxxd5xxx  in the hindbrain, whereas levels in the forebrain remain unchanged (nagata 1992;
hashimoto et al. 1993b). this rule also applies to
endogenous d-aspartate and its oxidase daspo in tissues
(schell et al. 1997a). in mammals, the distribution of an
endogenously synthesized d-amino acid in a tissue is usually the inverse of its oxidase; the exceptions are the low
levels of  xxxd5xxx  in the heart, skeletal muscle and testis;
these tissues lack both dao and  xxxg2204xxx 
(weimar & neims 1977; wolosker et al. 1999a). in the
case of  xxxd5xxx  in brain, such a relationship between a
neuroactive compound and its metabolic enzyme is contrary to how one normally thinks about neurotransmission. acetylcholine, for example, is released near synapses
rich in acetylcholinesterase and monoamine oxidase concentrates in monoaminergic pathways. by contrast, when
 xxxd5xxx  is made in forebrain astrocytes lacking dao, it
escapes through transporters and exchangers into the
extracellular spaces where it cannot be degraded, rapidly
cleared (by high-affinity uptake) or swept away by the
blood (as is the case with liver): and so it accumulates.
thus the presence of very high levels of  xxxd5xxx  in the
forebrain is due not only to high levels of  xxxg2204xxx 
but also depends crucially on the absence of dao. two
studies examined the generalizability of this concept
among vertebrates and reached surprising conclusions
with relevance to the coevolution of  xxxd5xxx  and the
nmda receptor (reviewed in horiike et al. 2001). working alone at stanford in 1966, dora goldstein, while
studying the effects of barbiturates on dao, noted that
the uneven distribution of dao observed in mammals did
not hold true for fishes and frogs (goldstein 1966). in
lower vertebrates dao was distributed rather evenly
across the various brain regions, with substantial activity
in forebrain. this observation sat quietly in the literature
for 28 years until nagata et al. (1994) reported a comparison of  xxxd5xxx  levels in lower vertebrates versus mammals. levels of  xxxd5xxx  in all brain regions of the carp
(adults and infants), frog and chicken are very low (less
than 10 nmol g⫺1 wt), whereas levels in the forebrains of
the mouse, rat and bull are uniformly high (ca.
350 nmol g⫺1)—the inverse of the dao distribution
reported by goldstein.
the molecular mechanism underlying the loss-of-function of dao gene expression in the forebrain glia of mammals is unknown. when homogenates from different brain
regions are mixed and assayed, the effect on dao activity
is strictly additive, which argues against the existence of
an endogenous dao inhibitor in forebrain (weimar &
neims 1977). rather, the loss of dao probably occurs at
the transcriptional level, and the regulation of dao
expression in brain offers an attractive area for future
study. some peroxisomal enzymes are highly inducible, so
perhaps others can be fully repressed in the presence of
the appropriate extracellular signals. one might speculate
that mammals, with their well-developed nmda receptor-rich forebrains, gained a selective advantage when
their forebrain astrocytes ceased to destroy endogenous dserine and instead released it in close vicinity to nmda
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

receptors. the evolutionary benefits of gene loss have
been discussed (olson 1999), but dao may represent an
interesting and dramatic case of brain region and cell-specific transcriptional repression driving natural selection. if
so, this event has happened very recently in evolutionary
terms and appears to be restricted to glia in the forebrains
of mammals.
6. the ontogeny of  xxxg602xxx 
and  xxxd5xxx 
the developmental pattern of dao expression in brain
further emphasizes the inverse relationships between dserine and its oxidase. although the dao activity in liver
and kidney has already attained half its adult levels in newborn rats and mice, in all brain regions it remains undetectable through the first 12 postnatal days (weimar &
neims 1977). correspondingly,  xxxd5xxx  immunoreactivity in newborn rats is intense in many areas of developing
brain: spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain, thalamus and the
olfactory mitral layer (figure 7a(i)). the visualization of
nmda receptor subunits 2a and b in adjacent sections
(figure 7b) with antibodies reveals substantial regional
overlap of the receptor channel and its putative endogenous ligand. one important caveat relating to the images
shown in figure 7 is that the nmda receptor antibodies
used for these experiments show little or no cross reactivity
with  xxxg966xxx  and  xxxg967xxx  subunits in tissue sections
(petralia et al. 1994a). these two subunits are abundant
during early postnatal development; when incorporated
into channels with nr1, these would also require the presence of a glycine site agonist to operate (monyer et al.
1994). thus the overlap of  xxxd5xxx  and nmda receptors
depicted in figure 7 is probably an under-representation
of the actual situation in brain.
the regional co-expression of  xxxd5xxx   xxxg964xxx /b persists
for the first postnatal week, at which time the immunoreactivity for both appear to have moved towards the forebrain (figure 7a(ii), b(ii)). at the microscopic level, areas
of intense  xxxd5xxx  immunoreactivity correspond to clusters of what appear to be glial cells with small, round cell
bodies; these cells have not been identified immunocytochemically, so it remains possible that some are (or will
become) neurons. the small  xxxd5xxx  cells appear to originate near the ventricles and, based on the progressive
orientation of their leading processes, give the impression
that they are migrating into the thalamus during postnatal
week two and into the cerebral cortex during week three
(m. j. schell, unpublished observations; figure 7, white
arrows). at the end of the second postnatal week, dao
expression commences in the hindbrain and cerebellum
(weimar & neims 1977). concomitantly,  xxxd5xxx  levels
fall in these brain regions (hashimoto et al. 1995b; schell
et al. 1997b), a change already visible with immunohistochemistry at day 14—just one day after dao expression
is first detected (figure 7a(iii)).
the delayed expression of dao during ontogeny is
conserved in the primate brain, where no activity is
detected in newborns, and substantial activity does not
appear in the cerebellum until postnatal week 20 (volpe
et al. 1970). likewise, in human brain, dao levels in the
cerebellar hemispheres of 13–14-month-old children are
15% of adult levels (neims et al. 1966).  xxxd5xxx  levels

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 953

(a)(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(b)(i)

(ii)

(iii)

figure 7. co-development of  xxxd5xxx  and nmda receptor regional localizations in a developing brain. (a)  xxxd5xxx -like
immunoreactivity, and (b) nr2 a/b-like immunoreactivity. postnatal age of rats (in days) is: (a(i) and b(i)) 1; (a(ii) and b(ii))
7; and (a(iii) and b(iii)) 14. white arrows depict brain areas rich in clusters of  xxxd5xxx  positive glia at various ages of
development. black arrows in postnatal day 14 brains point to the transient co-localization of  xxxd5xxx  and nmda receptors
in the cerebellum.

range between 140 and 400 nmol g⫺1 wet weight in the
prefrontal cortices of human foetuses (aged 14–40 weeks)
and remain elevated in this region throughout adulthood
(hashimoto et al. 1993c). similar to the case in other
mammals, the dao activity in the cerebral hemispheres
of adult humans (55–82 years old) is undetected (neims
et al. 1966).
the transient expression of  xxxd5xxx  in the cerebellum
during postnatal development is especially notable,
because nmda receptors also exhibit spatio-temporal
expression in this region during the postnatal period. in
the rodent cerebellum, the nr1 subunit occurs on most
or all neurons at all ages of development (petralia et al.
1994b), but the various nr2 subunits (required to form
a functional channel with nr1) exhibit temporal and celltype-specific expression (akazawa et al. 1994; monyer et
al. 1994). for example, nmda receptor channels occur
on purkinje neurons during the first three weeks of postnatal development but are absent from adults (dupont et
al. 1987; garthwaite et al. 1987; krupa & crepel 1990).
the specific nr2 subunit composition in developing
purkinje cells varies with age and may be partly species
specific (akazawa et al. 1994; scherzer et al. 1997; cullcandy et al. 1998; misra et al. 2000; thompson et al.
2000). during the first postnatal week, the predominant
nr2 subunit in rodent cerebellar purkinje cells is  xxxg967xxx ,
which exhibits very characteristically slowly-deactivating
currents when incorporated into channels (monyer et al.
1992; misra et al. 2000). levels of  xxxd5xxx  are substantial
in the newborn rat cerebellum and increase during the first
postnatal week (hashimoto et al. 1995b; schell et al.
1997b). the most intense immunoreactivity for  xxxd5xxx 
on day 7 is located in the glia surrounding the purkinje
cells (schell et al. 1997b), suggesting that glial  xxxd5xxx 
released there could modulate nmda receptors composed of nr1 and  xxxg967xxx .
the developmental co-expression of  xxxd5xxx  and
nmda 2a/b subunits in the cerebellum has been examined in more detail (schell et al. 1997b). during the
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

second postnatal week,  xxxd5xxx  levels and  xxxg964xxx /b
immunoreactivity both increase, reaching a peak around
age 12–14 days. then  xxxd5xxx  levels begin to fall, reaching a mere 2.5% of the p12 levels by adulthood (schell
et al. 1997b). concomitantly,  xxxg964xxx /b immunoreactivity
begins to fall after day 14, and in adult purkinje cells it is
no longer detected in mature adult rats. bergmann glia,
the specialized astrocytes of the cerebellar molecular layer,
surround the purkinje neuron synapses and probably saturate the purkinje cell nmda receptors with co-agonist
while their nmda receptor synapses develop. when
nmda receptors begin to show reduced expression in the
purkinje cells, dao expression in the bergmann glia rapidly becomes the highest of any brain cell (weimar &
neims 1977; horiike et al. 1987), and  xxxd5xxx  plummets
(discussed further in schell et al. 1997b). interestingly, in
the guinea-pig, an animal whose cerebellum develops prenatally, dao levels begin to increase during the last prenatal week and levels are already high at birth, adding
support to the idea that the delayed dao expression in
cerebellum corresponds to the end of synaptogenesis
(weimar 1977, pp. 73–185). despite the very high levels
of dao and very low biochemical levels of  xxxd5xxx  in
the molecular layer of adult cerebellum,  xxxd5xxx  is still
detected in adult cerebellum by immunohistochemistry
(schell et al. 1995). nmda receptor-containing synapses
persist in the presynaptic terminals of adult parallel fibres
(casado et al. 2000) and also in basket and stellate cells
(scherzer et al. 1997). if  xxxd5xxx  is released locally near
the synapses of these cells in the molecular layer, it still
may be able to function as a glycine site ligand, with the
high levels of dao in the surrounding glia perhaps leading
to a rapid removal and destruction of the agonist: a fate
more akin to faster conventional neurotransmitters.
in the developing granule layer of the cerebellum, the
various nr2 subunits also show spatio-temporal
expression at the mossy fibre–granule cell synapse, with
 xxxg964xxx , b and c contributing to the nmda-induced currents to various degrees at different ages (farrant et al.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

954 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

1994; ebralidze et al. 1996; cathala et al. 2000). the peak
day for the ratio of nmda to non-nmda receptors in
this region is 12 days of age, which is identical to the peak
age of  xxxd5xxx  expression in the cerebellum (schell et al.
1997b; cathala et al. 2000). during the first three postnatal weeks,  xxxd5xxx  is transiently expressed in astrocyes
that surround the synapses of the mossy fibres (schell et
al. 1997b; mothet et al. 2000).  xxxd5xxx  is not present in
this region in adults when  xxxg966xxx  is the exclusive nr2
expressed (farrant et al. 1994). thus, similar to the case
in the molecular layer, transient  xxxd5xxx  expression in the
granule layer occurs in parallel with spatio-temporal
changes in nmda receptor expression thought to be
important for the development and remodelling of synapses (rabacchi et al. 1992). by contrast, in the granule
cell layer of mature adults, no  xxxd5xxx  is detected and
glycine is more likely to be the predominant glycine site
agonist.
a recent physiological study has demonstrated a rapid
nmda receptor-dependent period of activity-dependent
synapse elimination in the cerebellum that occurs between
postnatal days 15 and 16 only (kakizawa et al. 2000).
when mice are injected with nmda receptor channel
blockers during this period (but not before or after), purkinje cells become multiply innervated with climbing fibres
(when normally they are only innervated by one). this
observation is surprising, because the climbing fibre–purkinje cell synapse at this age is not thought to use nmda
receptors. the conclusion of this work was that the
activity of the mossy fibre–granule cell synapse, known to
use nmda receptors, was responsible for the activitydependent synapse elimination at the climbing fibre synapse. at this age, dao expression is rising rapidly in the
glia surrounding the mossy fibre synapses; this could help
orchestrate a game of synaptic musical chairs, whereby
only active synapses are retained and redundant connections are pruned away. in summary, the delayed
expression of dao in the cerebellum suggests both that
there is a selective advantage to delaying the expression of
dao until after postnatal week two and also an advantage
to the high and persistent dao expression in adults. in
cerebellum at least,  xxxd5xxx  appears to act at glycine sites
only during development, while glycine acts as the main
or exclusive glycine site agonist during fast neurotransmission in adults.

7. a  xxxg602xxx  link to
schizophrenia?
over the past 15 years, substantial evidence has
accumulated to suggest that schizophrenia is somehow
linked to a hypofunction in the glutamatergic neurotransmitter systems in forebrain and limbic areas
(reviewed in goff & coyle 2001). much of this evidence
stems from the observation that nmda receptor channelblocking drugs (phencyclidine and ketamine) cause
schizophrenia-like symptoms in humans and primates and
also exacerbate the symptoms of people with the disease
(see, for example, lahti et al. 1995). additional evidence
comes from studies of transgenic mice with reduced
nmda receptor expression; these animals exhibit
social and sexual deficits that have been likened to
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

schizophrenia, and the deficits are reversed by antipsychotic drugs (mohn et al. 1999).
while antipsychotic drugs are effective at reducing the
florid positive symptoms of the disease in humans
(auditory hallucinations, paranoia), they do not reduce the
negative symptoms (loss of affect). to counteract the presumed nmda receptor hypofunction, a number of therapeutic approaches for schizophrenia have attempted to
enhance nmda receptor function by co-administering
glycine ( javitt et al. 1994),  xxxd5xxx  (tsai et al. 1998) or
d-cycloserine (cascella et al. 1994; heresco-levy et al.
2002) with antipsychotic drugs (reviewed in coyle et al.
2002; javitt 2002; millan 2002). some of the studies have
reported modest success and no obvious side effects.
however, the supplementations are less successful when
the amino acid is co-administered with clozapine, the antipsychotic of choice for many patients (potkin et al. 1999;
tsai et al. 1999; evins et al. 2000). in the case of d-cycloserine, a partial agonist at the glycine site (emmett et al.
1991), a narrow range of dosages is required to produce
a beneficial effect (goff et al. 1995). these therapies have
yet to be reconciled with earlier work that points to possible side effects. the well-documented nephroxic effects
of systemic  xxxd5xxx  administration have been discussed
in earlier sections of this review. a simple dietary supplementation with l-serine, which has been shown to raise
brain levels of  xxxd5xxx  when given systemically to rats
(takahashi et al. 1997; hashimoto 2002), provides an
alternative strategy worth investigating. d-cycloserine was
initially developed as an antibiotic to treat tuberculosis
(epstein et al. 1955); within a year of its being introduced,
psychotropic side effects were reported (lewis et al. 1957).
during the subsequent decade a variety of psychotropic
effects (seizures, hyperactivity, insomnia, confusion and
psychosis) were reported in at least 15 studies (simeon et
al. 1970).
a recent genetic linkage study has implicated dao in
some forms of schizophrenia, suggesting that changes in
dao activity in these patients might influence  xxxd5xxx 
levels and, by implication, nmda receptor function
(chumakov et al. 2002). it is worth reviewing these findings in the light of the subject of this review, especially
when one considers that schizophrenia might be a
uniquely human disease. a 50 million base pair region on
human chromosome 13 between q24 and q34 has been
linked to schizophrenia in a number of studies (lin et al.
1997; blouin et al. 1998; shaw et al. 1998; brzustowicz et
al. 1999; levinson et al. 2000). chumakov et al. (2002)
focused on this region in their own linkage study, which
implicated a five million base pair region at 13q34 in a
french–canadian schizophrenia population. all single
nucleotide polymorphisms across this region were identified and compared in cases and controls. a 65 000 base
region showed association with the disease in this population and also associated with the disease in a russian
schizophrenia population. the strengths and limitations of
the approach used in this and other schizophrenia linkage
studies have been discussed (cloninger 2002; harrison &
owen 2003).
no commonly used gene prediction programs indicate
the existence of any genes in the region identified by
chumakov et al. (2002), suggesting that the stretch in the
genome linked to schizophrenia lies in a ‘gene desert’.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 955

nevertheless, rapid amplification of cdna ends from
human cdna libraries identified two putative transcripts,
called  xxxg72xxx  and  xxxg30xxx . the genes coding for these transcripts would be transcribed from opposite strands of the
same dna, and the intron–exon junctions suggested by
the cdnas do not have the typical characteristics of splice
junctions in the genome. the  xxxg72xxx  transcript was detected
in amygdala, caudate nucleus, spinal cord and testis. the
 xxxg72xxx  transcript occurs in multiply spliced forms and is specific to higher primate genomes; non-human primate genomes (chimpanzee, gibbon, gorilla and rhesus monkey)
are predicted to code for transcripts that are considerably
shorter than those found in humans. in vitro transcription/
translation of the  xxxg72xxx  transcript produces a polypeptide
of 153 amino acids, while similar experiments using the
 xxxg30xxx  transcript produce no protein. antibodies against the
 xxxg72xxx  protein product label the endoplasmic reticulum and
golgi apparatus in cells overexpressing the  xxxg72xxx  protein.
these workers then carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen
using the predicted  xxxg72xxx  gene product and discovered a
protein–protein interaction with dao. when  xxxg72xxx  protein
is mixed with a 20-fold molar excess over dao protein,
dao activity is enhanced approximately threefold over
basal levels. the study proposes a model whereby the
expression of  xxxg72xxx  in schizophrenia produces an increase
in dao activity and a concomitant decrease in  xxxd5xxx 
levels, causing nmda receptor hypofunction. this model
is also bolstered by evidence of a genetic interaction
between  xxxg72xxx  and dao that is synergistic in some risk
genotypes. recently, the same  xxxg72xxx / xxxg30xxx  region has also
been associated with bipolar disorder, though the specific
single nucleotide polymorphisms implicated were not the
same as in the schizophrenia study (hattori et al. 2003).
while the genetic associations are intriguing, the proposed biochemical mechanism is difficult to reconcile with
other studies that have addressed the relationship between
dao and  xxxd5xxx .  xxxd5xxx  levels have been measured
in postmortem schizophrenic brains and found to be not
statistically different from controls (kumashiro et al.
1995). this objection may be explained simply because
the schizophrenia brains used in the  xxxd5xxx  study were
not of the same aetiology as in the french–canadian or
russian cohorts, and schizophrenia is a complex disease
unlikely to be ascribed to one causative agent or mutation.
indeed, a very recent study reports a modest reduction in
the levels of  xxxd5xxx  in the serum of schizophrenia
patients (hashimoto et al. 2003). the intracellular
location of the putative  xxxg72xxx /dao protein–protein interaction remains uncertain, because  xxxg72xxx  protein is localized
to the early secretory pathway, while dao occurs in the
lumen of the peroxisome. the model suggested by chumakov et al. (2002) is most difficult to reconcile with the
reported distribution of dao in the brains of mammals;
dao activity in mammals is thought to be absolutely
restricted to the cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord
(volpe et al. 1970), while schizophrenia involves a deficit
in the prefrontal cortex and limbic system (harrison
1999). based on the observation that mice lacking dao
show no changes in forebrain levels of  xxxd5xxx  (nagata
1992; hashimoto et al. 1993b), dao is not thought to
regulate  xxxd5xxx  levels in forebrain. a brain regional gene
expression study has classified dao as a highly cerebellumenriched transcript (sandberg et al. 2000), and western
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

blots of mouse brain regions do not detect dao protein
in forebrain (katagiri et al. 1991).
however, a very low but detectable dao activity has
been reported to occur in the forebrains of rodents more
than 13 weeks old (weimar & neims 1977) and also in
bovine (neims et al. 1966) and cat (de marchi & johnston 1969) forebrain. indeed, if no mechanism whatsoever
exists for  xxxd5xxx  catabolism in the forebrain, then it is
not clear why  xxxd5xxx  levels do not continue to increase
in adulthood unless  xxxd5xxx  crosses the blood–brain barrier and is destroyed/excreted by the kidneys. moreno et
al. (1999) have reported immunohistochemical mapping
of dao in rat brain. surprisingly, they report that dao
protein is present in all brain regions, in both neurons and
glia. because dao protein levels in certain brain regions
or in certain cells might not always equate with dao
activity, perhaps dao is regulated by an inhibitory protein–protein interaction or covalent modification in the
forebrains of mammals (but not other vertebrates) and/or
by an activating interaction with  xxxg72xxx  in human schizophrenics.
8. conclusions
table 2 summarizes the proposed sequence of evolutionary events leading to the appearance of the nmda
receptor glycine site and its regulation by  xxxd5xxx . the
approximate emergence times for the components of this
signalling system are taken from recent biological clock
estimates for the divergence of phyla (kumar & hedges
1998; wang et al. 1999; hedges et al. 2001); these are
for comparison only, because their absolute values remain
disputed (benton & ayala 2003). primitive glutamate
receptor channels occur in bacteria but these do not bind
 xxxd5xxx  (chen et al. 1999). glutamate receptors also
occur in plants, but these do not have the properties of
nmda receptors (lam et al. 1998). nmda receptor-like
proteins definitely occur in nematodes (brockie et al.
2001) and fruitflies (cattaert & birman 2001), but
whether these receptors require a mammal-like glycine site
to operate (and whether this site also recognizes  xxxd5xxx )
remains equivocal (figure 2). the best one can do is place
the emergence of the nmda receptor glycine site sometime after the divergence of arthropods and before the
appearance of amphibians—between 1000 and 650 myr
ago.
bacteria do not produce  xxxd5xxx  in large quantities, but
rather produce d-alanine, d-proline and d-glutamate for
their cell walls (bruckner et al. 1993; figure 3). eukaryotes, perhaps to eliminate the d-amino acids common in
the prokaryotes they ingest and harbour, evolved dao
activities by elaborating on the structure of other flavinrequiring oxidases (figure 5). mammalian b6-dependent
 xxxg2204xxx , which evolved independently of the bacterial b6-dependent alanine racemases, appears to be an
example of convergent evolution, arising from a side reaction carried out by b6-dependent enzymes related to bacterial serine and threonine dehydratases (wolosker et al.
1999a; mehta & christen 2000). it is unknown when
exactly  xxxg2204xxx -like proteins began producing
substantial quantities of  xxxd5xxx , but the phylogenetically earliest known examples of substantial  xxxd5xxx 
production in animals occur in insect larvae and annelids

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

956 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

table 2. summary of proposed sequence of events leading to the evolution of a glycine site regulated by  xxxd5xxx .
earliest appearance

divergence (myr ago)a

prokaryotes
prokaryotes
nematodes and arthropods
annelids and arthropods
tetrapods
mammals

⬎ 2500
⬎ 2500
1200
1000?
1000–650
300

component
glutamate-gated ion channel
dao
nmda-like glutamate receptors
plp-dependent  xxxg2204xxx 
mammalian-like nmda receptor glycine site
high  xxxd5xxx  levels in brain

a
divergence times in millions of years before the present (myr ago) are based on the work of hedges and colleagues (kumar &
hedges 1998; wang et al. 1999; hedges et al. 2001).

during certain stages of development (corrigan 1969).
nothing is yet known about the  xxxd5xxx  levels in the
insect or nematode nervous systems, which appear to lack
dao activity (corrigan et al. 1963), and it remains possible that substantial  xxxd5xxx  is synthesized by earlierdiverging eukaryotes but gets degraded by dao.
the lower vertebrates possess nmda receptor channels with glycine sites identical to those found in mammals
(figure 2). however, the forebrains of lower vertebrates
have low  xxxd5xxx  levels owing to high dao activity in all
brain regions (nagata et al. 1994). in these creatures the
glycine site would appear to be regulated chiefly by glycine
or some other unknown endogenous agonist. it is only in
the mammalian forebrain that high levels of  xxxd5xxx  occur
in glia located in close vicinity to high densities of nmda
receptors. this raises the interesting possibility that mammals have found it evolutionarily advantageous to both
developmentally delay (as in the hindbrain) or totally
repress (as in the forebrain) the expression of dao to
allow  xxxd5xxx  to accumulate to sufficient levels to occupy
nmda receptor glycine sites. the coevolution of the
nmda receptor glycine site and the high levels of  xxxd5xxx  in the forebrains of mammals offers an interesting case
study in the field of ‘phylogenetic pharmacology’, a term
coined more than 30 years ago (fischer 1972).
this proposed sequence of coevolution raises a question: why would mammals bother to use  xxxd5xxx  for regulating neurotransmission when glycine itself can be
assumed to regulate all nmda receptor glycine sites in
lower vertebrates—and also those sites on nmda receptors in the spinal cord, brainstem and adult cerebellum of
mammals? the answer may lie in the differences between
glycine and  xxxd5xxx  synaptic dynamics. glycine also gates
inhibitory chloride channels in all vertebrates (aprison et
al. 1969) and has the properties of a fast neurotransmitter:
it is concentrated in neurons (campistron et al. 1986),
released from synaptosomes by depolarizing stimuli
(mulder & snyder 1974), sequestered by high-affinity
reuptake systems (logan & snyder 1971) and turns over
rapidly (mcbride et al. 1973; daly et al. 1976; sato et al.
1991). the localizations of the two main glycine transporters in brain (zafra et al. 1995; jursky & nelson 1996)
strongly resemble localizations of glycine-like immunoreactivity (schell et al. 1997b), suggesting that the majority
of the glycine transmitter pool is sequestered inside cells.
thus the disposition and dynamics of glycine are well
suited for the homeostatic and motor functions carried out
in the caudal brain areas where it is enriched. such
functions must occur quickly and dependably for an
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

organism to survive, and the neuronal mechanisms controlling these functions require a relatively small amount
of plasticity once the brain has developed. even motor
learning—obviously a form a plasticity important throughout life—must occur precisely and requires small adjustments in timing and synchronization occurring over
millisecond time-scales. the neurotransmission underlying these processes must be dependable, repeatable and
rapid; no obvious benefit would be conferred by the extensive diffusion of a transmitter far from its site of action.
glycine—released by neurons to bind to nearby nmda
receptor glycine sites, followed by rapid uptake into cells—
seems well suited for this role.
compare these dynamics with the disposition of  xxxd5xxx  in the forebrain. once  xxxd5xxx  is synthesized in the
glial cytosol and released near synapses, it probably
remains in the extracellular space for a long time, its
actions limited mainly by diffusion. higher-level thinking
(logic, language, imagination) occurs predominantly in the
big forebrains of higher mammals, and some of these processes require minutes, days or even weeks to complete.
in humans, leaps in imagination are inevitably preceded
by long periods of incubation, when various scraps of
information and experience ‘pollinate’ neuronal activity.
perhaps the slower, less point-to-point dynamics of  xxxd5xxx  are more suited for this kind of brain activity. these
processes have been discussed extensively in various contexts (iversen & goodman 1986), including the non-synaptic actions of monoamines (beaudet & descarries 1978;
bunin & wightman 1999), neurotransmitter/receptor mismatches (herkenham 1987), neuropeptides (iversen
1984) and the diffusible neurotransmitter gases (baranano
et al. 2001). such processes are the targets for virtually all
useful drugs in neuropharmacology. various names have
been suggested: non-synaptic diffusion transmission
(bach-y-rita 1993), intersynaptic diffusion (barbour &
hausser 1997), parasynaptic diffusion (schmitt 1984)
and, perhaps most commonly, volume transmission
(agnati et al. 1995). this last term carries with it the
implication that we must consider some difficult parameters when thinking about movements of molecules
through the spatio-temporal continuum in neuropil: diffusion, geometry (fractal dimension), viscosity and tortuosity (nicholson & sykova 1998; rusakov & kullmann
1998).
non-synaptic processes also play crucial roles during
brain development. recently, mice have been engineered
with targeted disruptions in the synaptic vesicle secretion
machinery (verhage et al. 2000; varoqueaux et al. 2002).

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 957

the neurons of these animals are synaptically silent and
possess no evoked presynaptic secretion. remarkably, their
brains develop and assemble normally until birth, when the
animals die owing to failure to breathe. thus the bulk of
the early anatomical and synaptic development in brain
requires no fast neurotransmitter secretion whatsoever.
instead, during this time excitatory neurotransmission is
controlled by non-synaptic mechanisms: synthesis, diffusion, uptake and degradation (nedergaard et al. 2002).
although synaptic mechanisms obviously have increased
importance after birth, non-synaptic mechanisms continue
to operate and complement fast neurotransmission.
over the past 20 years it has become clear that glia participate crucially in this orchestrated cellular activity
(laming 1989; muller 1992; smith 1992; araque et al.
1999). to understand how the brain works, we must
understand not only the activity of neurons, but also the
relationship between information processing among neurons and glia (galambos 1961). in addition to glial modulation of established neuronal circuitry, glial influences
also operate during brain development, when both neurons and glia are migrating over great distances in the
brain, over periods of days to weeks (peretto et al. 1999;
conover et al. 2000; rakic 2003; suzuki & goldman
2003). in this context, the  xxxd5xxx  released from glia as
a consequence of metabolic coupling with neurons might
be thought of as a component of the extracellular milieu,
whose regional presence leads to an increased likelihood
that nmda receptor channels will open. in a more metaphorical sense, the evolution of  xxxd5xxx  and nmda
receptors in brain can be likened to the coevolution of
insects and flowers, and  xxxd5xxx  astrocyes might be
imagined to be insects that inhabit the neuropil and pollinate neuronal nmda receptors.
i am grateful to herman wolosker (technion-israel institute
of technology, haifa) and two anonymous reviewers for critical comments. i thank the royal society for support through
the robert and joan case fellowship for brain research.

references
agnati, l. f., zoli, m., stromberg, i. & fuxe, k. 1995 intercellular communication in the brain: wiring versus volume
transmission. neuroscience 69, 711–726.
ahmadi, s., muth-selbach, u., lauterbach, a., lipfert, p.,
neuhuber, w. l. & zeilhofer, h. u. 2003 facilitation of spinal nmda receptor currents by spillover of synaptically
released glycine. science 300, 2094–2097.
akazawa, c., shigemoto, r., bessho, y., nakanishi, s. &
mizuno, n. 1994 differential expression of five n-methyld-aspartate receptor subunit mrnas in the cerebellum of
developing and adult rats. j. comp.  xxxd122xxx . 347, 150–160.
alexander, f. w., sandmeier, e., mehta, p. k. & christen, p.
1994 evolutionary relationships among pyridoxal-5⬘-phosphate-dependent enzymes. regio-specific alpha, beta and
gamma families. eur. j. biochem. 219, 953–960.
allen, a. k. & rosenberg, h. 1968 the biosynthesis of  xxxd5xxx  ethanolamine phosphate in the earthworm megascolides
cameroni. biochim. biophys. acta 152, 208–210.
aprison, m. h., shank, r. p. & davidoff, r. a. 1969 a comparison of the concentration of glycine, a transmitter suspect, in different areas of the brain and spinal cord in seven
different vertebrates. comp. biochem. physiol. 28, 1345–
1355.
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

araque, a., parpura, v., sanzgiri, r. p. & haydon, p. g. 1999
tripartite synapses: glia, the unacknowledged partner.
trends neurosci. 22, 208–215.
armstrong, n. & gouaux, e. 2000 mechanisms for activation
and antagonism of an ampa-sensitive  xxxg981xxx :
crystal structures of the  xxxg953xxx  ligand binding core. neuron
28, 165–181.
armstrong, n., sun, y., chen, g. q. & gouaux, e. 1998
structure of a glutamate-receptor ligand-binding core in
complex with kainate. nature 395, 913–917.
auclair, j. l. 1959 amino acid oxidase activity in the fat body
and malpighian tubes of some insects. j. insect physiol. 3,
57–62.
bach-y-rita, p. 1993 nonsynaptic diffusion neurotransmission
(ndn) in the brain. neurochem. int. 23, 297–318.
ballard, t. m., pauly-evers, m., higgins, g. a., ouagazzal,
a. m., mutel, v., borroni, e., kemp, j. a., bluethmann,
h. & kew, j. n. 2002 severe impairment of nmda receptor function in mice carrying targeted point mutations in the
glycine binding site results in drug-resistant non-habituating
hyperactivity. j. neurosci. 22, 6713–6723.
banke, t. g. & traynelis, s. f. 2003 activation of nr1/nr2b
nmda receptors. nature neurosci. 6, 144–152.
baranano, d. e., ferris, c. d. & snyder, s. h. 2001 atypical
neural messengers. trends neurosci. 24, 99–106.
barbour, b. & hausser, m. 1997 intersynaptic diffusion of
neurotransmitter. trends neurosci. 20, 377–384.
beaudet, a. & descarries, l. 1978 the monoamine innervation of rat cerebral cortex: synaptic and non-synaptic axon
terminals. neuroscience 3, 851–860.
benton, m. j. & ayala, f. j. 2003 dating the tree of life. science
300, 1698–1700.
berger, a. j., dieudonne, s. & ascher, p. 1998 glycine uptake
governs glycine site occupancy at nmda receptors of excitatory synapses. j. neurophysiol. 80, 3336–3340.
bergeron, r., meyer, t. m., coyle, j. t. & greene, r. w.
1998 modulation of n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor function
by glycine transport. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 95,
15 730–15 734.
blanton, m. g., lo turco, j. j. & kriegstein, a. r. 1990
endogenous neurotransmitter activates n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors on differentiating neurons in embryonic cortex.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 87, 8027–8030.
blouin, j. l. (and 27 others) 1998 schizophrenia susceptibility
loci on chromosomes 13q32 and 8p21. nature genet. 20,
70–73.
bristow, d. r., bowery, n. g. & woodruff, g. n. 1986 light
microscopic autoradiographic localisation of [3h]glycine and
[3h]strychnine binding sites in rat brain. eur. j. pharmacol.
126, 303–307.
brockie, p. j., mellem, j. e., hills, t., madsen, d. m. & maricq, a. v. 2001 the c. elegans  xxxg981xxx  subunit
nmr-1 is required for slow nmda-activated currents that
regulate reversal frequency during locomotion. neuron 31,
617–630.
bruckner, h. & westhauser, t. 2003 chromatographic determination of l- and d-amino acids in plants. amino acids 24,
43–55.
bruckner, h., becker, d. & lupke, m. 1993 chirality of
amino acids of microorganisms used in food biotechnology.
chirality 5, 385–392.
bruckner, h., haasmann, s. & friedrich, a. 1994 quantification of d-amino acids in human urine using gc-ms and
hplc. amino acids 6, 205–211.
brzustowicz, l. m., honer, w. g., chow, e. w., little, d.,
hogan, j., hodgkinson, k. & bassett, a. s. 1999 linkage of
familial schizophrenia to chromosome 13q32. am. j. hum.
genet. 65, 1096–1103.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

958 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

bunin, m. a. & wightman, r. m. 1999 paracrine neurotransmission in the cns: involvement of 5-ht. trends neurosci. 22, 377–382.
burgess, m. f. & derby, c. d. 1997 two novel types of lglutamate receptors with affinities for nmda and l-cysteine
in the olfactory organ of the caribbean spiny lobster panulirus argus. brain res. 771, 292–304.
campistron, g., buijs, r. m. & geffard, m. 1986 glycine
neurons in the brain and spinal cord. antibody production
and immunocytochemical localization. brain res. 376,
400–405.
carone, f. a. & ganote, c. e. 1975  xxxd5xxx  nephrotoxicity.
the nature of proteinuria, glucosuria, and aminoaciduria in
acute tubular necrosis. arch. pathol. 99, 658–662.
casado, m., dieudonne, s. & ascher, p. 2000 presynaptic nmethyl-d-aspartate receptors at the parallel fiber-purkinje
cell synapse. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 97, 11 593–11 597.
cascella, n. g., macciardi, f., cavallini, c. & smeraldi, e.
1994 d-cycloserine adjuvant therapy to conventional neuroleptic treatment in schizophrenia: an open-label study. j.
neural transm. gen. sect. 95, 105–111.
cathala, l., misra, c. & cull-candy, s. 2000 developmental
profile of the changing properties of nmda receptors at cerebellar mossy fiber–granule cell synapses. j. neurosci. 20,
5899–5905.
cattaert, d. & birman, s. 2001 blockade of the central generator of locomotor rhythm by non-competitive nmda receptor antagonists in drosophila larvae. j. neurobiol. 48, 58–73.
chatterton j. e. (and 12 others) 2002 excitatory glycine receptors containing the  xxxg965xxx  family of nmda receptor subunits.
nature 415, 793–798.
chen, g. q. & gouaux, e. 1997 overexpression of a  xxxg981xxx  ( xxxg953xxx ) ligand binding domain in escherichia
coli: application of a novel protein folding screen. proc. natl
acad. sci. usa 94, 13 431–13 436.
chen, g. q., cui, c., mayer, m. l. & gouaux, e. 1999 functional characterization of a potassium-selective prokaryotic
 xxxg981xxx . nature 402, 817–821.
chen, l., muhlhauser, m. & yang, c. r. 2003 glycine transporter-1 blockade potentiates nmda-mediated responses in
rat prefrontal cortical neurons in vitro and in vivo. j. neurophysiol. 89, 691–703.
chiang, a. s., lin, w. y., liu, h. p., pszczolkowski, m. a.,
fu, t. f., chiu, s. l. & holbrook, g. l. 2002 insect
nmda receptors mediate juvenile hormone biosynthesis.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 99, 37–42.
chiu, j. c., desalle, r., lam, h. m., meisel, l. & coruzzi, g.
1999 molecular evolution of glutamate receptors: a primitive
signaling mechanism that existed before plants and animals
diverged. mol. biol. evol. 16, 826–838.
chiu, j. c., brenner, e. d., desalle, r., nitabach, m. n.,
holmes, t. c. & coruzzi, g. m. 2002 phylogenetic and
expression analysis of the glutamate-receptor-like gene family in arabidopsis thaliana. mol. biol. evol. 19, 1066–1082.
chouinard, m. l., gaitan, d. & wood, p. l. 1993 presence
of the n-methyl-d-aspartate-associated  xxxg904xxx 
agonist,  xxxd5xxx , in human temporal cortex: comparison of
normal, parkinson and alzheimer tissues. j. neurochem. 61,
1561–1564.
christensen, h. n. 1990 role of amino acid transport and
countertransport in nutrition and metabolism. physiol. rev.
70, 43–77.
chumakov, i. (and 64 others) 2002 genetic and physiological
data implicating the new human gene  xxxg72xxx  and the gene for
 xxxg602xxx  in schizophrenia. proc. natl acad. sci.
usa 99, 13 675–13 680.
cline, h. t. & tsien, r. w. 1991 glutamate-induced
increases in intracellular ca2⫹ in cultured frog tectal cells
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

mediated by direct activation of nmda receptor channels.
neuron 6, 259–267.
cloninger, c. r. 2002 the discovery of susceptibility genes for
mental disorders. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 99, 13 365–
13 367.
conover, j. c., doetsch, f., garcia-verdugo, j. m., gale,
n. w., yancopoulos, g. d. & alvarez-buylla, a. 2000 disruption of eph/ephrin signaling affects migration and proliferation in the adult subventricular zone. nature neurosci.
3, 1091–1097.
corrigan, j. j. 1969 d-amino acids in animals. science 164,
142–149.
corrigan, j. j. & srinivasan, n. g. 1966 the occurrence of certain d-amino acids in insects. biochemistry 5, 1185–1190.
corrigan, j. j., wellner, d. & meister, a. 1963 determination
of  xxxg602xxx  activity in insect tissues using dallohydroxyproline as substrate. biochim. biophys. acta 73,
50–56.
coyle, j. t., tsai, g. & goff, d. c. 2002 ionotropic glutamate
receptors as therapeutic targets in schizophrenia. curr. drug
target cns  xxxd122xxx . disord. 1, 183–189.
cull-candy, s. g., brickley, s. g., misra, c., feldmeyer, d.,
momiyama, a. & farrant, m. 1998 nmda receptor diversity in the cerebellum: identification of subunits contributing
to functional receptors. neuropharmacology 37, 1369–1380.
curtis, d. r. & johnston, g. a. 1970 strychnine, glycine and
vertebrate postsynaptic inhibition. nature 225, 1258–1259.
curtis, d. r., phillis, j. w. & watkins, j. c. 1961 actions of
amino acids on the isolated hemisected spinal cord of the
toad. br. j. pharmacol. 16, 262–283.
czepita, d., daw, n. w. & reid, s. n. 1996 glycine at the
nmda receptor in cat visual cortex: saturation and changes
with age. j. neurophysiol. 75, 311–317.
dale, n. & kandel, e. r. 1993 l-glutamate may be the fast
excitatory transmitter of aplysia sensory neurons. proc. natl
acad. sci. usa 90, 7163–7167.
daly, e. c., nadi, n. s. & aprison, m. h. 1976 regional distribution and properties of the glycine cleavage system
within the central nervous system of the rat: evidence for an
endogenous inhibitor during in vitro assay. j. neurochem. 26,
179–185.
dansen, t. b., wirtz, k. w., wanders, r. j. & pap, e. h.
2000 peroxisomes in human fibroblasts have a basic ph.
nature cell biol. 2, 51–53.
danysz, w. & parsons, a. c. 1998 glycine and n-methyl-daspartate receptors: physiological significance and possible
therapeutic applications. pharmacol. rev. 50, 597–664.
danysz, w., fadda, e., wroblewski, j. t. & costa, e. 1990
[3h] xxxd5xxx  labels strychnine-insensitive glycine recognition
sites of rat central nervous system. life sci. 46, 155–164.
defeudis, f. v., orensanz munoz, l. m. & fando, j. l. 1978
high-affinity glycine binding sites in rat cns: regional variation and strychnine sensitivity. gen. pharmacol. 9, 171–176.
de koning, t. j., snell, k., duran, m., berger, r., poll-the,
b. t. & surtees, r. 2003 l-serine in disease and development. biochem. j. 371, 653–661.
de marchi, w. j. & johnston, g. a. 1969 the oxidation of
glycine by  xxxg602xxx  in extracts of mammalian
central nervous tissue. j. neurochem. 16, 355–361.
de miranda, j., panizzutti, r., foltyn, v. n. & wolosker, h.
2002 cofactors of  xxxg2204xxx  that physiologically
stimulate the synthesis of the n-methyl-d-aspartate
(nmda) receptor coagonist  xxxd5xxx . proc. natl acad. sci.
usa 99, 14 542–14 547.
de souza, m. m., schenberg, l. c. & de padua carobrez, a.
1998 nmda-coupled periaqueductal gray glycine receptors
modulate anxioselective drug effects on plus-maze performance. behav. brain res. 90, 157–165.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 959
dingledine, r., borges, k., bowie, d. & traynelis, s. f. 1999
the  xxxg981xxx  ion channels. pharmacol. rev. 51,
7–61.
dupont, j. l., gardette, r. & crepel, f. 1987 postnatal development of the chemosensitivity of rat cerebellar purkinje
cells to excitatory amino acids. an in vitro study. brain res.
431, 59–68.
ebralidze, a. k., rossi, d. j., tonegawa, s. & slater, n. t.
1996 modification of nmda receptor channels and synaptic transmission by targeted disruption of the  xxxg966xxx  gene.
j. neurosci. 16, 5014–5025.
emmett, m. r., mick, s. j., cler, j. a., rao, t. s., iyengar,
s. & wood, p. l. 1991 actions of d-cycloserine at the nmethyl-d-aspartate-associated  xxxg904xxx  site in vivo.
neuropharmacology 30, 1167–1171.
epstein, i., nair, k. g. & boyd, l. j. 1955 cycloserine, a new
antibiotic in the treatment of human pulmonary tuberculosis: a preliminary report. antibiot. med. 1, 30.
espinosa, l., itzstein, c., cheynel, h., delmas, p. d. &
chenu, c. 1999 active nmda glutamate receptors are
expressed by mammalian osteoclasts. j. physiol. 518, 47–53.
evins, a. e., fitzgerald, s. m., wine, l., rosselli, r. & goff,
d. c. 2000 placebo-controlled trial of glycine added to clozapine in schizophrenia. am. j. psychiatry 157, 826–828.
farrant, m., feldmeyer, d., takahashi, t. & cull-candy,
s. g. 1994 nmda-receptor channel diversity in the
developing cerebellum. nature 368, 335–339.
feinstein, n., parnas, d., parnas, h., dudel, j. & parnas, i.
1998 functional and immunocytochemical identification of
glutamate autoreceptors of an nmda type in crayfish
neuromuscular junction. j. neurophysiol. 80, 2893–2899.
felder, c. b., graul, r. c., lee, a. y., merkle, h. p. & sadee,
w. 1999 the venus flytrap of periplasmic binding proteins:
an ancient protein module present in multiple drug receptors. aaps pharm. sci. 1, e2, 1–10. (doi 1208/ps010202.)
ferraro, t. n. & hare, t. a. 1985 free and conjugated amino
acids in human csf: influence of age and sex. brain res.
338, 53–60.
fischer, h. 1972 animal evolution in the field of synaptic substances. naturwissenschaften 59, 425–435.
fishman, w. h. & artom, c. 1942 serine injury. j. biol.
chem. 145, 345–346.
foucaud, b., laube, b., schemm, r., kreimeyer, a.,
goeldner, m. & betz, h. 2003 structural model of the
nmda receptor glycine site probed by site-directed chemical coupling. j. biol. chem. 278, 24 011–24 017.
fox, l. e. & lloyd, p. e. 1999 glutamate is a fast excitatory
transmitter at some buccal neuromuscular synapses in
aplysia. j. neurophysiol. 82, 1477–1488.
fukasawa, y., segawa, h., kim, j. y., chairoungdua, a.,
kim, d. k., matsuo, h., cha, s. h., endou, h. & kanai,
y. 2000 identification and characterization of a na⫹-independent neutral amino acid transporter that associates with
the 4f2 heavy chain and exhibits substrate selectivity for
small neutral d- and l-amino acids. j. biol. chem. 275,
9690–9698.
furukawa, h. & gouaux, e. 2003 mechanisms of activation,
inhibition and specificity: crystal structures of the nmda
receptor nr1 ligand-binding core. embo j. 22, 2873–
2885.
furuya, s., tabata, t., mitoma, j., yamada, k., yamasaki,
m., makino, a., yamamoto, t., watanabe, m., kano, m. &
hirabayashi, y. 2000 l-serine and glycine serve as major
astroglia-derived trophic factors for cerebellar purkinje neurons. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 97, 11 528–11 533.
galambos, r. 1961 a glia-neural theory of brain function.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 47, 129–136.
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

gallo, v. & russell, j. t. 1995 excitatory amino acid receptors
in glia: different subtypes for distinct functions? j. neurosci.
res. 42, 1–8.
gallo, v., patneau, d. k., mayer, m. l. & vaccarino, f. m.
1994 excitatory amino acid receptors in glial progenitor
cells: molecular and functional properties. glia 11, 94–101.
ganote, c. e., peterson, d. r. & carone, f. a. 1974 the nature of  xxxd5xxx -induced nephrotoxicity. am. j. pathol. 77,
269–282.
garthwaite, g., yamini jr, b. & garthwaite, j. 1987 selective
loss of purkinje and granule cell responsiveness to n-methyld-aspartate in rat cerebellum during development. brain res.
433, 288–292.
gaunt, g. l. & de duve, c. 1976 subcellular distribution of
 xxxg602xxx  and catalase in rat brain. j. neurochem.
26, 749–759.
genever, p. g., wilkinson, d. j., patton, a. j., peet, n. m.,
hong, y., mathur, a., erusalimsky, j. d. & skerry, t. m.
1999 expression of a functional n-methyl-d-aspartate-type
 xxxg981xxx  by bone marrow megakaryocytes. blood
93, 2876–2883.
goff, d. c. & coyle, j. t. 2001 the emerging role of glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment of schizophrenia.
am. j. psychiatry 158, 1367–1377.
goff, d. c., tsai, g., manoach, d. s. & coyle, j. t. 1995
dose-finding trial of d-cycloserine added to neuroleptics for
negative symptoms in schizophrenia. am. j. psychiatry 152,
1213–1215.
goldstein, d. b. 1966  xxxg602xxx  in brain: distribution in several species and inhibition by pentobarbitone.
j. neurochem. 13, 1011–1016.
goldstein, d. s., lenders, j. w., kaler, s. g. & eisenhofer,
g. 1996 catecholamine phenotyping: clues to the diagnosis,
treatment, and pathophysiology of neurogenetic disorders.
j. neurochem. 67, 1781–1790.
harrison, p. j. 1999 the neuropathology of schizophrenia. a
critical review of the data and their interpretation. brain 122,
593–624.
harrison, p. j. & owen, m. j. 2003 genes for schizophrenia?
recent findings and their pathophysiological implications.
lancet 361, 417–419.
harvey-girard, e. & dunn, r. j. 2003 excitatory amino acid
receptors of the electrosensory system: the nr1/nr2b nmethyl-d-aspartate receptor. j. neurophysiol. 89, 822–832.
hashimoto, a. 2002 effect of the intracerebroventricular and
systemic administration of l-serine on the concentrations of
d- and l-serine in several brain areas and periphery of rat.
brain res. 955, 214–220.
hashimoto, a. & oka, t. 1997 free d-aspartate and  xxxd5xxx 
in the mammalian brain and periphery. prog. neurobiol. 52,
325–353.
hashimoto, a., nishikawa, t., hayashi, t., fujii, n., harada,
k., oka, t. & takahashi, k. 1992 the presence of free dserine in rat brain. febs lett. 296, 33–36.
hashimoto, a., nishikawa, t., oka, t. & takahashi, k. 1993a
endogenous  xxxd5xxx  in rat brain: n-methyl-d-aspartate
receptor-related distribution and aging. j. neurochem. 60,
783–786.
hashimoto, a., nishikawa, t., konno, r., niwa, a., yasumura, y., oka, t. & takahashi, k. 1993b free  xxxd5xxx , daspartate and d-alanine in central nervous system and serum
in mutant mice lacking  xxxg602xxx . neurosci. lett.
152, 33–36.
hashimoto, a. (and 11 others) 1993c embryonic development
and postnatal changes in free d-aspartate and  xxxd5xxx  in the
human prefrontal cortex. j. neurochem. 61, 348–351.
hashimoto, a., oka, t. & nishikawa, t. 1995a extracellular
concentration of endogenous free  xxxd5xxx  in the rat brain as
revealed by in vivo microdialysis. neuroscience 66, 635–643.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

960 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

hashimoto, a., oka, t. & nishikawa, t. 1995b anatomical
distribution and postnatal changes in endogenous free daspartate and  xxxd5xxx  in rat brain and periphery. eur. j.
neurosci. 7, 1657–1663.
hashimoto, a., kanda, j. & oka, t. 2000 effects of n-methyld-aspartate, kainate or veratridine on extracellular concentrations of free  xxxd5xxx  and l-glutamate in rat striatum: an
in vivo microdialysis study. brain res. bull. 53, 347–351.
hashimoto, k. (and 11 others) 2003 decreased serum levels
of  xxxd5xxx  in patients with schizophrenia: evidence in support of the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor hypofunction
hypothesis of schizophrenia. arch. gen. psychiatry 60,
572–576.
hatanaka, t., huang, w., nakanishi, t., bridges, c. c.,
smith, s. b., prasad, p. d., ganapathy, m. e. & ganapathy,
v. 2002 transport of  xxxd5xxx  via the amino acid transporter
atb(0,⫹) expressed in the colon. biochem. biophys. res.
commun. 291, 291–295.
hattori, e., liu, c., badner, j. a., bonner, t. i., christian,
s. l., maheshwari, m., detera-wadleigh, s. d., gibbs,
r. a. & gershon, e. s. 2003 polymorphisms at the
 xxxg72xxx / xxxg30xxx  gene locus, on 13q33, are associated with bipolar
disorder in two independent pedigree series. am. j. hum.
genet. 72, 1131–1140.
hayashi, f., takahashi, k. & nishikawa, t. 1997 uptake of
d- and l-serine in c6 glioma cells. neurosci. lett. 239, 85–88.
heckmann, m. & dudel, j. 1995 recordings of glutamategated ion channels in outside-out patches from drosophila
larval muscle. neurosci. lett. 196, 53–56.
hedges, s. b., chen, h., kumar, s., wang, d. y., thompson,
a. s. & watanabe, h. 2001 a genomic time-scale for the
origin of eukaryotes. bmc evol. biol. 1, 1–10.
heresco-levy, u., ermilov, m., shimoni, j., shapira, b., silipo, g. & javitt, d. c. 2002 placebo-controlled trial of dcycloserine added to conventional neuroleptics, olanzapine,
or risperidone in schizophrenia. am. j. psychiatry 159,
480–482.
herkenham, m. 1987 mismatches between neurotransmitter
and receptor localizations in brain: observations and implications. neuroscience 23, 1–38.
hirai, h., kirsch, j., laube, b., betz, h. & kuhse, j. 1996
the glycine binding site of the  xxxg963xxx : identification of novel determinants of coagonist potentiation in the extracellular m3-m4 loop region.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 93, 6031–6036.
horiike, k., tojo, h., arai, r., yamano, t., nozaki, m. &
maeda, t. 1987 localization of  xxxg602xxx  in
bergmann glial cells and astrocytes of rat cerebellum. brain
res. bull. 19, 587–596.
horiike, k., tojo, h., arai, r., nozaki, m. & maeda, t. 1994
 xxxg602xxx  is confined to the lower brain stem
and cerebellum in rat brain: regional differentiation of astrocytes. brain res. 652, 297–303.
horiike, k., ishida, t., tanaka, h. & arai, r. 2001 distribution of  xxxg602xxx  and  xxxd5xxx  in vertebrate
brains. j. mol. catal. b enzym. 12, 37–41.
huang, y., nishikawa, t., satoh, k., iwata, t., fukushima,
t., santa, t., homma, h. & imai, k. 1998 urinary
excretion of  xxxd5xxx  in human: comparison of different ages
and species. biol. pharm. bull. 21, 156–162.
imai, k., fukushima, t., santa, t., homma, h., huang, y.,
shirao, m. & miura, k. 1998 whole body autoradiographic
study on the distribution of 14c- xxxd5xxx  administered intravenously to rats. amino acids 15, 351–361.
itzstein, c., cheynel, h., burt-pichat, b., merle, b., espinosa,
l., delmas, p. d. & chenu, c. 2001 molecular identification of nmda glutamate receptors expressed in bone
cells. j. cell biochem. 82, 134–144.
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

ivanovic, a., reilander, h., laube, b. & kuhse, j. 1998
expression and initial characterization of a soluble glycine
binding domain of the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor nr1
subunit. j. biol. chem. 273, 19 933–19 937.
iversen, l. l. 1984 the ferrier lecture, 1983. amino acids
and peptides: fast and slow chemical signals in the nervous
system? proc. r. soc. lond. b 221, 245–260.
iversen, l. l. & goodman, e. (eds) 1986 fast and slow chemical signalling in the nervous system. london: oxford university press.
javitt, d. c. 2002 glycine modulators in schizophrenia. curr.
opin. investig. drugs 3, 1067–1072.
javitt, d. c., zylberman, i., zukin, s. r., heresco-levy, u. &
lindenmayer, j. p. 1994 amelioration of negative symptoms
in schizophrenia by glycine. am. j. psychiatry 151, 1234–
1236.
javitt, d. c., balla, a. & sershen, h. 2002 a novel alanineinsensitive  xxxd5xxx  transporter in rat brain synaptosomal
membranes. brain res. 941, 146–149.
johnson, j. w. & ascher, p. 1987 glycine potentiates the
nmda response in cultured mouse brain neurons. nature
325, 529–531.
jursky, f. & nelson, n. 1996 developmental expression of the
glycine transporters glyt1 and  xxxg2151xxx  in mouse brain. j.
neurochem. 67, 336–344.
kakizawa, s., yamasaki, m., watanabe, m. & kano, m. 2000
critical period for activity-dependent synapse elimination in
developing cerebellum. j. neurosci. 20, 4954–4961.
kang, j. & turano, f. j. 2003 the putative  xxxg981xxx 
1.1 (atglr1.1) functions as a regulator of carbon and nitrogen metabolism in arabidopsis thaliana. proc. natl acad. sci.
usa 100, 6872–6877.
katagiri, m., tojo, h., horiike, k. & yamano, t. 1991
immunochemical relationship of d-amino acid oxidases in
various tissues and animals. comp. biochem. physiol. b 99,
345–350.
kera, y., watanabe, t., kimihiko, s., nagasaki, h. & yamada, r. 2001 d-aspartate oxidase and free acidic d-amino
acids in lower vertebrates. j. mol. catal. b 12, 121–129.
kew, j. n. (and 14 others) 2000 functional consequences of
reduction in nmda receptor glycine affinity in mice carrying targeted point mutations in the glycine binding site. j.
neurosci. 20, 4037–4049.
kishimoto, h., simon, j. r. & aprison, m. h. 1981 determination of the equilibrium dissociation constants and number
of glycine binding sites in several areas of the rat central nervous system, using a sodium-independent system. j. neurochem. 37, 1015–1024.
kleckner, n. w. & dingledine, r. 1988 requirement for glycine in activation of nmda-receptors expressed in xenopus
oocytes. science 241, 835–837.
konno, r., sasaki, m., asakura, s., fukui, k., enami, j. &
niwa, a. 1997  xxxg602xxx  is not present in the
mouse liver. biochim. biophys. acta 1335, 173–181.
kragh-hansen, u. & sheikh, m. i. 1984 serine uptake by luminal and basolateral membrane vesicles from rabbit kidney.
j. physiol. 354, 55–67.
krebs, c., fernandes, h. b., sheldon, c., raymond, l. a. &
baimbridge, k. g. 2003 functional nmda receptor subtype 2b is expressed in astrocytes after ischemia in vivo and
anoxia in vitro. j. neurosci. 23, 3364–3372.
krebs, h. a. 1935 metabolism of amino-acids. iii. deamination of amino acids. biochem. j. 29, 1620–1643.
krebs, h. a. 1948 the d- and l-amino-acid oxidases. biochem.
soc. symp. 1, 2–18.
krupa, m. & crepel, f. 1990 transient sensitivity of rat cerebellar purkinje cells to n-methyl-d-aspartate during development. a voltage clamp study in in vitro slices. eur. j.
neurosci. 2, 312–316.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 961
kumar, s. & hedges, s. b. 1998 a molecular timescale for
vertebrate evolution. nature 392, 917–920.
kumashiro, s., hashimoto, a. & nishikawa, t. 1995 free dserine in post-mortem brains and spinal cords of individuals
with and without neuropsychiatric diseases. brain res. 681,
117–125.
kuryatov, a., laube, b., betz, h. & kuhse, j. 1994
mutational analysis of the glycine-binding site of the nmda
receptor: structural similarity with bacterial amino acidbinding proteins. neuron 12, 1291–1300.
kuusinen, a., arvola, m. & keinanen, k. 1995 molecular dissection of the agonist binding site of an  xxxg981xxx .
embo j. 14, 6327–6332.
lahti, a. c., koffel, b., laporte, d. & tamminga, c. a. 1995
subanesthetic doses of ketamine stimulate psychosis in
schizophrenia. neuropsychopharmacology 13, 9–19.
lam, h. m., chiu, j., hsieh, m. h., meisel, l., oliveira, i. c.,
shin, m. & coruzzi, g. 1998 glutamate-receptor genes in
plants. nature 396, 125–126.
laming, p. r. 1989 do glia contribute to behaviour? a neuromodulatory review. comp. biochem. physiol. a 94, 555–568.
lampinen, m., pentikainen, o., johnson, m. s. & keinanen,
k. 1998 ampa receptors and bacterial periplasmic amino
acid-binding proteins share the ionic mechanism of ligand
recognition. embo j. 17, 4704–4711.
laube, b., hirai, h., sturgess, m., betz, h. & kuhse, j. 1997
molecular determinants of agonist discrimination by
nmda receptor subunits: analysis of the glutamate binding
site on the nr2b subunit. neuron 18, 493–503.
laube, b., kuhse, j. & betz, h. 1998 evidence for a tetrameric
structure of recombinant nmda receptors. j. neurosci. 18,
2954–2961.
levi, g. & patrizio, m. 1992 astrocyte heterogeneity:
endogenous amino acid levels and release evoked by nonn-methyl-d-aspartate receptor agonists and by potassiuminduced swelling in type-1 and type-2 astrocytes. j. neurochem. 58, 1943–1952.
levi, g., gallo, v. & patrizio, m. 1992 release of exogenous
and endogenous neurotransmitter amino acids from cultured
astrocytes. prog. brain res. 94, 243–250.
levinson, d. f. (and 19 others) 2000 multicenter linkage
study of schizophrenia candidate regions on chromosomes
5q, 6q, 10p, and 13q: schizophrenia linkage collaborative
group iii. am. j. hum. genet. 67, 652–663.
lewis, w. c., calden, g., thurston, r. & gilson, w. e. 1957
psychiatric and neurological reactions to cycloserine in the
treatment of tuberculosis. dis. chest 32, 172–182.
lin, m. w., sham, p., hwu, h. g., collier, d., murray, r. &
powell, j. f. 1997 suggestive evidence for linkage of schizophrenia to markers on chromosome 13 in caucasian but not
oriental populations. hum. genet. 99, 417–420.
lo, e. h., pierce, a. r., matsumoto, k., kano, t., evans,
c. j. & newcomb, r. 1998 alterations in k⫹ evoked profiles
of neurotransmitter and neuromodulator amino acids after
focal ischemia-reperfusion. neuroscience 83, 449–458.
logan, w. j. & snyder, s. h. 1971 unique high affinity uptake
systems for glycine, glutamic and aspartic acids in central
nervous tissue of the rat. nature 234, 297–299.
mcbride, w. j., daly, e. & aprison, m. h. 1973 interconversion of glycine and serine in a synaptosome fraction isolated
from the spinal cord, medulla oblongata, telencephalon, and
cerebellum of the rat. j. neurobiol. 4, 557–566.
madden, d. r. 2002 the structure and function of glutamate
receptor ion channels. nature rev. neurosci. 3, 91–101.
malinow, r. 2003  xxxg981xxx  trafficking and long-term
potentiation. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 358, 707–714.
(doi 10.1098/rstb.2002.1233.)
matsui, t., sekiguchi, m., hashimoto, a., tomita, u.,
nishikawa, t. & wada, k. 1995 functional comparison of
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

 xxxd5xxx  and glycine in rodents: the effect on cloned nmda
receptors and the extracellular concentration. j. neurochem.
65, 454–458.
mehta, p. k. & christen, p. 2000 the molecular evolution of
pyridoxal-5⬘-phosphate-dependent enzymes. adv. enzymol.
relat. areas mol. biol. 74, 129–184.
millan, m. j. 2002 n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-coupled
glycine(b) receptors in the pathogenesis and treatment of
schizophrenia: a critical review. curr. drug target cns  xxxd122xxx . disord. 1, 191–213.
misra, c., brickley, s. g., wyllie, d. j. & cull-candy, s. g.
2000 slow deactivation kinetics of nmda receptors containing nr1 and  xxxg967xxx  subunits in rat cerebellar purkinje
cells. j. physiol. 525, 299–305.
mitoma, j., furuya, s. & hirabayashi, y. 1998 a novel metabolic communication between neurons and astrocytes: nonessential amino acid l-serine released from astrocytes is
essential for developing hippocampal neurons. neurosci. res.
30, 195–199.
miyazaki, j., nakanishi, s. & jingami, h. 1999 expression and
characterization of a glycine-binding fragment of the nmethyl-d-aspartate receptor subunit nr1. biochem. j. 340,
687–692.
mohn, a. r., gainetdinov, r. r., caron, m. g. & koller,
b. h. 1999 mice with reduced nmda receptor expression
display behaviors related to schizophrenia. cell 98, 427–436.
monyer, h., sprengel, r., schoepfer, r., herb, a., higuchi,
m., lomeli, h., burnashev, n., sakmann, b. & seeburg,
p. h. 1992 heteromeric nmda receptors: molecular and
functional distinction of subtypes. science 256, 1217–1221.
monyer, h., burnashev, n., laurie, d. j., sakmann, b. & seeburg, p. h. 1994 developmental and regional expression in
the rat brain and functional properties of four nmda receptors. neuron 12, 529–540.
moreno, s., nardacci, r., cimini, a. & ceru, m. p. 1999
immunocytochemical localization of  xxxg602xxx 
in rat brain. j. neurocytol. 28, 169–185.
moroz, l. l., gyori, j. & salanki, j. 1993 nmda-like receptors in the cns of molluscs. neuroreport 4, 201–204.
mothet, j. p., parent, a. t., wolosker, h., brady jr, r. o.,
linden, d. j., ferris, c. d., rogawski, m. a. & snyder,
s. h. 2000  xxxd5xxx  is an endogenous ligand for the glycine
site of the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor. proc. natl acad.
sci. usa 97, 4926–4931.
mulder, a. h. & snyder, s. h. 1974 potassium-induced
release of amino acids from cerebral cortex and spinal cord
slices of the rat. brain res. 76, 297–308.
muller, c. m. 1992 a role for glial cells in activity-dependent
central nervous plasticity? review and hypothesis. int. rev.
neurobiol. 34, 215–281.
murray, f., kennedy, j., hutson, p. h., elliot, j., huscroft,
i., mohnen, k., russell, m. g. & grimwood, s. 2000
modulation of [3h]mk-801 binding to nmda receptors in
vivo and in vitro. eur. j. pharmacol. 397, 263–270.
nagata, y. 1992 involvement of  xxxg602xxx  in elimination of  xxxd5xxx  in mouse brain. experientia 48, 753–755.
nagata, y., konno, r., yasumura, y. & akino, t. 1989
involvement of  xxxg602xxx  in elimination of free
d-amino acids in mice. biochem. j. 257, 291–292.
nagata, y., horiike, k. & maeda, t. 1994 distribution of free
 xxxd5xxx  in vertebrate brains. brain res. 634, 291–295.
nagata, y. (and 11 others) 1999 occurrence of d-amino acids
in a few archaea and dehydrogenase activities in hyperthermophile pyrobaculum islandicum. biochim. biophys. acta 1435,
160–166.
nakanishi, n., shneider, n. a. & axel, r. 1990 a family of
 xxxg981xxx  genes: evidence for the formation of heteromultimeric receptors with distinct channel properties.
neuron 5, 569–581.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

962 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

nakauchi, j. (and 11 others) 2000 cloning and characterization of a human brain na⫹-independent transporter for
small neutral amino acids that transports  xxxd5xxx  with high
affinity. neurosci. lett. 287, 231–235.
nedergaard, m., takano, t. & hansen, a. j. 2002 beyond the
role of glutamate as a neurotransmitter. nature rev. neurosci. 3, 748–755.
neidle, a. & dunlop, d. s. 2002 allosteric regulation of
mouse brain  xxxg2204xxx . neurochem. res. 27, 1719–
1724.
neims, a. h., zieverink, w. d. & smilack, j. d. 1966 distribution of  xxxg602xxx  in bovine and human nervous tissues. j. neurochem. 13, 163–168.
nicholson, c. & sykova, e. 1998 extracellular space structure
revealed by diffusion analysis. trends neurosci. 21, 207–215.
nilsson, m., carlsson, a. & carlsson, m. l. 1997 glycine and
 xxxd5xxx  decrease mk-801-induced hyperactivity in mice. j.
neural transm. 104, 1195–1205.
nong, y., huang, y. q., ju, w., kalia, l. v., ahmadian, g.,
wang, y. t. & salter, m. w. 2003 glycine binding primes
nmda receptor internalization. nature 422, 302–307.
obrenovitch, t. p., hardy, a. m. & urenjak, j. 1997 high
extracellular glycine does not potentiate n-methyl-d-aspartate-evoked depolarization in vivo. brain res. 746, 190–194.
o’brien, p. j. & herschlag, d. 1999 catalytic promiscuity and
the evolution of new enzymatic activities. chem. biol. 6,
r91–r105.
o’hara, p. j., sheppard, p. o., thogersen, h., venezia, d.,
haldeman, b. a., mcgrane, v., houamed, k. m.,
thomsen, c., gilbert, t. l. & mulvihill, e. r. 1993 the
ligand-binding domain in metabotropic glutamate receptors
is related to bacterial periplasmic binding proteins. neuron
11, 41–52.
oldendorf, w. h. 1973 stereospecificity of blood–brain barrier
permeability to amino acids. am. j. physiol. 224, 967–969.
olson, m. v. 1999 when less is more: gene loss as an engine
of evolutionary change. am. j. hum. genet. 64, 18–23.
paas, y., eisenstein, m., medevielle, f., teichberg, v. i. &
devillers-thiery, a. 1996 identification of the amino acid
subsets accounting for the ligand binding specificity of a  xxxg981xxx . neuron 17, 979–990.
paas, y., devillers-thiery, a., teichberg, v. i., changeux,
j. p. & eisenstein, m. 2000 how well can molecular modelling predict the crystal structure: the case of the ligand-binding domain of glutamate receptors. trends pharmacol. sci.
21, 87–92.
panizzutti, r., de miranda, j., ribeiro, c. s., engelender, s. &
wolosker, h. 2001 a new strategy to decrease n-methyld-aspartate (nmda) receptor coactivation: inhibition of dserine synthesis by converting  xxxg2204xxx  into an eliminase. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 98, 5294–5299.
parveen, z., large, a., grewal, n., lata, n., cancio, i., cajaraville, m. p., perry, c. j. & connock, m. j. 2001 d-aspartate oxidase and  xxxg602xxx  are localised in the
peroxisomes of terrestrial gastropods. eur. j. cell biol. 80,
651–660.
peretto, p., merighi, a., fasolo, a. & bonfanti, l. 1999 the
subependymal layer in rodents: a site of structural plasticity
and cell migration in the adult mammalian brain. brain res.
bull. 49, 221–243.
petralia, r. s., wang, y. x. & wenthold, r. j. 1994a the
nmda receptor subunits  xxxg964xxx  and nr2b show histological and ultrastructural localization patterns similar to those
of nr1. j. neurosci. 14, 6102–6120.
petralia, r. s., yokotani, n. & wenthold, r. j. 1994b light
and electron microscope distribution of the nmda receptor
subunit  xxxg963xxx  in the rat nervous system using a selective anti-peptide antibody. j. neurosci. 14, 667–696.
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

pfeiffer-linn, c. & glantz, r. m. 1991 an arthropod nmda
receptor. synapse 9, 35–42.
pierobon, p., minei, r., porcu, p., sogliano, c., tino, a.,
marino, g., biggio, g. & concas, a. 2001 putative glycine
receptors in hydra: a biochemical and behavioural study.
eur. j. neurosci. 14, 1659–1666.
pollegioni, l., diederichs, k., molla, g., umhau, s., welte,
w., ghisla, s. & pilone, m. s. 2002 yeast  xxxg602xxx : structural basis of its catalytic properties. j. mol. biol.
324, 535–546.
potkin, s. g., jin, y., bunney, b. g., costa, j. & gulasekaram,
b. 1999 effect of clozapine and adjunctive high-dose glycine
in treatment-resistant schizophrenia. am. j. psychiatry 156,
145–147.
priestley, t., laughton, p., myers, j., le bourdelles, b.,
kerby, j. & whiting, p. j. 1995 pharmacological properties
of recombinant human n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors comprising nr1a/ xxxg964xxx  and nr1a/nr2b subunit assemblies
expressed in permanently transfected mouse fibroblast cells.
mol. pharmacol. 48, 841–848.
pszczolkowski, m. a., lee, w. s., liu, h. p. & chiang, a. s.
1999 glutamate-induced rise in cytosolic calcium concentration stimulates in vitro rates of juvenile hormone biosynthesis in corpus allatum of diploptera punctata. mol. cell.
endocrinol. 158, 163–171.
rabacchi, s., bailly, y., delhaye-bouchaud, n. & mariani, j.
1992 involvement of the n-methyl d-aspartate (nmda)
receptor in synapse elimination during cerebellar development. science 256, 1823–1825.
rakic, p. 2003 developmental and evolutionary adaptations of
cortical radial glia. cereb. cortex 13, 541–549.
ribeiro, c. s., reis, m., panizzutti, r., de miranda, j. &
wolosker, h. 2002 glial transport of the neuromodulator
 xxxd5xxx . brain res. 929, 202–209.
robinson, t. 1976 d-amino acids in higher plants. life sci.
19, 1097–1102.
rothman, s. m. & olney, j. w. 1995 excitotoxicity and the
nmda receptor: still lethal after eight years. trends neurosci. 18, 57–58.
rusakov, d. a. & kullmann, d. m. 1998 geometric and viscous components of the tortuosity of the extracellular space
in the brain. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 95, 8975–8980.
sandberg, r., yasuda, r., pankratz, d. g., carter, t. a.,
del rio, j. a., wodicka, l., mayford, m., lockhart, d. j. &
barlow, c. 2000 regional and strain-specific gene
expression mapping in the adult mouse brain. proc. natl
acad. sci. usa 97, 11 038–11 043.
sandmeier, e., hale, t. i. & christen, p. 1994 multiple evolutionary origin of pyridoxal-5⬘-phosphate-dependent amino
acid decarboxylases. eur. j. biochem. 221, 997–1002.
sarower, m. g., matsui, t. & abe, h. 2003 distribution and
characteristics of d-amino acid and d-aspartate oxidases in
fish tissues. j. exp. zool. a 295, 151–159.
sato, k., yoshida, s., fujiwara, k., tada, k. & tohyama, m.
1991 glycine cleavage system in astrocytes. brain res. 567,
64–70.
savoca, r., ziegler, u. & sonderegger, p. 1995 effects of lserine on neurons in vitro. j. neurosci. meth. 61, 159–167.
schell, m. j., molliver, m. e. & snyder, s. h. 1995  xxxd5xxx ,
an endogenous synaptic modulator: localization to astrocytes
and glutamate-stimulated release. proc. natl acad. sci. usa
92, 3948–3952.
schell, m. j., cooper, o. b. & snyder, s. h. 1997a d-aspartate localizations imply neuronal and neuroendocrine roles.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 94, 2013–2018.
schell, m. j., brady jr, r. o., molliver, m. e. & snyder, s. h.
1997b  xxxd5xxx  as a neuromodulator: regional and developmental localizations in rat brain glia resemble nmda receptors. j. neurosci. 17, 1604–1615.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx  m. j. schell 963
scherzer, c. r., landwehrmeyer, g. b., kerner, j. a., standaert, d. g., hollingsworth, z. r., daggett, l. p., velicelebi,
g., penney jr, j. b. & young, a. b. 1997 cellular distribution of nmda  xxxg981xxx  subunit mrnas in the
human cerebellum. neurobiol. dis. 4, 35–46.
schmitt, f. o. 1984 molecular regulators of brain function: a
new view. neuroscience 13, 991–1001.
schousboe, a., westergaard, n. & hertz, l. 1993 neuronal–
astrocytic interactions in glutamate metabolism. biochem.
soc. trans. 21, 49–53.
segawa, h., fukasawa, y., miyamoto, k., takeda, e., endou,
h. & kanai, y. 1999 identification and functional characterization of a na⫹-independent neutral amino acid transporter with broad substrate selectivity. j. biol. chem. 274,
19 745–19 751.
shaw, s. h. (and 12 others) 1998 a genome-wide search for
schizophrenia susceptibility genes. am. j. med. genet. 81,
364–376.
silbernagl, s., o’donovan, d. j. & völker, k. 1997  xxxd5xxx 
nephrotoxicity is mediated by oxidative damage. pflügers
arch. 433, r37.
silbernagl, s., volker, k. & dantzler, w. h. 1999  xxxd5xxx 
is reabsorbed in rat renal pars recta. am. j. physiol. 276,
f857–f863.
simeon, j., fink, m., itil, t. m. & ponce, d. 1970 d-cycloserine therapy of psychosis by symptom provocation. comp.
psychiatry 11, 80–88.
skatchkov, s., brosamle, c., vyklicky, l., kuffler, d. p. &
orkand, r. k. 1994 nmda receptors on adult frog spinal
motoneurons in culture. neurosci. lett. 176, 251–254.
smith, s. j. 1992 do astrocytes process neural information?
prog. brain res. 94, 119–136.
srinivasan, n. g. 1965 biosynthesis of  xxxd5xxx  in the silkworm, bombyx mori. j. biol. chem. 240, 796–800.
steele, r. j., dermon, c. r. & stewart, m. g. 1996 d-cycloserine causes transient enhancement of memory for a weak
aversive stimulus in day-old chicks (gallus domesticus). neurobiol. learn. mem. 66, 236–240.
stern-bach, y., bettler, b., hartley, m., sheppard, p. o.,
o’hara, p. j. & heinemann, s. f. 1994 agonist selectivity of
glutamate receptors is specified by two domains structurally
related to bacterial amino acid-binding proteins. neuron 13,
1345–1357.
stevens, e. r., esguerra, m., kim, p. m., newman, e. a.,
snyder, s. h., zahs, k. r. & miller, r. f. 2003  xxxd5xxx 
and  xxxg2204xxx  are present in the vertebrate retina and
contribute to the physiological activation of nmda receptors. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 100, 6789–6794.
strisovsky, k., jiraskova, j., barinka, c., majer, p., rojas, c.,
slusher, b. s. & konvalinka, j. 2003 mouse brain serine
racemase catalyzes specific elimination of l-serine to pyruvate. febs lett. 535, 44–48.
suzuki, s. o. & goldman, j. e. 2003 multiple cell populations
in the early postnatal subventricular zone take distinct
migratory pathways: a dynamic study of glial and neuronal
progenitor migration. j. neurosci. 23, 4240–4250.
takahashi, k., hayashi, f. & nishikawa, t. 1997 in vivo evidence for the link between l- and  xxxd5xxx  metabolism in rat
cerebral cortex. j. neurochem. 69, 1286–1290.
tam, r. & saier jr, m. h. 1993 structural, functional, and
evolutionary relationships among extracellular solute-binding receptors of bacteria. microbiol. rev. 57, 320–346.
thompson, c. l., drewery, d. l., atkins, h. d., stephenson,
f. a. & chazot, p. l. 2000 immunohistochemical localization of n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor nr1,  xxxg964xxx , nr2b
and  xxxg966xxx /d subunits in the adult mammalian cerebellum.
neurosci. lett. 283, 85–88.
tsacopoulos, m. & magistretti, j. 1996 metabolic coupling
between glia and neurons. j. neurosci. 16, 877–885.
phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

tsai, g., yang, p., chung, l. c., lange, n. & coyle, j. t.
1998  xxxd5xxx  added to antipsychotics for the treatment of
schizophrenia. biol. psychiatry 44, 1081–1089.
tsai, g. e., yang, p., chung, l. c., tsai, i. c., tsai, c. w. &
coyle, j. t. 1999  xxxd5xxx  added to clozapine for the treatment of schizophrenia. am. j. psychiatry 156, 1822–1825.
turano, f. j., panta, g. r., allard, m. w. & van berkum, p.
2001 the putative glutamate receptors from plants are
related to two superfamilies of animal neurotransmitter
receptors via distinct evolutionary mechanisms. mol. biol.
evol. 18, 1417–1420.
uo, t., yoshimura, t., shimizu, s. & esaki, n. 1998 occurrence of pyridoxal 5⬘-phosphate-dependent  xxxg2204xxx 
in silkworm, bombyx mori. biochem. biophys. res. commun.
246, 31–34.
usuda, n., yokota, s., hashimoto, t. & nagata, t. 1986
immunocytochemical localization of  xxxg602xxx 
in the central clear matrix of rat kidney peroxisomes. j. histochem. cytochem. 34, 1709–1718.
utsunomiya-tate, n., endou, h. & kanai, y. 1996 cloning
and functional characterization of a system asc-like na⫹dependent neutral amino acid transporter. j. biol. chem.
271, 14 883–14 890.
van veldhoven, p. p., brees, c. & mannaerts, p. 1991 daspartate oxidase, a peroxisomal enzyme in liver of rat and
man. biochim. biophys. acta 1073, 203–208.
varoqueaux, f., sigler, a., rhee, j. s., brose, n., enk, c.,
reim, k. & rosenmund, c. 2002 total arrest of spontaneous and evoked synaptic transmission but normal synaptogenesis in the absence of munc13-mediated vesicle
priming. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 99, 9037–9042.
verhage, m. (and 11 others) 2000 synaptic assembly of the
brain in the absence of neurotransmitter secretion. science
287, 864–869.
verrey, f. 2003 system l: heteromeric exchangers of large,
neutral amino acids involved in directional transport. pflügers
arch. 445, 529–533.
volpe, j. j., lee, g., laster, l. & robinson, j. c. 1970
regional distribution of isozymes of  xxxg602xxx 
and acetylesterase in developing primate brain. exp.  xxxd122xxx .
28, 76–87.
wafford, k. a., kathoria, m., bain, c. j., marshall, g., le
bourdelles, b., kemp, j. a. & whiting, p. j. 1995 identification of amino acids in the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor
nr1 subunit that contribute to the glycine binding site. mol.
pharmacol. 47, 374–380.
wako, k., ma, n., shiroyama, t. & semba, r. 1995 glial
uptake of intracerebroventricularly injected  xxxd5xxx  in the
rat brain: an immunocytochemical study. neurosci. lett. 185,
171–174.
wang, d. y., kumar, s. & hedges, s. b. 1999 divergence
time estimates for the early history of animal phyla and the
origin of plants, animals and fungi. proc. r. soc. lond. b 266,
163–171. (doi 10.1098/rspb.1999.0617.)
weimar, r. w. 1977 d-amino oxidase in mammalian cerebellum. phd dissertation. the johns hopkins university, baltimore, md, usa.
weimar, w. r. & neims, a. h. 1977 the development of damino acid oxidase in rat cerebellum. j. neurochem. 29,
649–656.
westergren, i., nystrom, b., hamberger, a., nordborg, c. &
johansson, b. b. 1994 concentrations of amino acids in
extracellular fluid after opening of the blood–brain barrier
by intracarotid infusion of protamine sulfate. j. neurochem.
62, 159–165.
wilcox, k. s., fitzsimonds, r. m., johnson, b. & dichter,
m. a. 1996 glycine regulation of synaptic nmda receptors
in hippocampal neurons. j. neurophysiol. 76, 3415–3424.

downloaded from http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on march 30, 2015

964 m. j. schell

evolution of nmda receptors and  xxxd5xxx 

williams, k., chao, j., kashiwagi, k., masuko, t. & igarashi,
k. 1996 activation of n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors by
glycine: role of an aspartate residue in the m3–m4 loop of
the nr1 subunit. mol. pharmacol. 50, 701–708.
wolosker, h., blackshaw, s. & snyder, s. h. 1999a serine
racemase: a glial enzyme synthesizing  xxxd5xxx  to regulate
glutamate-n-methyl-d-aspartate neurotransmission. proc.
natl acad. sci. usa 96, 13 409–13 414.
wolosker, h., sheth, k. n., takahashi, m., mothet, j. p.,
brady jr, r. o., ferris, c. d. & snyder, s. h. 1999b purification of  xxxg2204xxx : biosynthesis of the neuromodulator  xxxd5xxx . proc. natl acad. sci. usa 96, 721–725.
wood, m. w., vandongen, h. m. & vandongen, a. m. 1997
an alanine residue in the m3–m4 linker lines the glycine
binding pocket of the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor. j. biol.
chem. 272, 3532–3537.
wood, m. w., vandongen, h. m. & vandongen, a. m. 1999
a mutation in the glycine binding pocket of the n-methyl-

phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b (2004)

d-aspartate receptor nr1 subunit alters agonist efficacy.
brain res. mol. brain res. 73, 189–192.
wood, p. l. 1995 the co-agonist concept: is the nmda-associated  xxxg904xxx  saturated in vivo? life sci. 57, 301–
310.
yamamoto, n., tomita, u., umino, a. & nishikawa, t. 2001
uptake of  xxxd5xxx  by synaptosomal p2 fraction isolated
from rat brain. synapse 42, 84–86.
yasuda, e., ma, n. & semba, r. 2001 immunohistochemical
evidences for localization and production of  xxxd5xxx  in some
neurons in the rat brain. neurosci. lett. 299, 162–164.
young, a. b. & snyder, s. h. 1973 strychnine binding associated with glycine receptors of the central nervous system.
proc. natl acad. sci. usa 70, 2832–2836.
zafra, f., aragon, c., olivares, l., danbolt, n. c., gimenez,
c. & storm-mathisen, j. 1995 glycine transporters are differentially expressed among cns cells. j. neurosci. 15,
3952–3969.

