special considerations with fondaparinux therapy:
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and wound healing
william e. dager, pharm.d., fcshp, judith andersen, m.d., and edith nutescu, pharm.d.
multiple options for anticoagulation therapy are now available, placing an
additional responsibility on health care workers for choosing the optimal
therapy for each patient. the heparins carry a risk of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia (hit), an immune-mediated reaction to heparin that may
lead to pulmonary embolism and death. fondaparinux, a new, synthetic
pentasaccharide, binds to  xxxg2056xxx  and potentiates  xxxg2056xxx ’s
inhibition of  xxxg741xxx . fondaparinux does not bind to  xxxg1726xxx  and
thus is theoretically unable to cause immunoallergic hit. unlike lowmolecular-weight heparins, fondaparinux does not cross-react in vitro with
sera from patients with clinical cases of hit. these findings suggest that
fondaparinux would not lead to formation of hit antibodies and would not
provoke clinical thrombosis in patients who had hit antibodies because of
previous exposure to heparins. to date, no cases of immunoallergic hit have
been associated with fondaparinux use in clinical trials. anecdotal evidence
suggests that fondaparinux eventually may prove to be valuable for preventing
and treating thrombosis in patients with hit. the effect of anticoagulants on
wound healing is another consideration when choosing a thromboprophylactic strategy after major surgery. there is evidence that thrombin
plays a role in wound healing, but fondaparinux is too small to enable
 xxxg2056xxx  to inhibit thrombin. thus, fondaparinux may be less likely
than a  xxxd1997xxx  to interfere with wound healing.
key words: anticoagulation therapy, fondaparinux, heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, wound healing, orthopedic surgery.
(pharmacotherapy 2004;24(7 pt 2):88s–94s)
the mechanisms by which a thrombus forms
are multifactorial and include interlinked
from the department of pharmacy, university of
california–davis medical center, and the department of
medicine, university of california–davis school of
medicine, sacramento, california, and the school of
pharmacy, the university of california–san francisco, san
francisco, california (dr. dager); the department of
internal medicine, wayne state university school of
medicine, and hemostasis services, harper university
hospital, karmanos cancer institute, detroit, michigan (dr.
andersen); and the department of pharmacy practice,
college of pharmacy, university of illinois at chicago, and
the university of illinois medical center, chicago, illinois
(dr. nutescu).
address reprint requests to edith a. nutescu, pharm.d.,
university of illinois at chicago, college of pharmacy, 833
south wood street, mc 886, room 164, chicago, il
60612; e-mail: enutescu@uic.edu.

processes involving the plasma and endothelial
lining, as well as processes inside endothelial
cells. the presence of circulatory stasis,
endothelial wall damage, or imbalance between
pro- and anticoagulant factors can increase an
individual’s risk for thrombosis. several classes
of anticoagulants, each with distinct characteristics, are now available for the prevention or
treatment of thromboembolic disease.
because of the multiple choices available,
selecting an anticoagulant regimen is no longer a
simple task of limited options. the decision is
influenced by the subtle differences among
agents and a consideration of which factors are
influencing thrombosis or risk for bleeding.
fondaparinux, a new anticoagulant, has never
been associated with the development of a

special considerations with fondaparinux therapy dager et al
syndrome reminiscent of type 2 (immunemediated) heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
(hit) and eventually may prove to be useful in
preventing or treating thrombosis in patients
with that condition. in addition, fondaparinux
may be less likely than heparins to interfere with
wound healing.
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
shortly after what is now called unfractionated
heparin (ufh) came into widespread use (in the
1950s), a few cases of arterial thromboembolism
in patients who had been treated with heparin
were reported.1 the clots in these cases were soft
and pale and consisted largely of fibrin and
platelets—hence, the name “white clot syndrome.”
because the clots tended to develop a week or 2
after the start of heparin therapy, an immunemediated cause was suspected.
after measurement of platelet counts became
routine (in the 1970s), cases of thrombocytopenia
were noticed among patients treated with
heparins. two basic patterns were observed. 2
some of the patients had mild thrombocytopenia
that occurred within the first 4 days of heparin
therapy (too early to represent an antibody
response to a novel antigen) but rarely caused
clinical signs or symptoms and tended to resolve
even if the heparin therapy was continued. this
condition was called hit type 1. other patients,
however, had thrombocytopenia that arose 5 or
more days after the start of heparin therapy (or
earlier in patients previously exposed to heparin)
and that, paradoxically, was associated with a
prothrombotic state. this immune-mediated
form was called hit type 2. in the following
discussion, the term hit will refer to the type 2
(immune-mediated) form. the presence of
thrombus in the setting of hit has been called
hit thrombosis syndrome (hitts).
pathophysiology
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia arises
when a patient’s immune system produces
antibodies (primarily immunoglobulin [ig] g) to
altered  xxxg1726xxx  ( xxxg1726xxx ), a protein found in
the a granules of platelets. once exposed to
heparin,  xxxg1726xxx  undergoes conformational changes,
exposing certain cryptic epitopes to which igg
can bind.3 once antibody binds to  xxxg1726xxx , the igg
fc region can cross-link the platelet fcgiia
receptors, resulting in platelet activation and the
release of procoagulant materials (including  xxxg1726xxx )
from platelet granules.

89s

the platelet aggregation resulting from platelet
activation decreases the number of circulating
platelets, thus resulting in thrombocytopenia.
nevertheless, the patient is at high risk for
thrombosis because of the platelet aggregation
and the procoagulant materials released by the
activated platelets. additional  xxxg1726xxx  released from
a granules interacts with heparan sulfate strands
on the endothelial wall, resulting in changes that
allow expression of  xxxg748xxx . the binding of
altered  xxxg1726xxx -igg complexes to monocytes also
leads to further expression of  xxxg748xxx , thus
promoting thrombus formation.4
the typical onset of hit is 4–10 days after
reexposure to ufh or low-molecular-weight
heparin (lmwh), occurring within 100 days of
the first exposure to heparin. 5, 6 however,
patients with recent exposure may develop rapidonset hit with reexposure to ufh or lmwh. in
such situations, acute systemic reactions such as
fever, tachycardia, flushing, headache, chest pain,
and cardiac arrest have been observed.5
occasionally, hit arises several days (mean 9
days, but up to 40 days) after ufh or lmwh
therapy is discontinued or persists for several
weeks after the therapy is discontinued.7 these
cases of delayed-onset hit suggest that the hit
antibodies are somehow causing platelet
activation, even though heparin is no longer
present. one possibility is that the antibodies are
reactive against  xxxg1726xxx  bound to glycosa-minoglycans
on the surface of endothelial cells.8, 9
administration of heparin to a patient with
delayed-onset hit could produce signs that
suggest rapid-onset hit. consequently, the
college of american pathologists recommends
that if thrombosis develops during or soon after
heparin therapy, the patient’s platelet count
should be measured promptly and compared
with recent values.10 a platelet count decrease of
50% or more from baseline may indicate hit,
even if a platelet count nadir greater than 150 x
10 3/mm 3 remains. 10 even smaller declines in
platelet count have been associated with
thrombotic events.10
the occurrence of hit mostly is associated
with exposure to ufh but has been reported to
occur with lmwh.11 all heparins are heterogeneous mixtures of glycosaminoglycan polymers
from animal tissue. however, the lmwh
preparations have a lower molecular weight with
a narrower range than that of ufh. the ability
of a heparin molecule to bind to  xxxg1726xxx  depends on
the heparin molecule’s chain length and degree of
sulfation.12 probably because of shorter chain

90s

supplement to pharmacotherapy volume 24, number 7, 2004

length, lmwhs are less likely than ufh to result
in hit. 11, 13 however, the cross-reactivity of
lmwh with hit antibodies resulting from ufh
treatment is greater than 80%.14 thus, lmwhs
are relatively contraindicated in patients with
hit.
patients undergoing cardiovascular or
orthopedic surgery may be at particularly high
risk for hit and related thrombosis. 15–17 in
patients undergoing orthopedic surgery, the
reported frequency of hit is 1% and 3% when
patients receive ufh for 1 and 2 weeks,
respectively. 13 new, progressive, or recurrent
thrombosis occurs in roughly one third to one
half of the patients with proved hit, with the
highest rates associated with lower platelet
counts. 8 when left unrecognized and/or
untreated, hit can result in permanent
morbidity (including amputation) in 20–30% of
cases and a mortality rate of up to 30%.18
complications
although arterial thromboembolic events were
historically the first recognized manifestations of
hit, venous thrombotic events (notably proximal
deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism)
are more frequently observed. 19 deep vein
thrombosis may lead to potentially lethal
pulmonary embolism. possible long-term
consequences include a disfiguring and disabling
postthrombotic syndrome (which may cause
chronic venous ulceration of the lower limb) or
pulmonary hypertension. documented arterial
thromboembolic complications of hit include
lower limb arterial thrombosis, thrombotic
stroke, myocardial infarction, aortic thrombosis,
mesenteric artery thrombosis, renal artery
thrombosis, and vascular graft occlusion.3
diagnosis
recognition of hit requires a high index of
suspicion. however, even small, easily overlooked exposures to heparin (such as a heparin
flush used to clear a catheter) have led to the
development of hit antibodies or have caused or
exacerbated thrombosis in patients with
antibodies.8
the consequences of a missed diagnosis of hit
can be grave. use of heparin products to treat
the thromboembolic complications of unrecognized hit or failure to provide appropriate
alternative anticoagulation in cases of recognized
isolated hit (hit without evident thrombosis)
could make the situation much worse. 20 the

diagnosis of hit should be based on a combination of clinically evident abnormalities
(thrombocytopenia with or without thrombosis)
with detection of hit antibodies. however,
thrombocytopenia (whether heparin related or
not) has many possible causes and is common in
hospitalized patients, complicating the ability to
provide an accurate diagnosis. although the
platelet count typically decreases in patients with
hit, it might not decrease enough to fit the
standard definition of thrombocytopenia (< 150 x
10 3/mm 3) even if the decrease is greater than
50%. furthermore, most patients with enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (elisa) test results
positive for the hit antibody never develop
thrombocytopenia or thrombosis.4
an iceberg model (figure 1) often is used to
describe the process of diagnosing hit. the
model as a whole represents patients who have
had exposure to heparin within the appropriate
time frame (i.e., starting at least 5 days
previously) and have a positive elisa result for
antibody to the hit antigen (the heparin- xxxg1726xxx 
complex). a subset of the model represents
patients who also have positive results from
functional assays. these assays (e.g., the platelet
aggregation test, 14c-serotonin release assay,

thrombosis
thrombocytopenia
functional assay positive
elisa positive
figure 1. schematic of the iceberg model of the diagnosis of
type 2 heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. the entire
model represents patients with positive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (elisa) results. all sections except
the bottom section represent patients with positive
functional assay results. the portion of the iceberg model
above the “waterline” represents patients with
thrombocytopenia, with or without thrombosis. (from
reference 8 with permission.)

special considerations with fondaparinux therapy dager et al
heparin-induced platelet activation assay, and
flow cytometry) measure whether patient
samples cause activation of platelets from healthy
donors in the presence of heparin. the rate of
false-positive values can be significant. the
subset of the iceberg model above the “waterline”
consists of patients who also have a low platelet
count. a subset of that portion represents
patients who also have thromboembolic
complications from hit.
management
heparin should be discontinued immediately
in patients with suspected hit. the lmwhs
(e.g., enoxaparin,  xxxd1805xxx ,  xxxd3379xxx ) are
relatively contraindicated and should be avoided.
because of the high risk of thrombosis, especially
in the early stages of hit, alternative anticoagulation should be instituted.19 the recommended initial treatment for hit is to remove all
sources of heparin and promptly begin therapy
with a parenteral direct thrombin inhibitor.
 xxxd2455xxx  and  xxxd218xxx  are approved by the
united states food and drug administration for
anticoagulation in patients with hit.  xxxd348xxx 
(a shorter-acting direct thrombin inhibitor) is
under investigation for that indication.
parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors require
careful monitoring of the activated partial
thromboplastin time.
when thrombosis is present, warfarin is
typically added for long-term anticoagulation.
however, warfarin should not be used as a single
agent to initiate anticoagulation in patients with
hit because of the risk of venous limb gangrene
or other thromboembolic complications. the
proposed mechanism is a transient decrease in
the levels of the  xxxg1847xxx ; this
decrease, in combination with an existing
prothrombotic state, could pose a risk of
warfarin-associated skin necrosis (which may
lead to the gangrene) or other thromboembolic
complications.8 the risk of these complications
can be reduced if the warfarin is begun only after
adequate anticoagulation with an agent that
prevents thrombin generation or inactivates
thrombin (e.g., a direct thrombin inhibitor).8
the first dose of warfarin should be given only
after the platelet count is under recovery. 21
conservative dosing should be considered,
gradually targeting international normalized ratio
(inr) values of 2–3 for 5–7 days.20 this is to
avoid excessive inr values, which have been
associated with venous limb gangrene in the

91s

setting of hit.22 starting warfarin therapy in the
setting of hit is thus a lengthy and costly
process that can be further challenging if the
direct thrombin inhibitor used causes falsely
elevated inr values.
the approach and duration of anticoagulant
therapy for patients with isolated hit has not
been specifically studied. because of concerns
about delayed-onset hit and thrombosis,
additional anticoagulation for up to 40 days has
been suggested. however, whether this approach
leads to improved outcomes has not been
determined. proposed options for extended
anticoagulant therapy include warfarin,
subcutaneous  xxxd2455xxx , or fondaparinux.
fondaparinux
fondaparinux is a selective, synthetic  xxxg741xxx 
inhibitor and is a synthetic analog of the
pentasaccharide sequence that enables heparin to
bind to  xxxg2056xxx  and potentiate its
anticoagulant activity. because fondaparinux has
a smaller molecular size and fewer negatively
charged sulfoxy groups than those of ufh or
lmwh, it does not bind to  xxxg1726xxx  and thus is
theoretically unable to cause the conformational
changes necessary to expose antigenic sites. 23
unlike lmwhs, fondaparinux does not crossreact in vitro with sera from patients with clinical
cases of hit. 24–26 these findings suggest that
fondaparinux would not lead to formation of hit
antibodies and would not provoke clinical
thrombosis in patients who had hit antibodies
because of previous exposure to heparins.
to date, no cases of hit have been observed in
any of the more than 7500 patients who have
received fondaparinux in clinical trials. in the
phase iii trials of immediate-phase prophylaxis
(up to 11 days after major orthopedic surgery),
platelet counts between 100 and 50 x 103/mm3
were observed in 2.9% of fondaparinux-treated
patients and counts below 50 x 103/mm3 in 0.2%
of fondaparinux-treated patients. 27 however,
these cases were clinically indistinguishable from
non–immune-mediated (type 1) thrombocytopenia
that has been associated with heparin therapy.27–31
nearly all of these cases arose during the first 3
days of treatment, and baseline platelet counts
below 150 x 103/mm3 were observed in most of
the patients with thrombocytopenia.32 no cases
of thrombocytopenia were observed in the 327
patients who received extended prophylaxis (up
to 31 days after surgery) with fondaparinux in
the pentasaccharide in hip-fracture surgery plus

92s

supplement to pharmacotherapy volume 24, number 7, 2004

(penthifra plus) trial.33
the frequency of elisa test results positive for
heparin antibodies in the four orthopedic trials
ranged from 2.9–5.5% for fondaparinux and
3.0–3.6% for enoxaparin.32 however, for most
patients (including the one fondaparinux-treated
patient with a positive elisa result and deep
vein thrombosis), the thrombocytopenia resolved
even though treatment with the study drug was
continued. 32 no reference standard assay to
detect hit is available. the elisa test has a
high negative predictive value but produces many
false-positive results. 10 the prescribing information27 specifies that fondaparinux should be
discontinued if the platelet count decreases
below 100 x 103/mm3. this is out of concern for
bleeding related to the lower platelet counts.
many of the cases of thrombocytopenia in major
orthopedic surgery trials may have been due to
the surgical procedure itself, which can cause
platelets to be lost or consumed; thus, the clinical
relevance of thrombocytopenia in the fondaparinux clinical trials is unclear.
the prescribing information for fondaparinux
states that fondaparinux should be used with
caution in patients with a history of hit.27 the
recent large, multicenter, controlled deep vein
thrombosis (matisse-dvt) 34 and pulmonary
embolism (matisse-pe)35 trials (with more than
2000 patients receiving fondaparinux) showed
that a once-daily fixed-dose regimen of
fondaparinux was at least as effective and as safe
as more complicated regimens of enoxaparin and
ufh, respectively, in the early treatment of
venous thromboembolism. however, patients
with thrombocytopenia (defined as platelet
counts < 100 x 10 3 /mm 3 ) at baseline were
excluded from these trials. given the high risk of
morbidity and mortality associated with hit, the
use of fondaparinux alone in the initial
management of thrombosis due to hit cannot be
recommended over established direct thrombin
inhibitor regimens until supportive data are
available.
since fondaparinux has been shown to be
effective for thromboprophylaxis and does not
interact with  xxxg1726xxx , there may be a potential role
for fondaparinux in thromboprophylaxis in
patients with a recent history of hit or hitts.
as mentioned, the use of warfarin as a sole agent
to initiate anticoagulation in a patient with hit
could pose the risk of warfarin-induced venous
limb gangrene.8 for patients with acute hit, oral
anticoagulant therapy should be delayed until
adequate anticoagulation with a rapidly acting

parenteral anticoagulant is achieved and, ideally,
not administered until there has been substantial
platelet count recovery.8 fondaparinux may offer
a simplified approach with potential economic
benefits for continued antithrombotic therapy
once the platelet count is under recovery.
only recently have limited case reports or
series describing the use of fondaparinux in the
setting of hit become available, all of which are
only in abstract form. one case report involves
the successful use of fondaparinux 2.5 mg twice/day
in a pregnant woman with hit (thrombocytopenia,
pulmonary embolism, and positive hit
antibodies). after a brief treatment with hirudin,
the woman received fondaparinux, without
complications, for the duration of the pregnancy.
the infant was born healthy, without complications at delivery. 36 another case involves a
patient with a history of lupus anticoagulant,
multiple pulmonary embolisms, and acute
myocardial infarctions who developed hit. after
another recurrent pulmonary embolism, which
initially was managed with  xxxd2455xxx , the patient
was switched to fondaparinux 2.5 mg/day and
eventually discharged to receive 2.5 mg alternating with 5 mg, without any further complications during the 8-month period reported.37
with regard to initial treatment of hit, one
group reported on five cases of patients with
hitts (elisa hit antibody positive) who
initially were treated with fondaparinux 7.5 mg/day
until successfully transitioned to warfarin. 38
although these reports are encouraging, the role
of fondaparinux (including the correct dose and
regimen design) in the prophylaxis and treatment
of venous and arterial thrombosis in patients
with hit is unclear. trials to clarify these points
are under way.
wound healing
during the past few years, hundreds of
published reports of tissue culture and animal
models have highlighted the role of thrombin in
wound healing. thrombin has been shown to
mediate and enhance wound healing by increasing
the production of procollagen connective tissue,39
causing contraction of collagen matrix,40 inducing
growth factor production, and promoting fibroblast
retention.41, 42 in tissue culture studies, thrombin
has been shown to stimulate the growth,
replication, and activity of a number of human
cellular components of wound healing, including
fibroblasts (which are responsible for collagen
deposition in wounds43), keratinocytes (which

special considerations with fondaparinux therapy dager et al
are responsible for dermal repair44), myoblasts
(which are responsible for muscle repair), and
megakeratocytes (which are responsible for the
release of growth factor in certain types of
wounds45). direct inhibition of thrombin has
been shown to reverse many of these effects.
thus, a selective xa inhibitor may be less likely
than a lmwh to interfere with wound healing.
any delay in the healing of a wound created for
implanting a joint prosthesis is of major concern
because a sterile environment must be
maintained around the implant. bleeding into a
wound or seepage of clear exudate may
predispose the patient to infection and increase
the length of hospital stay. a recent study of
2001 patients undergoing primary unilateral total
knee arthroplasty found that the method of
thromboprophylaxis did not affect the amount of
postoperative drain output.46 however, use of
lmwh, as opposed to warfarin, resulted in a
significantly greater number of patients with
actively draining wounds early in the postoperative period.46 this difference disappeared
by the eighth postoperative day. in addition,
lmwh was associated with a prolonged time to a
dry postoperative wound. 46 in a study of 205
patients undergoing hip fracture surgery, the
frequency and severity of wound infection were
higher among patients who received lmwh
than among those who received mechanical
prophylaxis.47
inhibition of  xxxg741xxx  interrupts the
coagulation cascade by preventing the activation
of factor ii (prothrombin) to form thrombin
(factor iia). unfractionated heparin and various
lmwh preparations inhibit both  xxxg741xxx  and
factor iia. fondaparinux selectively inhibits only
 xxxg741xxx , and even complete inhibition of factor
xa permits some thrombin to be formed through
alternative pathways and leaves endogenous
thrombin intact. because fondaparinux does not
inhibit thrombin, endogenous thrombin is
available to participate in hemostasis and other
processes.
some orthopedic surgeons report that wounds
look better and have less drainage in patients
who receive fondaparinux instead of the lmwh
enoxaparin for postoperative thromboprophylaxis.48
a prospective study is in progress to evaluate the
effect of fondaparinux on wound healing.
conclusion
in vitro data suggest that fondaparinux does
not cause hit, nor have any cases of hit been

93s

attributed to the use of fondaparinux in clinical
trials. thromboprophylaxis may be necessary for
patients with isolated hit or a history of hit;
fondaparinux’s ease of use and lack of crossreactivity with  xxxg1726xxx  could make it an attractive
option in that setting. the prescribing information states that fondaparinux should be used
with caution in patients with a history of hit
because such use had not been studied in clinical
trials.27 results from a small number of recently
reported cases of fondaparinux therapy in
patients with hit or hitts are encouraging, but
further clinical investigation (which is under
way) is needed. because of the role of thrombin
in wound healing, selective xa inhibition may
offer important advantages for thromboprophylaxis after major orthopedic surgery. the
effect of fondaparinux on wound healing is being
studied.
references
1. weisman re, tobin rw. arterial embolism occurring during
systemic heparin therapy. arch surg 1958;76:219–27.
2. chong bh, berndt mc. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
blut 1989;58:53–7.
3. warkentin te, chong bh, greinacher a. heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia: towards consensus. thromb haemost
1998;79:1–7.
4. warkentin te. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia:
pathogenesis and management. br j haematol 2003;121:
535–55.
5. warkentin te, kelton jg. temporal aspects of heparininduced thrombocytopenia. n engl j med 2001;344:1286–92.
6. lubenow n, kempf r, eichner a, eichler p, carlsson le,
greinacher a. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: temporal
pattern of thrombocytopenia in relation to initial use or
reexposure to heparin. chest 2002;122:37–42.
7. warkentin te, kelton jg. delayed-onset heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia and thrombosis. ann intern med
2001;135:502–6.
8. warkentin te, greinacher a. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. new york: marcel dekker, inc., 2000.
9. rice l, attisha wk, drexler a, francis jl. delayed-onset
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. ann intern med
2002;136:210–15.
10. warkentin te. platelet count monitoring and laboratory
testing for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. arch pathol lab
med 2002;126:1415–23.
11. lindhoff-last e, nakov r, misselwitz f, breddin hk,
bauersachs r. incidence and clinical relevance of heparininduced antibodies in patients with deep vein thrombosis
treated with unfractionated or  xxxd1997xxx .
br j haematol 2002;118:1137–42.
12. greinacher a, alban s, dummel v, franz g, mueller-eckhardt
c. characterization of the structural requirements for a
carbohydrate based anticoagulant with a reduced risk of
inducing the immunological type of heparin-associated
thrombocytopenia. thromb haemost 1995;74:886–92.
13. warkentin te, levine mn, hirsh j, et al. heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia in patients treated with low-molecularweight heparin or unfractionated heparin. n engl j med
1995;332:1330–5.
14. vun cm, evans s, chong bh. cross-reactivity study of lowmolecular-weight heparins and heparinoid in heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. thromb res 1996;81:525–32.

94s

supplement to pharmacotherapy volume 24, number 7, 2004

15. fabris f, luzzatto g, stefani pm, girolami b, cella g,
girolami a. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. haematologica
2000;85:72–81.
16. warkentin te. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a ten-year
retrospective. annu rev med 1999;50:129–47.
17. warkentin te, sheppard ja, horsewood p, simpson pj,
moore jc, kelton jg. impact of the patient population on the
risk for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. blood
2000;96:1703–8.
18. greinacher a. antigen generation in heparin-associated
thrombocytopenia: the nonimmunologic type and the
immunologic type are closely linked in their pathogenesis.
semin thromb hemost 1995;21:106–16.
19. warkentin te, kelton jg. a 14-year study of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. am j med 1996;101:502–7.
20. dager we, white rh. pharmacotherapy of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. expert opin pharmacother 2003;4:919–40.
21. smythe ma, warkentin te, stephens jl, zakalik d, mattson
jc. venous limb gangrene during overlapping therapy with
warfarin and a direct thrombin inhibitor for immune heparininduced thrombocytopenia. am j hematol 2002;71:50–2.
22. warkentin te. venous limb gangrene during warfarin
treatment of cancer–associated deep venous thrombosis. ann
intern med 2001;135(8 pt 1):589–93.
23. chong bh. heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. j thromb
haemost 2003;1:1471–8.
24. ahmad s, jeske wp, walenga jm, et al. synthetic
pentasaccharides do not cause platelet activation by
antiheparin- xxxg1726xxx  antibodies. clin appl thromb
hemost 1999;5:259–66.
25. amiral j, lormeau jc, marfaing-koka a, et al. absence of
cross-reactivity of sr90107a/org31540 pentasaccharide with
antibodies to heparin- xxxg1726xxx  complexes developed in heparininduced thrombocytopenia. blood coagul fibrinolysis
1997;8:114–17.
26. elalamy i, lecrubier c, potevin f, et al. absence of in vitro
cross-reaction of pentasaccharide with the plasma heparindependent factor of twenty-five patients with heparin-associated thrombocytopenia. thromb haemost 1995;74:1384–5.
27. organon sanofi-synthelabo llc.  xxxd2149xxx  (fondaparinux
sodium) prescribing information. west orange, nj; 2003.
28. bauer ka, eriksson bi, lassen mr, turpie agg, for the
steering committee of the pentasaccharide in major knee
surgery study. fondaparinux compared with enoxaparin for
the prevention of venous thromboembolism after elective major
knee surgery. n engl j med 2001;345:1305–10.
29. eriksson bi, bauer ka, lassen mr, turpie agg, for the
steering committee of the pentasaccharide in hip-fracture
surgery study. fondaparinux compared with enoxaparin for
the prevention of venous thromboembolism after hip-fracture
surgery. n engl j med 2001;345:1298–304.
30. lassen mr, bauer ka, eriksson bi, turpie agg, for the
european pentasaccharide elective surgery study (ephesus)
steering committee. postoperative fondaparinux versus
preoperative enoxaparin for prevention of venous thromboembolism in elective hip-replacement surgery: a randomised
double-blind comparison. lancet 2002;359:1715–20.
31. turpie agg, bauer ka, eriksson bi, lassen mr, for the
pentathlon 2000 study steering committee.
postoperative fondaparinux versus postoperative enoxaparin
for prevention of venous thromboembolism after elective hipreplacement surgery: a randomised double-blind trial. lancet
2002;359:1721–6. (erratum in lancet 2002;360:1102.)
32. u.s. food and drug administration, center for drug
evaluation and research. application 21–345 medical review.
available from http://www.fda.gov/cder/foi/nda/2001/21-

345_arixtra.htm. accessed april 28, 2004.
33. eriksson bi, lassen mr. duration of prophylaxis against
venous thromboembolism with fondaparinux after hip fracture
surgery: a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, doubleblind study. arch intern med 2003;163:1337–42.
34. the matisse investigators. the matisse–dvt trial, a
randomized, double-blind study comparing once-daily
fondaparinux with the  xxxd1997xxx 
enoxaparin, twice daily, in the initial treatment of symptomatic
deep-vein thrombosis. j thromb haemost 2003;(suppl
1):oc332.
35. buller hr, davidson bl, decousus h, et al, for the matisse
investigators. subcutaneous fondaparinux versus intravenous
unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of pulmonary
embolism. n engl j med 2003;349:1695–702. (erratum in n
engl j med 2004;350:423.)
36. rubin n, rubin j. treatment of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia with thrombosis (hitt) in pregnancy with
fondaparinux [abstr]. blood 2003;102:4190.
37. lian ec, chua l, oberstein e. long-term use of fondaparinux
in a patient with antiphospholipid syndrome, heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia and refractoriness to coumarin [abstr].
blood 2003;102:4206.
38. kuo khm, kovacs mj. successful treatment of heparin induced
thrombocytopenia (hit) with fondaparinux [abstr]. blood
2003;102:1147.
39. chambers rc, dabbagh k, mcanulty rj, gray aj, blancbrude op, laurent gj. thrombin stimulates fibroblast
procollagen production via proteolytic activation of proteaseactivated receptor 1. biochem j 1998;333:121–7.
40. pilcher bk, levine ns, tomasek jj. thrombin promotion of
isometric contraction in fibroblasts: its extracellular mechanism
of action. plast reconstr surg 1995;96:1188–95.
41. chang mc, chan cp, wu hl, et al. thrombin-stimulated
growth, clustering, and collagen lattice contraction of human
gingival fibroblasts is associated with its protease activity. j
periodontol 2001;72:303–13.
42. chambers rc, leoni p, blanc-brude op, wembridge de,
laurent gj. thrombin is a potent inducer of connective tissue
growth factor production via proteolytic activation of proteaseactivated receptor-1. j biol chem 2000;275:35584–91.
43. shimizu t, ohkawara a, mizue y, nishihira j. alpha-thrombin
stimulates expression of macrophage migration inhibitory
factor in skin fibroblasts. semin thromb hemost 1999;25:
569–73.
44. algermissen b, sitzmann j, nurnberg w, laubscher jc, henz
bm, bauer f. distribution and potential biologic function of
the  xxxg746xxx  par-1 on human keratinocytes. arch
dermatol res 2000;292:488–95.
45. weltermann a, wolzt m, petersmann k, et al. large amounts
of  xxxg2413xxx  at the site of hemostatic
plug formation in vivo. arterioscler thromb vasc biol
1999;19:1757–60.
46. dewal hs, su et, hiebert r, di cesare pe. factors
influencing post-operative surgical drain output and time to a
dry wound following total knee arthroplasty. presented at the
annual meeting of the american academy of orthopaedic
surgeons, new orleans, la, february 5–9, 2003.
47. sanchez-ballaster j, smith mg, kershaw s, et al. wound
infection in the management of hip fractures: a comparison
between subcutaneous low-molecular weight heparin and no
thromboprophylaxis. presented at the annual meeting of the
american academy of orthopaedic surgeons, new orleans, la,
february 5–9, 2003.
48. waldman bj. advancements in minimally invasive total hip
arthroplasty. orthopedics 2003;26(suppl 8):s833–6.

