inhibition of the human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease ( xxxg171xxx ) repair activity and sensitization of breast cancer cells to dna alkylating agents...  cells repair dna damage via four main mechanisms, however, damage induced by alkylators and oxidative damage is predominantly repaired by the dna base excision repair (ber) pathway. the ap endonuclease,  xxxg171xxx , is one of the main enzymes in the ber pathway. it is abundant in human cells and accounts for nearly all of the abasic site cleavage activity observed in cellular extracts.  xxxg171xxx  expression is elevated in a variety of cancers and a high  xxxg171xxx  expression has been associated with poor outcome to chemoradiotherapy. the small molecule  xxxd2514xxx  has been shown to enhance the killing ability of ionizing radiation in cells and preliminary evidence suggests that  xxxd2514xxx  may inhibit ap endonuclease. given the role  xxxg171xxx  plays in repairing oxidative and ionizing radiation dna damage, the reports of  xxxd2514xxx  as an ionizing radiation enhancer and the potential use of  xxxd2514xxx  as an ap endonuclease inhibitor, we examined whether  xxxd2514xxx  could inhibit  xxxg171xxx  endonuclease activity. we report that  xxxd2514xxx  inhibits the repair activity of  xxxg171xxx , but not its redox function or exonuclease activity on mismatched nucleotides.  xxxd2514xxx  also appears to inhibit exonuclease iii family members ( xxxg171xxx  and exoiii), but not endonuclease iv ap endonucleases, nor bifunctional glycosylase/lyases such as endonuclease viii or formamidopyrimidine-dna glycosylase (fpg). furthermore, the addition of  xxxd2514xxx  inhibits  xxxg171xxx  repair activity from cellular extracts and enhances the cell killing effect of the laboratory  xxxd3249xxx  methyl methanesulfonate (mms) and the clinically relevant agent temozolomide (tmz). given these initial findings, it would be of interest to further develop  xxxd2514xxx  as an  xxxg171xxx  inhibitor through the use of structure-function studies as a means of enhancing the sensitization of tumors to chemotherapeutic agents.