adis drug evaluation

drugs 2004; 64 (18): 2125-2141
0012-6667/04/0018-2125/$34.00/0
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

cabergoline
a review of its use in the treatment of parkinson’s disease
monique p. curran and caroline m. perry
adis international, auckland, new zealand
various sections of the manuscript reviewed by:
j.e. ahlskog, division of movement disorders, department of neurology, mayo clinic, rochester,
minnesota, usa; h. baas, department of neurology, city hospital hanau, hanau, germany; k.r.
chaudhuri, king’s college hospital, guy’s, king’s and st thomas’ school of medicine, london, uk; m.
contin, institute of neurology, university of bologna, bologna, italy; p. del dotto, department of
neuroscience, university of pisa, pisa, italy; d. deleu, hamad medical corporation, doha, state of qatar; r.
dodel, neurologische klinik, friedrich-wilhelms-universität, bonn, germany; s. happe, department of
neurology, university of muenster, munich, germany; r. inzelberg, department of neurology, hillel yaffe
medical center, technion, israel; k. stiasny-kolster, mz nervenheilkunde-neurologische klinik, marburg,
germany.
data selection
sources: medical literature published in any language since 1980 on cabergoline, identified using medline and embase, supplemented by
adisbase (a proprietary database of adis international). additional references were identified from the reference lists of published articles.
bibliographical information, including contributory unpublished data, was also requested from the company developing the drug.
search strategy: medline search terms were ‘cabergoline’ and ‘parkinson’s disease’. embase search terms were ‘cabergoline’ and
‘parkinson’s disease’. adisbase search terms were ‘cabergoline’ and ‘parkinson’s disease’. searches were last updated 12 august 2004.
selection: studies in patients with parkinson’s disease who received cabergoline. inclusion of studies was based mainly on the methods
section of the trials. when available, large, well controlled trials with appropriate statistical methodology were preferred. relevant
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic data are also included.
index terms: cabergoline, parkinson’s disease, pharmacodynamics, pharmacoeconomics, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use, tolerability.

contents
summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2126
1. introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2127
2. pharmacodynamic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2128
2.1 receptor binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2128
2.2 antiparkinsonian effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2128
2.3 neuroprotective effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2128
2.4 effects on sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2129
3. pharmacokinetic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2129
4. therapeutic use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2129
4.1 in patients with advanced parkinson’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2130
4.1.1 comparisons with placebo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2130
4.1.2 comparisons with bromocriptine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2130
4.1.3 comparison with pergolide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2130
4.2 in patients with early parkinson’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2130
5. pharmacoeconomic analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2133
6. tolerability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2134
7. dosage and administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2135
8. place of cabergoline in the management of parkinson’s disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2136

2126

curran & perry

summary
abstract

cabergoline is a synthetic ergoline dopamine agonist with a high affinity for
dopamine d2 receptors and a long elimination half-life. this agent provides
continuous dopaminergic stimulation with once-daily administration. adjuvant
oral cabergoline is usually well tolerated and effective in controlling symptoms in
patients with advanced parkinson’s disease experiencing response fluctuations to
long-term levodopa therapy. in patients with early parkinson’s disease, cabergoline (with or without levodopa) is well tolerated and effective in controlling disease
symptoms, and may reduce the risk of developing drug-induced motor complications. data from two pharmacoeconomic analyses suggest that cabergoline may
be a cost-effective treatment option versus levodopa in patients with early
parkinson’s disease, and highlight the need for further evaluation of the drug in
this indication.

pharmacological
properties

cabergoline is a dopaminergic synthetic ergoline derivative, with high and
prolonged affinity for human dopamine d2 and d3 receptors, but limited affinity
for d1 receptors. the drug also demonstrates some affinity for nondopaminergic
(serotonergic and adrenergic) brain receptors.
in animal models, cabergoline has demonstrated neuroprotective effects.
in open-label trials, an evening dose of cabergoline had a beneficial effect on
nocturnal motor symptoms in patients with parkinson’s disease, with significantly
reduced nocturnal akinesias and early-morning dyskinesias.
the pharmacokinetic profile of oral cabergoline at steady-state is linear within
the recommended dosage range, with peak plasma concentrations being reached
within 0.5–3 hours. cabergoline is extensively distributed into body tissues,
including the brain. cabergoline has a long elimination half-life (63–109 hours),
allowing for convenient once-daily administration. the pharmacokinetics of
cabergoline are unaffected by mild-to-moderate renal impairment, food, age or
gender. there is no pharmacokinetic interaction between cabergoline and levodopa.

therapeutic use

patients with advanced parkinson’s disease receiving levodopa: the
improvement in parkinsonian symptoms with adjuvant oral cabergoline was
similar to that achieved with bromocriptine and was significantly superior to that
with placebo. efficacy was assessed according to the unified parkinson’s disease
rating scale (updrs) activities of daily living (adl) and motor function
subscores, or percentage of patients with improvements in motor disability in the
clinical global impression scale. the reduction in the percentage of ‘off’ hours
with adjuvant cabergoline was significantly greater than that with placebo (p <
0.05), but similar to that with bromocriptine. the daily levodopa dose required
was significantly less with cabergoline than placebo (p < 0.001).
adjunctive cabergoline and pergolide both improved parkinsonian symptoms,
according to the updrs motor performance subscale (p < 0.001 vs baseline) in a
small crossover study. however, cabergoline was more effective than pergolide in
controlling motor performance during the ‘off’ phase (p < 0.05).
patients with early parkinson’s disease: oral cabergoline (with or without
additional levodopa) was as effective as levodopa alone in improving the symptoms of parkinson’s disease during the first year of treatment, with a >30%
decrease versus baseline in updrs motor function subscore occurring in 81%
versus 87% of patients, respectively. with long-term treatment, there was a
gradual decrease in the improvement in updrs motor function subscores in both

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

2127

treatment groups. similarly, updrs adl subscores improved significantly from
baseline in both treatment groups in the first year of therapy, with a subsequent
decline in the rate of improvement thereafter. motor complications developed in
significantly fewer patients after long-term treatment with cabergoline (with or
without additional levodopa) than with levodopa alone (22% vs 34%; p < 0.05). in
patients who remained on cabergoline or levodopa monotherapy, the respective
incidence of motor complications was 5.3% versus 15.5% (p-value not stated).
pharmacoeconomic
studies

cabergoline was considered cost effective in patients with newly diagnosed
parkinson’s disease, based on the incremental costs per benefit gained versus
levodopa. analyses were decision-analysis (markov) models and were based on
data from a 5-year clinical study. from a german societal perspective, the
incremental cost (direct and indirect) of cabergoline monotherapy versus levodopa over a 10-year period was €1031 per decreased updrs score point for
patients aged ≥60 years (year 2002 values). over a 5-year period, and from a
swedish public healthcare system perspective, cabergoline (with or without
additional levodopa) was associated with incremental costs (direct) of €13 863
per year of motor complications avoided versus levodopa (year 2000 values).

tolerability

cabergoline 0.5–6 mg/day was generally well tolerated, with adverse events
usually being transient and mild to moderate in severity. in patients with advanced
parkinson’s disease receiving levodopa, the incidence of adverse events with the
addition of cabergoline (74%) was similar to that with placebo (68%). in patients
with newly diagnosed parkinson’s disease, the incidence of adverse events
associated with cabergoline (with or without levodopa) was similar to that with
levodopa alone (83% and 82%).
common adverse events associated with cabergoline in clinical trials in
patients receiving levodopa included cns disturbances (dyskinesia, hyperkinesia,
hallucinations, confusion), gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, gastritis) and cardiovascular events (postural hypotension, dizziness and
peripheral oedema). the incidence of cardiopulmonary fibrosis in non-susceptible
individuals treated with cabergoline is low (<2%). cabergoline (with or without
levodopa) has been associated with somnolence, although excessive daytime
somnolence and sudden sleep onset episodes (‘sleep attacks’) are rare. in a small
open-label study in nine patients with early parkinson’s disease, switching from
monotherapy with alternative dopamine agonists to cabergoline monotherapy
(administered at bedtime) resulted in a reduction in daytime sleepiness.

1. introduction
parkinson’s disease arises from the progressive
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra.[1] as a result, there is a decrease in
striatal concentrations of dopamine and the control
of neurotransmission is affected. thus, the disease is
characterised by the development of motor symptoms, such as resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia
and postural instability.[2]
current therapies for parkinson’s disease aim to
restore dopaminergic transmission at the nigrosub© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

stantial level with agents such as the dopamine
precursor levodopa or, alternatively, bypass presynaptic dopamine synthesis and directly activate
postsynaptic dopamine receptors with dopamine agonists.[3,4] levodopa has been the gold standard of
parkinson’s disease therapy over the past three decades.[5] however, long-term use of levodopa therapy is associated with motor complications including dyskinesia (chorea, dystonia) and motor fluctuations.[1]
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2128

dopamine agonists such as cabergoline
( xxxd400xxx ®,  xxxd400xxx ®, sogelin®)1 have established
efficacy as adjuvants to long-term levodopa therapy
for the management of motor fluctuations in patients
with advanced parkinson’s disease. more recently,
their use as initial monotherapy or in combination
with levodopa in early parkinson’s disease has been
investigated.
this article reviews the efficacy and tolerability
of oral cabergoline as adjuvant therapy in patients
with advanced parkinson’s disease treated with levodopa, and as initial therapy in patients with early
parkinson’s disease. the cost effectiveness of cabergoline in patients with newly diagnosed disease is
also reviewed.
2. pharmacodynamic properties
the pharmacodynamic properties of oral cabergoline have previously been extensively reviewed,[6,7] therefore, this section provides an overview of the key properties of the drug.
2.1 receptor binding

based on the results of preclinical studies, it has
been assumed that the dopamine receptor agonists
exert their antiparkinsonian effects primarily via the
stimulation of dopamine d2 receptors, with some
involvement of d1 receptors.[8] whether the affinity
displayed by dopamine agonists for d3 receptors
contributes to therapeutic benefits or undesirable
properties (psychiatric or motor adverse effects) has
yet to be fully clarified.[9,10]
cabergoline, a dopaminergic synthetic ergoline
derivative, has high affinity for human d2 receptors.[7,11-14] in human brain tissue, the dissociation
constant (ki) of cabergoline for d2 receptors was
0.61 nmol/l.[13] in vivo studies indicated that ligation to the receptor is long lasting (at least 68
hours).[6,15] cabergoline also demonstrated affinity
for d3 receptors in human brain tissue (ki = 1.27
nmol/l), but showed limited affinity for d1 receptors (ki = 1462 nmol/l).[13] studies of human recombinant receptors demonstrated that the drug has
moderate affinity for nondopaminergic brain recep1

curran & perry

tors such as serotonin 5-ht1 and 5-ht2 receptors
and  xxxg87xxx   xxxg830xxx - and  xxxg831xxx -adrenergic receptors.[11,12,14]
2.2 antiparkinsonian effects

in animal models of parkinson’s disease, cabergoline reduced disease symptoms, without inducing
dyskinesia or hyperactivity.[16-19] in these models,
levodopa-induced dyskinesia was reversed by the
addition of sustained treatment with cabergoline,[19,20] and was prevented if cabergoline was administered with levodopa treatment.[18]
actigraphy analysis of diurnal motor activity in
patients (n = 8) with parkinson’s disease treated
with levodopa indicated a significant (p < 0.01)
increase in motor activity versus baseline after administration of cabergoline 2–4 mg/day at breakfast.
when treated with cabergoline, patients had an increase in motor activity of 40% in the morning (from
0800 to 1200h), of 60% in the afternoon (from 1200
to 1800h) and of 60% early the next morning (from
the time of arising to 0800h).[21] data from randomised, double-blind, multicentre studies investigating
the clinical efficacy of cabergoline in patients with
parkinson’s disease are presented in section 4.
2.3 neuroprotective effects

evidence from in vitro[22-25] and in vivo[26,27] studies suggest that cabergoline may confer neuroprotection via a number of possible mechanisms. however, well designed trials in patients with parkinson’s disease have yet to provide clear evidence of a
neuroprotective effect of cabergoline in the clinical
setting.
like other dopamine agonists, cabergoline
reduces lipid peroxidation in animal brain tissue.[22,26,27] this antioxidant property of the drug
may be the result of its ability to scavenge free
radicals[23,27] and to activate antioxidant enzymatic
activities such as the glutathione system.[22,27] moreover, in vitro studies indicate that cabergoline may
contribute to neuroprotection by up-regulating endogenous neurotrophic factors such as nerve growth
factor, brain-derived  xxxg1614xxx  and glial
cell line-derived  xxxg1614xxx .[24,25] levels of
these factors were immediately elevated from those

the use of trade names is for product identification purposes only and does not imply endorsement.

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

in the control after treatment with cabergoline, with
10-, 3- and 30-fold increases, respectively, at 16
hours.[25]
2.4 effects on sleep

sleep disturbance is commonly associated with
parkinson’s disease, with many factors such as
motor symptoms (nocturnal akinesia, tremor, periodic limb movements), the disease-related dopaminergic deficit and drug therapy considered to be involved in its pathophysiology.[28-30] sustained dopaminergic stimulation initiated at bedtime may help
with improving nocturnal motor symptoms and secondarily improve sleep and reduce the incidence of
daytime sudden sleep-onset episodes (‘sleep attacks’) and excessive daytime somnolence. details
of ‘sleep attacks’ and excessive daytime somnolence in cabergoline recipients are outlined in section 6.
open-label trials demonstrated that an evening
dose of cabergoline had a beneficial effect on nocturnal motor symptoms in patients with parkinson’s
disease, with significantly reduced nocturnal akinesias and early-morning dyskinesias and improvements in subjectively assessed sleep.[31-34] in one
open-label study in patients with parkinson’s disease (n = 15),[32] although sleep efficacy (total time
of sleep per time in bed) and the amount of stage 1 or
2 sleep did not alter, and stage shifts (119 vs 148; p <
0.05) and awakenings (22.4 vs 32.5; p < 0.05) significantly increased from baseline, the quality of
subjectively assessed sleep significantly improved
with treatment with 6–8 weeks of cabergoline 3–6
mg/day. patients felt significantly more refreshed in
the  xxxd2476xxx  cabergoline treatment than at
baseline (8.3 vs 5.5; p = 0.02; assessed on a visual
analogue scale of 1 [worst] to 10 [best]).[32] in
addition, the periodic leg movement index during
sleep also decreased from baseline values after cabergoline treatment (34.9 vs 6.7 per hour of sleep; p =
0.022).[32]
3. pharmacokinetic properties
since the pharmacokinetic properties of oral cabergoline in healthy volunteers and patients with
parkinson’s disease have previously been extensive© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

2129

ly reviewed,[6,7,35] only a brief summary of these
properties is provided in this section.
in a study of seven patients with parkinson’s
disease, the pharmacokinetic profile of cabergoline
at steady state was linear across the dosage range 3,
5 and 7 mg/day, with peak plasma concentrations
(approximately 500, 620 and 1200 ng/l) being
reached within 0.5, 1.5 and 3 hours (data estimated
from a graph).[36] plasma cabergoline concentrations
were relatively constant during the 24-hours between doses, with the exception of the 7 mg/day
dosage (off-label) which was associated with a peak
approximately 150–180 minutes after administration. cabergoline is extensively distributed into
body tissues, including the brain.[6] cabergoline is
moderately bound to plasma proteins (approximately 40%) in a concentration-independent manner.[35]
because of limitations in assay methods, values for
total clearance, volume of distribution at steady state
and absolute bioavailability of cabergoline are unknown.[35]
cabergoline is extensively metabolised in the
liver, mainly by hydrolysis of the acylurea bond of
the urea moiety.[35]
the elimination half-life (t1/2) of cabergoline was
66–109 hours in healthy volunteers, estimated indirectly on the basis of urinary excretion rates.[35]
thus, cabergoline can conveniently be administered
once daily. cabergoline is excreted mainly in the
faeces (72% of an administered dose within 240
hours), with urinary excretion of unchanged cabergoline accounting for about 20% of an administered
dose.[35]
mild-to-moderate renal impairment,[35] administration of food[37] and age or gender[38] had no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of
cabergoline. there was no pharmacokinetic interaction between cabergoline and levodopa[39] or
selegiline,[40] but coadministration of cabergoline
and clarithromycin resulted in an increase in the
plasma concentration of cabergoline (see section
7).[41]
4. therapeutic use
clinical trials have investigated the efficacy of
oral cabergoline as adjuvant therapy to levodopa in
patients with advanced parkinson’s disease with
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2130

‘on-off’ mobility problems and daily fluctuations in
motor performance (section 4.1). the drug has also
been investigated in patients with newly diagnosed
parkinson’s disease (section 4.2), who received additional levodopa therapy as required.
in the trials in patients with advanced parkinson’s disease (section 4.1), the primary endpoints
included the mean decrease in unified parkinson’s
disease rating scale (updrs) activities of daily
living (adl) subscores and/or motor function subscores[42,43] or the percentage improvement in clinical global impression (cgi) scale of clinical improvement in motor disability.[44-46] changes in patient’s self quantification of ‘off’ hours (poor motor
function), ‘on’ (good motor function) or time ‘on
with dyskinesia’ and changes in daily levodopa dosage were also used to assess efficacy.
the primary endpoint in the trial in patients with
early idiopathic parkinson’s disease (section 4.2)
was the onset of motor complications confirmed at
two subsequent visits.[47,48]
cabergoline therapy was generally initiated as a
once-daily dose of 0.5mg and increased in weekly
increments of 0.5mg, as required, to a maximum
once-daily dose of 4–6mg.
4.1 in patients with advanced
parkinson’s disease

small comparative trials (dose-ranging [0.5–2.5
mg/day],[49] versus placebo,[50,51] bromocriptine[52]
or pergolide[53]) and larger phase iii trials (versus
placebo[42,43] or bromocriptine[44-46]) have investigated the efficacy of cabergoline as an adjunct to levodopa in patients with advanced parkinson’s disease.
this review focuses on the phase iii trials (see table
i for study design details), with the exception of a
comparative trial[53] in which patients were randomised to adjunctive cabergoline or pergolide (phase
iii trials have not been conducted for this comparison). only two of the phase iii trials have been fully
published,[42,46] although additional data from two of
the other trials[44,45] have been published in a separate review.[54]
patients were stabilised on levodopa therapy for
at least 1 month prior to study entry and had end of
dose ‘wearing off’ or motor complications.[54,55] reduction of the levodopa dosage was permitted
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

curran & perry

during the studies. levodopa was administered with
a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor (to prevent the peripheral conversion of levodopa to dopamine).
4.1.1 comparisons with placebo

as an adjunct to levodopa therapy, cabergoline
improved parkinsonian symptoms to a significantly
greater extent than placebo, when assessed according to the updrs adl and motor function scores
(table i).[42,43] moreover, the reduction in the percentage of ‘off’ hours was significantly greater in
recipients of adjuvant cabergoline than placebo (p <
0.05; table i).[42,43] the daily levodopa dose was
significantly less with cabergoline than placebo;
there was an 18% versus 3% reduction from baseline in the mean daily levodopa dose (p < 0.001) in
one study[42] and decreases in median daily dose
(–80 vs 0mg; p < 0.001) occurring in 58% versus
26% of patients in the other study.[43]
4.1.2 comparisons with bromocriptine

adjunctive cabergoline improved parkinsonian
symptoms to a similar extent as adjunctive bromocriptine when assessed according to the percentage
of patients with improvements in cgi scale (table i)
and improvement in the updrs scores (values not
stated).[44-46] although the reduction in the percentage of ‘off’ hours was numerically greater with
cabergoline treatment versus bromocriptine, the difference was not statistically significant (table
i).[44,45]
4.1.3 comparison with pergolide

in a small crossover study (table i),[53] both cabergoline and pergolide improved symptoms according to the updrs motor function subscale (p <
0.001 vs baseline). the improvement during the
‘off’-phase, according to the updrs motor function
subscale, was significantly greater with cabergoline
than pergolide (p < 0.05; table i).
4.2 in patients with early parkinson’s disease

cabergoline (maximum dosage 4 mg/day) initiated as monotherapy (with additional open-label levodopa as required) has been compared with levodopa
in patients with early idiopathic parkinson’s disease
in a single 5-year trial (see table ii for study design
details). a full and complete analysis of the trial at
endpoint (development of motor complications condrugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

2131

table i. comparative efficacy of oral cabergoline (cab) as adjuvant therapy to levodopa (lev) in patients (pts) with advanced parkinson’s
disease in randomised, double-blind, multicentre trials, unless otherwise indicated. cab was titrated in increments of 0.5mg not more than
once weekly. reduction of the lev dosage (value not clearly stated) was permitted. cab was administered once daily and bromocriptine
(brm) and pergolide (per) were administered three times daily. lev was administered with a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor (generally
carbidopa; dosage not stated).
study

treatment

dosage

total

cgi

mean improvement in updrs subscore vs baseline improvement in no.

(no. of
(mg/day)a duration improvement adl (%
randomised
(wks)
(% pts)
reduction)
pts)

motor function
(% reduction)

adl and motor
function (points)

of ‘off’ hours vs
baseline (%
reduction)

comparisons with pl
hutton et

cab (123)

al.[42]c

pl (65)

musch et

cab (145)

al.[43]ef

0.5–5

24

0.5–6

19.1*b

16.5*b

4.0b

6.3b

values not stated*
values not stated
6.0**b

24

2.0b

pl (73)

10.3*d
1.5d

comparisons with brm
destee et

cab (191)

0.5–6

al.[44]ei

brm (193)

5–40

schneider

cab (181)

0.5–6

et al.[45]ej

brm (185)

5–40

≤22g
≤20g

yanagisawa cab (115)

0.25–4

et al.[46]f

1.25–22.5

brm (120)

12

83.2b

63h

77.1b

55h

77.9b

51h

77.8b

45h

43.7b
35.0b

comparison with per
ulm and

cab (24)

≤6

30.5†bk/42.6†‡bl

8

a

per (24)
≤5
titrated to obtain optimal antiparkinson response.

b

primary endpoint.

c

no pts received dopamine agents in the month prior to study entry.

d

median value.

e

published as an abstract and poster.

f

previous use of dopamine agonists not stated.

g

including 12 weeks at stable dosage.

h

mean value.

schuler[53]fm

i

pts had not previously received dopamine agonists.

j

pts had previously received dopamine agonists.

k

on phase (nonblind assessment).

l

off phase (nonblind assessment).

25.7†bk/31.8†bl

m randomised, video-blinded, crossover study.
adl = activities of daily living; cgi = clinical global improvement; pl = placebo; updrs = unified parkinson’s disease rating scale; * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs pl; † p < 0.001 vs baseline; ‡ p < 0.05 vs per.

firmed at two consecutive 3-monthly visits, or after
a maximum of 5 years) has been recently published.[48] a planned interim analysis of the trial at 1
year[56] and an initial analysis of data at endpoint
have also been published.[47]
patients who had previously been treated with
levodopa, selegiline or dopamine agonists were excluded from the trial.[48] however, patients were
permitted previous treatment with amantadine or
anticholinergic drugs, but these drugs were discon© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

tinued at least 4 weeks prior to study entry. additional open-label levodopa was added to both treatment arms as required (when the decrease in
updrs motor function score versus baseline was
<30%) [table ii].
cabergoline (with or without additional levodopa) was as effective as levodopa during the first year
of treatment, with 81% versus 87% of patients
achieving clinical improvement in parkinson’s disease (>30% decrease in updrs motor function
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2132

curran & perry

table ii. oral cabergoline (cab) vs levodopa (lev) in patients (pts) with early idiopathic parkinson’s disease (hoehn and yahr stages
1–3).[48] in the double-blind, multicentre trial, 211 pts were randomised to cab and 209 pts were randomised to lev. the per-protocol
analysis included 123 cab recipients and 129 lev recipients. cab dosages were titrated at 2- to 4-week intervals over a titration phase of
up to 24 weeks. lev was administered with carbidopa as a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor (dosage not stated). additional open-label lev
was added as required.a pts had received no previous treatment with lev, selegiline or dopamine agonists. amantadine or anticholinergic
drugs were discontinued at least 4 weeks before the study began. during the stable dosage period, cab was administered once daily and
lev was administered four times daily
clinical improvementc
(% pts)

pts requiring additional lev (%)
[mean lev dose; mg/day]

cab

81.4

[322]

lev

86.6

[784]

cab

58.9**

[355]

lev

75.9

[799]

treatment
1 year
3 years
5 years

development of motor
complicationsb (% pts)

cab

22.3*

46.4

64 [431]

lev

33.7

67.9

47 [784]

a

added when the decrease in the updrs motor function score vs baseline was <30%.

b

primary endpoint; assessed at two consecutive 3-month visits, on the basis of a check list in which fluctuations were classified into
different categories.

c

>30% decrease in updrs motor function score vs baseline.

updrs = unified parkinson’s disease rating scale; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs lev.

score versus baseline) [table ii].[48,56] however, as a
consequence of the disease progression, there was a
gradual decrease in the improvement in updrs
motor function score over the remainder of the
study,[47,48] with 46% of recipients of cabergoline
(with or without additional levodopa) and 68% of
levodopa recipients achieving clinical improvement
at 5 years.[48]
mean updrs motor function scores over time
were significantly lower with levodopa than with
cabergoline (with or without levodopa) [p < 0.01],
with scores of 12.9 vs 13.8 at 1 year, 17.2 vs 18.6 at
3 years and 16.3 vs 19.2 at 5 years.[48] similarly,
updrs adl subscores significantly improved over
the first year of therapy in both treatment groups,
with a subsequent gradual decline in the level of
improvement with prolonged therapy; the betweengroup differences were only significant at 12 months
(p < 0.05).[48]
with long-term therapy, additional open-label
levodopa therapy was required by 64% of cabergoline recipients compared with 47% of levodopa recipients (table ii); cabergoline recipients required
additional levodopa earlier than those treated with
levodopa (p < 0.0001). the mean cumulative exposure to levodopa was lower with cabergoline than
with levodopa only (304 vs 761 g/patient; p-value
not stated).[48] there was no difference in the severity of parkinson’s disease at baseline between caber© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

goline recipients who subsequently needed additional levodopa and those who were adequately treated
with cabergoline monotherapy.[57]
importantly, this 5-year study demonstrated that
motor complications developed in significantly fewer recipients of cabergoline (with or without additional levodopa) than levodopa alone (22% vs 34%;
p < 0.05; table ii)[48] the cumulative probability of
developing motor complications was significantly
lower for recipients of cabergoline (with or without
levodopa) than for recipients of levodopa alone (p <
0.02) throughout the treatment period, according to
log rank test analysis (figure 1). most patients who
developed motor complications (68% of cabergoline
recipients and 71% of levodopa recipients), did so
within 30 months of treatment initiation. in recipients of cabergoline (with or without levodopa) and
levodopa, motor complications included end-ofdose failures (16.1% vs 22.1%) and dyskinesias
(9.5% vs 21.2%).[48] the cumulative risk of developing dyskinesias was significantly lower with cabergoline (with or without levodopa) than levodopa
alone (p < 0.001; cox model analysis).[47,48]
in patients who had remained on monotherapy
without additional levodopa, motor complications
occurred in fewer cabergoline than levodopa recipients (5.3% vs 15.5%; p-value not stated);[48] common motor complications included end-of-dose failure (4.0% vs 10.9%) and dyskinesia (1.3% vs
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

2133

9.1%).[48] in those who required additional openlabel levodopa, motor complications occurred in
fewer cabergoline than levodopa recipients (31.9%
vs 54.1%).[48]
5. pharmacoeconomic analyses
the costs to the public healthcare system of
parkinson’s disease are related to the progression of
the disease and the development of motor complications.[58] thus, cabergoline, which delays motor
complications and reduces the symptoms of the disease, although associated with higher daily drug
acquisition costs compared with levodopa, may potentially be cost effective in the long term.[4]
two analyses have investigated the cost effectiveness of treatment with cabergoline versus levodopa in patients with early parkinson’s disease
(table iii).[59,60] the main source of clinical data
used in both of these analyses was a randomised,
double-blind, comparative 5-year clinical study in
patients with early parkinson’s disease who had not
previously been treated with levodopa (section
4.2).[47] the primary endpoint of this trial was the
onset of motor complications.
sensitivity analyses were performed in both analyses. the results are subject to the assumptions and
inputs of the models (table iii).
cabergoline was considered cost effective by the
researchers of the two analyses, based on the incremental costs per effect gained versus levodopa
(table iii). however, it should be noted that the

cumulative probability
of developing the event

lev (n = 204)
cab ± lev (n = 208)
0.6
0.5
0.4

*

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

time (years)
fig. 1. cumulative probability of developing motor complications in
patients with early parkinson’s disease (estimated by the kaplan
meier’s method). in a randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial,
patients were randomised to oral cabergoline (cab) with or without
levodopa (lev) or lev alone (reproduced from rinne et al.,[47] with
permission). * p < 0.02 vs lev.

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

endpoints used in these analyses were different from
those used in other cost-effectiveness analyses of
patients with parkinson’s disease (generally cost per
quality-adjusted life year), preventing comparison
with an accepted benchmark figure.
the analysis conducted from a swedish healthcare perspective (direct costs only considered) demonstrated that patients treated with cabergoline (with
or without levodopa) gained 0.31 years without
motor complications relative to levodopa, giving
incremental costs per year of motor complications
avoided of €13 863 in the base-case (5 years) [table
iii].[60] this model was robust to variations in costs
and discount rates. running the model for 10 years
in a sensitivity analysis resulted in a more favourable cost effectiveness ratio of €6122 per year of
motor complications avoided. however, this analysis did not include patients in the later stages of
parkinson’s disease (hoehn and yahr stages 4 and
5). since it is likely that patients may reach these
stages over a 10-year period, the associated costs
may increase. moreover, motor complication rates
were based on 5-year data which may or may not be
applicable in the longer term.
in the german analysis that included both direct
and indirect costs over a 10-year period on a hypothetical cohort of 100 patients, cabergoline monotherapy was found to be a cost-effective alternative
to levodopa based on estimated incremental costs
per decreased updrs score point (table iii) for
patients aged ≥60 years.[59] in patients aged <60
years, levodopa was considered the dominant strategy in terms of better efficacy and lower annual cost
(cost-effectiveness analysis not applicable). incremental costs per motor complication-free patient
were greater for patients aged <60 years than those
aged ≥60 years (table iii). sensitivity analyses indicated that this model was robust against changes of
discount rate, cost data and mortality rates.
nevertheless, as noted by the researcher, this
analysis had several limitations.[59] the costs per
decreased updrs score point were used to determine the cost-effectiveness ratio. although updrs
score is the current standard evaluation tool for
clinical studies, the researchers noted that there is a
lack of evidence-based data relating updrs score
reductions and clinically meaningful outcomes.
they suggested that the use of updrs scores as an
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2134

curran & perry

table iii. cost-effectiveness of oral cabergoline (cab) vs levodopa (lev) monotherapy in patients (pts) with recently diagnosed parkinson’s
disease (hoehn and yahr stages 1–3). a decision-analysis (markov) model was used. the main source of clinical data in both studies was a
5-year, randomised, double-blind, comparative study[47] (see section 4.2). data from other published literature were also included. progression of the disease was modelled through the hoehn and yahr scale. cab dosage was 3[60] or 2.9[59] mg/day and lev was 450[60] or 600[59]
mg/day
lindgren et al.[60]a

smala et al.[59]b

time period

5 years

10 years

perspective (year of costing)

swedish public healthcare system (2000)

german societal (2002)

costs included

directc

direct and indirectd

motor complications per year

calculated using a weibull regression modele

cab 0.01/lev 0.03ef

mortality rate

same as general population

2.0

annual discount rate (%)

3

5

key inputs/assumptions in model

incremental costs (€) per effect vs lev

13 863 per year of motor complications avoided 1031g per decreased updrs score pointh

costs per motor complication-free pt
57 900g (or 104 400i)
a lev could be added to cab monotherapy if the decrease in updrs motor function vs baseline was <30%.
b

modelled using a hypothetical cohort of 100 pts receiving monotherapy.

c

medication, inpatient and outpatient care.

d

medication, diagnostic and medical, rehabilitation, hospitalisation, transportation, medical devices, nondrug treatment, social
services, long-term care, short-term incapacity benefits and productivity losses.

e

based on data from clinical trial.

f

complication rates were assumed constant over age and time and equal across all hoehn and yahr stages.

g

pts aged ≥60 years.

h

sum of updrs part i–v total scores for pts who received cab instead of lev.

i

pts aged <60 years.

updrs = unified parkinson’s disease rating scale.

outcome parameter for cost effectiveness needed
further evaluation. the small sample size of the
original data set and the low overall rate of motor
complications (5.3% of cabergoline monotherapy
recipients and 15.5% of levodopa recipients over 5
years) meant that no time-dependent or hoehn and
yahr-specific complication rates could be determined, and, consequently, complication rates were
assumed to be constant over age, time and equal
across all hoehn and yahr stages.[59] since only
patients in hoehn and yahr stages 1–3 were included in the model, no evaluation was carried out for
patients with more advanced stages of the disease.
6. tolerability
in the clinical trials outlined in section 4, cabergoline 0.5–6 mg/day (with or without levodopa) was
generally well tolerated, with adverse events usually
being transient and mild to moderate in severity.
in a meta-analysis of clinical trials in patients
(n = 1069) with advanced parkinson’s disease receiving levodopa,[61] the incidence of adverse events
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

with adjuvant cabergoline therapy (74%) was similar to that with placebo (68%) or adjuvant bromocriptine (74%), with withdrawal rates of 15%, 7%
and 19%, respectively. common adverse events
associated with adjuvant cabergoline therapy in
these clinical trials included cns disturbances
(51%; dyskinesia, hyperkinesia, hallucinations, confusion), gastrointestinal disturbances (33%; nausea,
vomiting, dyspepsia, gastritis) and cardiovascular
events (27%; most frequently postural hypotension
and dizziness)[61,62] other reported adverse events
included peripheral oedema (6%), angina (≈1%) and
erythromelalgia (0.4%).[62]
cabergoline, both as adjunctive and monotherapy, was well tolerated in elderly patients (n = 102;
aged 65–75 years) and the very elderly (n = 60; aged
>75 years) with parkinson’s disease in a multicentre, retrospective survey.[63]
adjuvant cabergoline was better tolerated than
adjuvant pergolide, according to data from a small
trial in patients with advanced parkinson’s disease
receiving levodopa (section 4.1.3).[53] in this trial,
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

significantly more patients choose to continue with
cabergoline than pergolide treatment at the end of
the study (63% vs 37%; p < 0.05).
in patients with newly diagnosed parkinson’s
disease enrolled in a 5-year study, the overall incidence of adverse events was 83% with cabergoline
(with or without additional levodopa) and 82% with
levodopa; rates of withdrawal were 16% and 13%,
respectively.[47,48]
inflammatory-fibrotic complications have occasionally been associated with prolonged use of
ergoline dopamine agonists.[5,64,65] several case reports of fibrotic and serosal inflammatory conditions associated with cabergoline have been published.[65-69] on the basis of the international drug
monitoring uppsala database and a medline
search,[64] the reporting rate of such reactions was
lower with cabergoline than pergolide (13 vs 131
total cases; patient-years of exposure not stated). in
an observational study of 234 patients with parkinson’s disease, cabergoline (mean dose 3.7 mg/day)
treatment was associated with a low incidence of
cardio-pulmonary fibrosis in non-susceptible individuals (<1.7%).[68] these complications can have
an insidious onset,[65] and the manufacturer recommends regular and careful monitoring for manifestations of progressive fibrotic disorders.[62] the clinical course of the fibrotic syndromes is usually benign and a partial reversal of lesions generally
occurs after withdrawal of the drug.[64] however,
cases of persistence[69] or temporary progression of
fibrosis[67] have occurred.
somnolence has been documented in recipients
of cabergoline (with or without levodopa) [see section 2],[62,70,71] although reports of excessive daytime
somnolence or ‘sleep attacks’ are limited.[62,72-74]
cabergoline plus levodopa was not associated with
abnormal sleepiness (mean score of 7 on epworth
sleepiness scale), ‘sleep attacks’ or episodes of falling asleep while driving in 25 patients with parkinson’s disease (data presented in an abstract).[73] according to a german community-based survey of
patients with parkinson’s disease receiving levodopa, a ‘sleep attack’ with or without warning signs
occurred in 6.2% of cabergoline recipients (n = 401;
mean dose 4.2 mg/day).[72] the incidence of ‘sleep
attacks’ without warning signs was 3.0% (95% ci
2.1, 3.8) with cabergoline (mean dose 3.4 mg/day),
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

2135

5.4% (95% ci 3.9, 7.0) with  xxxd3145xxx  (mean dose
7.0 mg/day) and 5.6% (95% ci 4.3, 7.0) with
pramipexole (mean dose 2.0 mg/day).[72]
interestingly, switching to cabergoline monotherapy (mean 4.7 mg/day administered at bedtime)
from monotherapy with other dopamine agonists
( xxxd3145xxx , pramipexole or pergolide; time of dose
administration not stated) resulted in a 70% reduction in daytime sleepiness (scored on the epworth
sleepiness scale), according to data from a 3-month,
open-label trial in nine patients with early parkinson’s disease.[74] the researchers hypothesised that
the risk for sleepiness was highest when the peak
plasma concentrations of these drugs were reached,
and this risk could be reduced with an evening
administration of a dopamine agonist with a long t1/2
such as cabergoline.
7. dosage and administration
oral cabergoline can be used for the treatment of
parkinson’s disease, either as monotherapy in newly
diagnosed patients or as adjunctive therapy to levodopa in patients with more advanced disease.[62]
the license for cabergoline varies from country
to country. in spain, ireland and the uk, cabergoline is indicated as adjunctive therapy to levodopa
plus a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor in patients affected by ‘on-off’ mobility problems with daily fluctuations in motor performances.[62] in other countries, for example finland, germany, norway, switzerland, denmark, japan and sweden, cabergoline
is licensed for use in parkinson’s disease with or
without the addition of levodopa.
the recommended dosage for cabergoline is
2–6mg once daily.[62] optimisation of dosage should
be obtained through a slow initial dose titration,
starting from a dosage of 1mg once daily, with
increments of 0.5–1mg ( xxxd2274xxx - or 14-day intervals),
until the maximal control of symptoms is achieved.
the dosage of levodopa may be gradually decreased
as the dosage of cabergoline is increased.
cabergoline should not be administered to patients with a history or clinical symptoms of respiratory disorders linked to fibrotic tissue degeneration,
unless the benefits gained clearly outweigh the associated risks (see section 6).[62] patients should be
regularly monitored for manifestations of progresdrugs 2004; 64 (18)

2136

sive fibrotic disorders and the drug withdrawn if
fibrotic or serosal inflammatory changes are diagnosed or suspected.[62] in common with other ergot
derivatives, cabergoline should be used with caution
in patients with severe cardiovascular disease,
raynaud’s syndrome, peptic ulcer, gastrointestinal
bleeding or a history of serious (particularly
psychotic) illness. caution is also advised when
cabergoline is used concomitantly with other drugs
that lower blood pressure.[62]
cabergoline should not be used concurrently
with drugs that have dopamine antagonist activity
(e.g. phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes, metoclopramide) or with macrolide antibacterials (see section 3).[62]
8. place of cabergoline in the
management of parkinson’s disease
parkinson’s disease affects 1–2% of the population aged >60 years,[75] with the increasing mean age
of the population and the decline in competing
causes of mortality, it is estimated that the number
of people affected by this disease will increase,
along with its social and healthcare burden.[4,76] currently, no treatment has been shown to cure parkinson’s disease or delay its progression. consequently, the goals of treatment focus on providing symptomatic treatment, delaying the onset of motor
function problems and neuroprotection.
pharmacological treatment is usually achieved
through dopaminergic therapy aimed at replacing
the dopamine which is depleted during progressive
neurodegeneration.[77] this may occur through the
direct replacement of dopamine using levodopa (the
amino-acid precursor of dopamine), the pharmacokinetics of which are enhanced by agents that inhibit
the  xxxd306xxx  decarboxylase and catechol-omethyl transferase (e.g.  xxxd2000xxx ,  xxxd3395xxx ). alternatively selective dopamine agonists are used to
substitute for dopamine by activating postsynaptic
receptors. currently used dopamine agonists include
the ergot derivatives (bromocriptine, cabergoline,
 xxxd2498xxx , piribedil, dihydroergocryptine and pergolide) and the non-ergoline agents (apomorphine,
pramipexole and  xxxd3145xxx ). other less commonly
used options, that have typically been used in patients younger than 60 years, include anticholinergics (used in the treatment of prominent resting
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

curran & perry

tremor) and amantadine (used in the treatment of
akinesia, rigidity and dyskinesia).[5,77,78]
neuroprotective therapy that could slow, stop or
prevent the progression of parkinson’s disease is
urgently required. although data from in vitro and
in vivo studies of agents such as selegiline and
dopamine agonists have suggested a possible
neuroprotective effect, outcomes from clinical and
imaging studies[79,80] have been been confounded by
limitations of study design.[81,82] nevertheless, evidence to date is sufficient to encourage further research in this area.[81]
levodopa combined with a peripheral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor has been considered the therapy of choice for parkinson’s disease.[1,5] however,
despite the success of levodopa as first-line therapy,
it is associated with a loss of efficacy over time and
the development of response fluctuations (‘wearingoff’ and ‘on-off’ phenomena).[1] patients treated
with levodopa therapy for 4–6 years have an approximate 40% likelihood of experiencing motor fluctuations and a risk of dyskinesias slightly less than
40%.[83] the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of
the development of motor fluctuations is unclear,
but it has been suggested that the pulsatile stimulation of striatal dopamine receptors may be responsible.[5,84] moreover, there has been theoretical concern that levodopa might be toxic to dopamine neurons as it undergoes oxidative metabolism;[5]
however, data regarding the toxicity of levodopa in
the clinical situation are conflicting.[81] a consensus
conference on the topic concluded that, at present,
there is no convincing evidence that levodopa
causes or accelerates neuronal death.[85]
there has been an intensive effort to develop new
treatments that, by providing direct and long-lasting
dopaminergic stimulation, are able to reverse disabilities in patients with advanced parkinson’s disease, as well as provide relief of symptoms without
increasing the incidence of motor complications in
patients with newly diagnosed disease.[1] there has
been growing interest in dopamine agonists to fulfil
these roles.
dopamine agonists offer several advantages over
levodopa.[5] the therapeutic target of the dopamine
agonists is the postsynaptic dopamine receptor,
which is relatively spared by the disease.[6] moreover, dopamine agonists do not require metabolic
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

conversion to an active product to exert their effect.[5] unlike levodopa, circulating amino acids do
not compete with dopamine agonists for absorption
and transport into the brain. they have a longer t1/2
than levodopa and, therefore, have the potential to
achieve a more sustained stimulation of striatal dopamine receptors. however, dopamine agonists have
a broader adverse event profile than levodopa, with
the incidence of certain adverse events including
hallucinations, somnolence and oedema being
higher with dopamine agonists.[82]
dopamine agonists are widely and successfully
used as an adjunct to levodopa in patients with
advanced parkinson’s disease, and thereby allow a
reduction in the levodopa dosage.[5] more recently,
studies have suggested that initial treatment with a
dopamine agonist reduces the risk of developing
motor complications compared with levodopa.[4,82]
cabergoline is a synthetic ergoline derivative
with unique pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
properties that differentiate it from other dopamine
agonists. one of the most distinctive features of
cabergoline is its long t1/2 (see section 3), which,
along with its affinity for d2 receptors, provides
continuous dopaminergic stimulation with oncedaily administration. the once-daily regimen makes
cabergoline more convenient to administer than other dopamine agonists or levodopa (which must be
administered at a higher daily frequency).[35]
unlike levodopa, dopamine agonists, such as
cabergoline, do not undergo oxidative metabolism,
generate free radicals or induce oxidative stress.
such processes are involved in the nigral cell death
characteristic of parkinson’s disease.[5] in vitro and
in vivo models suggest that cabergoline, in a manner
similar to other dopamine agonists,[4] may have a
neuroprotective effect (see section 2). however,
specifically designed long-term trials, with appropriate endpoints and methods of assessment, need to
be conducted in order to establish the neuroprotective activity of cabergoline in a clinical setting.
data from placebo-controlled trials in patients
with advanced parkinson’s disease receiving levodopa indicate that adjuvant cabergoline therapy effectively controls the symptoms of the disease,
thereby allowing a reduction in the levodopa dosage. moreover, adjuvant cabergoline was associated
with fewer ‘off’ hours than placebo (section 4.1.1).
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

2137

adjuvant therapy with cabergoline was as effective
as bromocriptine and at least as effective as pergolide in controlling parkinsonian symptoms in patients
with advanced disease receiving levodopa (section
4.1.2 and 4.1.3). cabergoline was significantly more
effective than pergolide in improving motor performance during the ‘off’ phase (section 4.1.3).
moreover, adjuvant cabergoline was better tolerated
than adjuvant pergolide, with a significantly greater
proportion of patients choosing to continue with
cabergoline than pergolide treatment at the conclusion of the crossover study (section 6).
in patients with newly diagnosed parkinson’s
disease, the efficacy of cabergoline (with or without
additional levodopa) was similar to that of levodopa
during the first year of treatment (section 4.2). although the improvement in symptoms declined with
prolonged treatment, there was no significant difference in the percentage of patients who achieved
clinical improvement at 5 years. nevertheless, mean
updrs motor function scores were slightly, but
significantly lower, in levodopa than cabergoline
recipients over the 5-year period. importantly, the
development of motor complications with long-term
therapy occurred in significantly fewer recipients of
cabergoline (with or without levodopa) than in recipients of levodopa, indicating that initial treatment
with cabergoline may delay the occurrence of levodopa-induced motor complications (section 4.2).
nevertheless, the use of dopamine agonists as
initial therapy in patients with parkinson’s disease
has been debated in the literature.[5,86-88] arguments
in favour of the initial use of dopamine agonists
include their potential neuroprotective effect and
their association with fewer motor complications
than levodopa.[5] commentators arguing against the
initial use of these agents require further clinical
evidence of their advantages,[86,88] and seek answers
to such questions as whether the apparent advantage
of dopamine agonists over levodopa with respect to
dyskinesias and short duration responses might disappear if a lower dosage of levodopa were used
initially.[86] nevertheless, the parkinson’s disease
treatment practice parameter of the american academy of neurology concluded that it is appropriate to
use initial treatment with levodopa or a dopamine
agonist.[82]
drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2138

data from small open-label studies indicate that
an evening dose of cabergoline has a beneficial
effect on nocturnal symptoms of the disease (section
2.4), but further randomised, double-blind studies
are needed to confirm these results.
costs associated with parkinson’s disease are
markedly increased with disease progression and the
development of treatment-related motor complications.[58] although dopamine agonists, such as cabergoline, are more costly than levodopa,[4] savings
associated with decreased dyskinesias and clinical
improvements may allow these agents to be cost
effective, especially in patients with newly diagnosed disease. data from two pharmacoeconomic
decision analyses suggested that cabergoline was
cost effective compared with levodopa alone in patients with newly diagnosed parkinson’s disease
(section 5). while the methodologies employed in
one of these analyses[59] have been questioned,[89,90]
clarification of most areas of concern has been provided in a response from the investigators.[57] further cost effectiveness studies that directly compare
cabergoline with other dopamine agonists and estimate costs per quality-adjusted life year are warranted.
the acute adverse events associated with cabergoline were similar to those with other dopamine
agonists,[5] and include cns and gastric disturbances and cardiovascular effects. adverse events
tend to occur with treatment initiation and abate
with continued treatment.[5] it is recommended that
cabergoline is initiated at a low dosage and gradually titrated until maximal clinical response is
achieved (section 7).
fibrotic complications such as pleuritis, pleural
effusion, pleural or pulmonary fibrosis, pericarditis,
pericardial effusion and retroperitoneal fibrosis have
occasionally been associated with long-term use of
ergoline dopamine agonists.[65] cabergoline has
been associated with a low incidence of cardiopulmonary fibrosis in non-susceptible individuals (section 6). since these disorders can have an insidious
onset, it is advised that cabergoline recipients should
be regularly and carefully monitored for manifestations of progressive fibrotic disorders.[62]
dopaminergic drugs have been associated with
increased daytime somnolence, and have been implicated in ‘sleep attacks’.[91-93] the cause is com© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

curran & perry

plex, with not only the medication, but also the
disease process and underlying sleep disorders contributing.[30] cabergoline (with or without levodopa)
has been associated with somnolence, and data from
a survey suggest that it may be associated with a low
incidence of ‘sleep attacks’ (section 6). interestingly
data from a small open-label study indicate that
switching to cabergoline monotherapy from monotherapy with other dopamine agonists resulted in a
reduction in daytime sleepiness. however, further
large studies are needed to fully elucidate the role of
cabergoline in the pathophysiology of daytime
sleepiness induced by dopaminergic drugs.
in conclusion, cabergoline is a synthetic ergoline
dopamine agonist with a high affinity for d2 receptors and a long t1/2. this agent provides continuous
dopaminergic stimulation with once-daily administration. adjuvant cabergoline is usually well tolerated and effective in controlling symptoms in patients
with advanced parkinson’s disease experiencing
response fluctuations to long-term levodopa therapy. in patients with early parkinson’s disease, cabergoline (with or without levodopa) is well tolerated
and effective in controlling disease symptoms, and
may reduce the risk of drug-induced developing
motor complications. data from two pharmacoeconomic analyses suggest that cabergoline may be
a cost-effective treatment option versus levodopa in
patients with early parkinson’s disease, and highlight the need for further evaluation of the drug in
this indication.
references
1. ahlskog je. parkinson’s disease: medical and surgical treatment.  xxxd122xxx  clin 2001; 19 (3): 579-605
2. gelb dj, oliver e, gilman s. diagnostic criteria for parkinson
disease. arch  xxxd122xxx  1999; 56 (1): 33-9
3. lam yw. clinical pharmacology of dopamine agonists. pharmacotherapy 2000 jan; 20 (1 pt 2): 17s-25s
4. clarke ce, guttman m. dopamine agonist monotherapy in
parkinson’s disease. lancet 2002 nov 30; 360 (9347): 1767-9
5. olanow cw, watts rl, koller wc. an algorithm (decision
tree) for the management of parkinson’s disease (2001): treatment guidelines. neurology 2001; 56 (11 suppl. 5): s1-s88
6. fariello rg. pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic features
of cabergoline: rationale for use in parkinson’s disease. drugs
1998; 55 suppl. 1: 10-6
7. wiseman lr, fitton a. cabergoline: a review of its efficacy in
the treatment of parkinson’s disease. cns drugs 1999 dec; 12
(6): 485-97
8. vermeulen rj, drukarch b, wolters ec, et al. dopamine d1
receptor agonists: the way forward for the treatment of parkinson’s disease? cns drugs 1999; 11 (2): 83-91

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

9. joyce jn.  xxxg657xxx  as a therapeutic target for
antipsychotic and antiparkinsonian drugs. pharmacol ther
2001; 90 (2-3): 231-59
10. levant b, zao dung ling, carvey pm. dopamine d3 receptors;
relevance for the drug treatment of parkinson’s disease. cns
drugs 1999; 12 (5): 391-402
11. millan mj, maiofiss l, cussac d, et al. differential actions of
antiparkinson agents at multiple classes of monoaminergic
receptor. i: a multivariate analysis of the binding profiles of 14
drugs at 21 native and cloned human receptor subtypes. j
pharmacol exp ther 2002 nov; 303 (2): 791-804
12. newman-tancredi a, cussac d, audinot v, et al. differential
actions of antiparkinson agents at multiple classes of monoaminergic receptor. ii: agonist and antagonist properties at
subtypes of dopamine d2-like receptor and  xxxg87xxx   xxxg830xxx / xxxg831xxx -adrenoceptor. j pharmacol exp ther 2002 nov; 303 (2): 805-14
13. gerlach m, double k, reichmann h, et al. arguments for the
use of dopamine receptor agonists in clinical and preclinical
parkinson’s disease. j neural transm suppl 2003; (65):
167-83
14. newman-tancredi a, cussac d, quentric y, et al. differential
actions of antiparkinson agents at multiple classes of monoaminergic receptor. iii: agonist and antagonist properties at
serotonin, 5-ht1 and 5-ht2, receptor subtypes. j pharmacol
exp ther 2002 nov; 303 (2): 815-22
15. bergström m, hartvig p, nava c, et al. effects of cabergoline
on striatal dopamine receptor binding and dopamine synthesis:
in vivo study in monkey with positron emission tomography
[abstract no. 15-11]. proceedings of the 18th annual meeting
of the european neuroscience association; 1995 sep 3-7;
amsterdam, 192
16. arai n, isaji m, miyata h, et al. differential effects of three
dopamine receptor agonists in mptp-treated monkeys. j
neural transm – park dis dement sect 1995; 10 (1): 55-62
17. nomoto m, kita s, iwata si, et al. effects of acute or prolonged
administration of cabergoline on parkinsonism induced by
mptp in common marmosets. pharmacol biochem behav
1998; 59 (3): 717-21
18. belanger n, gregoire l, tahar ah, et al. chronic treatment
with small doses of cabergoline prevents dopa-induced dyskinesias in parkinsonian monkeys. mov disord 2003 dec; 18
(12): 1436-41
19. hadj tahar a, gregoire l, bangassoro e, et al. sustained
cabergoline treatment reverses levodopa-induced dyskinesias
in parkinsonian monkeys. clin neuropharmacol 2000 jul 31;
23 (4): 195-202
20. miyagi m, arai n, taya f, et al. effect of cabergoline, a longacting dopamine d2 agonist, on reserpine-treated rodents. biol
pharm bull 1996; 19 (11): 1499-502
21. katayama s. actigraph analysis of diurnal motor fluctuations
during dopamine agonist therapy. eur  xxxd122xxx  2001; 46 suppl.
1: 11-7
22. lombardi g, varsaldi f, miglio g, et al. cabergoline prevents
necrotic neuronal death in an in vitro model of oxidative stress.
eur j pharmacol 2002 dec 20; 457 (2-3): 95-8
23. yoshida t, tanaka m, suzuki y, et al. antioxidant properties
of cabergoline: inhibition of brain auto-oxidation and superoxide anion production of microglial cells in rats. neurosci
lett 2002 sep 13; 330 (1): 1-4
24. ohta k, kuno s, mizuta i, et al. effects of dopamine agonists
bromocriptine, pergolide, cabergoline, and skf-38393 on
gdnf, ngf, and bdnf synthesis in cultured mouse astrocytes. life sci 2003 jun 20; 73 (5): 617-26
25. ohta k, fujinami a, kuno s, et al. cabergoline stimulates
synthesis and secretion of  xxxg1564xxx , brain-derived
 xxxg1614xxx  and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor by mouse astrocytes in primary culture. pharmacology
2004; 71: 162-8

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

2139

26. finotti n, castagna l, moretti a, et al. reduction of lipid
peroxidation in different rat brain areas after cabergoline treatment. pharmacol res 2000 oct; 42 (4): 287-91
27. yoshioka m, tanaka k, miyazaki i, et al. the dopamine
agonist cabergoline provides neuroprotection by activation of
the glutathione system and scavenging free radicals. neurosci
res 2002 jul; 43 (3): 259-67
28. poewe w, hogl b. parkinson’s disease and sleep. curr opin
 xxxd122xxx  2000; 13 (4): 423-6
29. stacy m. sleep disorders in parkinson’s disease: epidemiology
and management. drugs aging 2002; 19 (10): 733-9
30. zesiewicz ta, hauser ra. sleep attacks and dopamine agonists
for parkinson’s disease: what is currently known? cns drugs
2003; 17 (8): 593-600
31. chaudhuri kr, bhattacharya fk. the use of cabergoline in
nocturnal parkinsonian disabilities causing sleep disturbances:
a parallel study with controlled-release levodopa. eur j  xxxd122xxx 
1999; 6 suppl. 5: s11-5
32. hogl b, rothdach a, wetter tc, et al. the effect of cabergoline
on sleep, periodic leg movements in sleep, and early morning
motor function in patients with parkinson’s disease. neuropsychopharmacology 2003 oct; 28 (10): 1866-70
33. chaudhuri kr, agapito c, porter mc, et al. cabergoline, a
long-acting dopamine agonist, overcomes levodopa refractory
nocturnal disabilities in parkinson’s disease. neurology 1999
apr 12; 52 suppl. 2: 263
34. ghatani t, agapito c, bhattacharya kf, et al. comparative
audit of pergolide and cabergoline therapy in the treatment of
nocturnal ‘off’ periods causing sleep disruption in parkinson’s
disease. eur j  xxxd122xxx  2001; 8 suppl. 1: 8-11
35. del dotto p, bonuccelli u. clinical pharmacokinetics of cabergoline. clin pharmacokinet 2003; 42 (7): 633-45
36. lera g, vaamonde j, rodriguez m, et al. cabergoline in
parkinson’s disease: long-term follow-up. neurology 1993
dec; 43: 2587-90
37. persiani s, rocchetti m, pacciarini ma, et al. the effect of food
on cabergoline pharmacokinetics and tolerability in healthy
volunteers. biopharm drug dispos 1996; 17 (5): 443-55
38. rahimy mk, bolyard kb, knuth dw, et al. single- and
multiple-dose pharmacokinetics evaluation of cabergoline in
healthy young and elderly volunteers [abstract no p-tu-225].
parkinsonism relat disord 2001; 7 suppl. 1: s67
39. del dotto p, colzi a, musatti e, et al. clinical and pharmacokinetic evaluation of l-dopa and cabergoline cotreatment in
parkinson’s disease. clin neuropharmacol 1997 oct; 20 (5):
455-65
40. dostert p, strolin benedetti m, persiani s, et al. lack of
pharmacokinetic interaction between the selective dopamine
agonist cabergoline and the mao-b inhibitor selegiline. j
neural transm suppl 1995; 45: 247-57
41. nomura t, zhang j, nakatsuka a, et al. pharmacokinetic study
on the interaction between cabergoline and clarithromycin in
healthy volunteers [abstract no. ici354]. j pharmacol sci
2003; 91 suppl. 1: 74p
42. hutton jt, koller wc, ahlskog je, et al. multicenter, placebocontrolled trial of cabergoline taken once daily in the treatment
of parkinson’s disease. neurology 1996 apr; 46: 1062-5
43. musch b, bonura l, investigator study group. cabergoline
once a day as adjunctive therapy to levodopa in parkinson’s
disease [abstract no. 3 plus poster]. mov disord 2000; 15
suppl. 3: 121
44. destee a, schneider e, gershanik o, et al. efficacy and
tolerability of cabergoline compared to bromocriptine in patients suffering from levodopa associated motor complications
(not on treatment with da-agents) [abstract no. ss26]. mov
disord 1996; 11 suppl. 1: 269
45. schneider e, gershanik o, dom r, et al. efficacy and tolerability of cabergoline compared to bromocriptine in patients suf-

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

2140

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.
54.
55.
56.

57.
58.

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

curran & perry

fering from levodopa associated motor complications (on
treatment with da-agents) [abstract no. ss27]. mov disord
1996; 11 suppl. 1: 269
yanagisawa n, kowa h, mizuno y, et al. the clinical evaluation of  xxxd400xxx  (cabergoline) in parkinson’s disease with
combined use of l-dopa: a multi-centered double-blind comparative study vs. bromocriptine mesilate [in japanese]. rinsho iyaku 1996; 12 (17): 3757-98
rinne uk, bracco f, chouza c, et al. early treatment of
parkinson’s disease with cabergoline delays the onset of motor
complications: results of a double-blind levodopa controlled
trial. drugs 1998; 55 suppl. 1: 23-30
bracco f, battaglia a, chouza c, et al. the long-acting
dopamine receptor agonist cabergoline in early parkinson’s
disease: final results of a 5-year, double-blind, levodopa-controlled study. cns drugs 2004; 18 (11): 733-46
lieberman a, imke s, muenter m, et al. multicenter study of
cabergoline, a long-acting dopamine receptor agonist, in
parkinson’s disease patients with fluctuating responses to levodopa/carbidopa. neurology 1993 oct; 43: 1981-4
steiger mj, el-debas t, anderson t, et al. double-blind study
of the activity and tolerability of cabergoline versus placebo in
parkinsonians with motor fluctuations. j  xxxd122xxx  1996 jan; 243
(1): 68-72
ahlskog je, wright kf, muenter md, et al. adjunctive cabergoline therapy of parkinson’s disease: comparison with placebo and assessment of dose responses and duration of effect.
clin neuropharmacol 1996 jun; 19 (3): 202-12
inzelberg r, nisipeanu p, rabey jm, et al. double-blind
comparison of cabergoline and bromocriptine in parkinson’s
disease patients with motor fluctuations. neurology 1996 sep;
47: 785-8
ulm g, schuler p. cabergoline versus pergolide: a videoblinded, randomised multicenter cross-over study [in german].
aktuel  xxxd122xxx  1999; 26 (8): 360-5
clarke ce, deane kd. cabergoline versus bromocriptine for
levodopa-induced complications in parkinson’s disease. cochrane database syst rev 2003; 3
clarke ce, deane kh. cabergoline for levodopa-induced complications in parkinson’s disease. cochrane database syst rev
2003; 3
rinne uk, bracco f, chouza c, et al. cabergoline in the
treatment of early parkinson’s disease: results of the first year
of treatment in a double-blind comparison of cabergoline and
levodopa. neurology 1997 feb; 48: 363-8
smala am, siebert u, oertel wh, et al. reply: cabergoline
versus levodopa therapy [letter]. mov disord 2004; 19 (6):
734-5
dodel rc, berger k, oertel wh. health-related quality of life
and healthcare utilisation in patients with parkinson’s disease:
impact of motor fluctuations and dyskinesias. pharmacoeconomics 2001; 19 (10): 1013-38
smala am, spottke ea, machat o, et al. cabergoline versus
levodopa monotherapy: a decision analysis. mov disord 2003
aug; 18 (8): 898-905
lindgren p, jonsson b, duchane j. the cost-effectiveness of
early cabergoline treatment compared to levodopa in sweden.
eur j health econ 2003; 4 (1): 37-42
marsden cd. clinical experience with cabergoline in patients
with advanced parkinson’s disease treated with levodopa.
drugs 1998; 55 suppl. 1: 17-22
pharmacia.  xxxd400xxx  tablets 1mg [uk prescribing information].
pharmacia: milton keynes, 2003
forbes a, brechany u, stegie f, et al. use and tolerability of
cabergoline in young and older people with parkinson’s disease: a multi-center observational study. j appl res 2003; 3
(4): 356-62

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

64. muller t, fritze j. fibrosis associated with dopamine agonist
therapy in parkinson’s disease [letter]. clin neuropharmacol
2003; 26 (3): 109-11
65. fibrotic reactions with pergolide and other ergot-derived dopamine receptor agonists. curr probl pharmacovigilance 2002
apr; 28: 3
66. frank w, moritz r, becke b, et al. low dose cabergoline
induced interstitial pneumonitis. eur respir j 1999 oct; 14 (4):
968-70
67. frans e, dom r, demedts m. pleuropulmonary changes during
treatment of parkinson’s disease with a long-acting ergot derivative, cabergoline. eur respir j 1992 feb; 5 (2): 263-5
68. dhawan v, stegie f, metcalf p, et al. what is the risk of cardiopulmonary fibrosis with cabergoline use in parkinson’s disease: an observational study of 224 cases. proceedings of the
association of british neurologists; 2004 apr 14-16; london
69. ling lh, ahlskog je, munger tm, et al. constrictive pericarditis and pleuropulmonary disease linked to ergot dopamine
agonist therapy (cabergoline) for parkinson’s disease. mayo
clin proc 1999; 74 (4): 371-5
70. ferreira jj, pona n, costa j, et al. somnolence as an adverse
drug reaction of antiparkinsonian drugs: a meta-analysis of
published randomised placebo-controlled trials [abstract no.
p659]. mov disord 2000; 15 suppl. 3: 128
71. pal s, bhattacharya k, agapito c, et al. a comparative study of
daytime sleepiness within parkinson’s disease patients treated
with cabergoline, pramipexole and levodopa [abstract no.
p593]. mov disord 2000; 15 suppl. 3: 110-1
72. paus s, brecht hm, koster j, et al. sleep attacks, daytime
sleepiness, and dopamine agonists in parkinson’s disease. mov
disord 2003 jun; 18 (6): 659-67
73. pal s, bhattacharya kf, agapito c, et al. a study of excessive
daytime sleepiness and its clinical significance in three groups
of parkinson’s disease patients taking pramipexole, cabergoline and levodopa mono and combination therapy. j neural
transm 2001; 108 (1): 71-8
74. del dotto p, gambaccini g, caneparo d, et al. bedtime
cabergoline in parkinson’s disease patients with excessive
daytime sleepiness induced by dopamine agonists.  xxxd122xxx  sci
2003 oct; 24 (3): 170-1
75. de rijk mc, tzourio c, breteler mmb, et al. prevalence of
parkinsonism and parkinson’s disease in europe: the
europarkinson collaborative study. j  xxxd122xxx  neurosurg
psychiatry 1997 jan; 62: 10-5
76. rubenstein lm, chrischilles ea, voelker md. the impact of
parkinson’s disease on health status, health expenditures, and
productivity: estimates from the national medical expenditure
survey. pharmacoeconomics 1997 oct; 12 (4): 486-98
77. conley sc, kirchner jt. medical and surgical treatment of
parkinson’s disease: strategies to slow symptom progression
and improve quality of life. postgrad med 1999 aug; 106 (2):
41-52
78. martignoni f, riboldazzi g, calandrella d, et al. motor complications of parkinson’s disease.  xxxd122xxx  sci 2003; 24 suppl.
1: s27-9
79. parkinson study group.  xxxg2149xxx  brain imaging to
assess the effects of pramipexole vs levodopa on parkinson
disease progression. jama 2002; 287: 1653-61
80. whone a, watts r, stoessl j. slower progression of parkinson’s
disease with  xxxd3145xxx  versus levodopa: the real-pet study.
ann  xxxd122xxx  2003; 54: 93-101
81. schapira ahv, olanow cw. neuroprotection in parkinson
disease: mysteries, myths and misconceptions. jama 2004;
291: 358-64
82. miyasaki jm, martin w, suchowersky o, et al. practice parameter: initiation of treatment for parkinson’s disease: an evidence-based review. report of the quality standards subcom-

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

cabergoline: a review

83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

mittee of the american academy of neurology. neurology
2002; 58 (1): 11-7
ahlskog je, muenter md. frequency of levodopa-related dyskinesias and motor fluctuations as estimated from the cumulative literature. mov disord 2001; 16 (3): 448-58
obeso ja, rodriguez-oroz mc, chana p, et al. the evolution
and origin of motor complications in parkinson’s disease.
neurology 2000; 55 (11 suppl. 4): s13-23
agid y, ahlskog e, albanese a, et al. levodopa in the
treatment of parkinson’s disease: a consensus meeting. mov
disord 1999; 14 (6): 911-3
wooten gf. agonists vs levodopa in pd: the thrilla of whitha.
neurology 2003; 60 (3): 360-2
ahlskog je. slowing parkinson’s disease progression: recent
dopamine agonist trials. neurology 2003; 60 (3): 381-9
albin rl, frey ka. initial agonist treatment of parkinson
disease: a critique. neurology 2003; 60 (3): 390-4
wheatley k, clarke ce, ives n. cabergoline vs. levodopa
monotherapy [letter]. mov disord 2002; 19 (6): 733-4

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

2141

90. marras c. re: cabergoline versus levodopa monotherapy: a
decision analysis [letter]. mov disord 2004; 19 (6): 736
91. chaudhuri kr, pal s, brefel-courbon c. ‘sleep attacks’ or
‘unintended sleep episodes’ occur with dopamine agonists: is
this a class effect? drug saf 2002; 25 (7): 473-83
92. homann cn, wenzel k, suppan k, et al. sleep attacks in
patients taking dopamine agonists: review. bmj 2002 jun 22;
324 (7352): 1483-7
93. frucht s, rogers jd, greene pe, et al. falling asleep at the
wheel: motor vehicle mishaps in persons taking pramipexole
and  xxxd3145xxx . neurology 1999; 52 (9): 1908-10

correspondence: monique p. curran, adis international
limited, 41 centorian drive, private bag 65901, mairangi
bay, auckland 1311, new zealand.
e-mail: demail@adis.co.nz

drugs 2004; 64 (18)

