drug experience

drug safety 7 (i): 14-31. 1992
0114-5916/ 92/0001 -0014/$09.00/ 0
© adis international limited. all rights reserved.
drs! 46

adverse effects of angiotensin converting enzyme
(ace) inhibitors
an update

roy c. parish and lisa j. miller
department of pharmacy practice, college of pharmacy, university of georgia,
athens, georgia, st mary's hospital. athens, georgia, central state hospital,
milledgeville, georgia, and drug information service, university of texas,
m.d. anderson cancer center, houston, texas, usa

contents
15
16

17
17
18
18
19
19
19
19

20
20
20
20
20
21
21
21

22
22
23
23
23
23
24
24
24
25
25
26
26

27
28

summary
i. respiratory effects: cough
2. dermatological effects
2.1 rash
2.2 pemphigoid reaction
2.3 angioedema
2.4 alopecia
2.5 flushing
3. haematologicai effects
3. 1 anaemia
3.2 neutropenia
3.3 thrombocytopenia
4. central nervous system effects
4. 1 general effects
4.2 deterioration in huntington's disease
4.3 depression
5. endocrine/metabolic effects
5.1 sodium and potassium balance
5.2 metabolic effects
5.3 serum chemistry
5.4 gynaecomastia
6. gastrointestinal effects
6.1 dyspepsia
6.2 taste disturbances
6.3 liver
7. cardiovascular effects
7.1 hypotension
8. renal effects
8.1 functional renal insufficiency
8. 1.1 high-risk groups
9. other effects
10. use in pregnancy
ii. use in children

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

summary

15

the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors are a group of effective drugs with a
unique mechanism of action. these drugs have proven to be useful for hypertension and congestive heart failure. early clinical trials of captopril used doses that are now known to be inappropriately high, and dose-related adverse effects were observed frequently. the recognition
that lower doses are effective has reduced the incidence of adverse reactions and resulted in
improved patient tolerance. when patients are properly selected and correctable risk factors are
removed, serious side effects are uncommon. unfortunately, the early reputation of nephrotoxicity persists, as does the belief that significant blood dyscrasias, endocrine effects and rash are
serious risks for the average patient.
after wide use of captopril, enalapril and lisinopril, and investigational trials of nearly a dozen
newer agents, a sufficiency of clinical observation, experimental evidence and accurate postmarketing recording of events is accumulating to allow insight into the major toxicities with regard
to more intelligent patient selection, more rational dosing and proper identification of risk factors.
the most common adverse reactions are cough and skin rash. it appears that the agents are
generally not cross-reactive with regard to skin rash, although it is not clear whether this effect
is drug-specific or class-specific with regard to cough.
statistically but not clinically significant lowering of haemoglobin and hematocrit is common;
these effects are inconsequential in most patients. neutropenia, once thought to be prevalent,
now appears to be so only in patients with autoimmune or collagen-vascular disease; the majority
of patients outside these groups are at low risk.
hyperkalaemia is a frequent occurrence. this should not be surprising in view of the effect
of the ace inhibitors on plasma aldosterone. when dietary potassium intake is regulated and
sources of altered potassium excretion are identified, hyperkalaemia is seldom a serious problem.
identification of sodium and water deficits allows correction before the drugs are started, and the
frequency of hypotension and hyperkalaemia caused by the drugs is quite low if these factors are
properly managed.
an unexpected finding emerging in recent years is the  xxxd1861xxx  associated with ace inhibitor
therapy. its mechanism is not definitely known. nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may control this symptom in some patients.
the frequent pbservation of proteinuria in patients taking ace inhibitors has gained notice
and sometimes caused undue alarm. it is difficult to separate disease effects in diabetes and
hypertension from true drug effects. proteinuria may be only slightly more common with drug
therapy than in the population of patients with these diseases who are not taking ace inhibitors.
the drugs now appear to be directly nephrotoxic only in rare cases. in many-patient populations,
they may even slow the advance of renal disease or be protective of renal function. risk factors
for the development of functional renal insufficiency have been identified and high risk patients
can either avoid ace inhibitor therapy or start at lower doses.
the drugs still cannot be recommended for use in pregnancy except in circumstances where
they are the only means of managing life-threatening hypertension. ace inhibitors appear to be
safe and effective for severe childhood hypertension, but not in neonates.
the majority of clinical experience, especially postmarketing studies, has dealt with captopril
and enalapril. experience continues to accumulate with lisinopril, ramipiril, benazepril and other
new agents, but to date these appear to be indistinguishable from enalapril in their side effect
profiles.
the ace inhibitors appear to be attractive choices for managing hypertension of all degrees,
and congestive heart failure in all stages. with intelligent use, they offer a reasonably safe alternative to older therapies and may have significant advantages in well selected patients.

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

16

since the first angiotensin converting enzyme
(ace) inhibitor, captopril, received us approval
in 1981, this class of drugs has been utilised as a
successful part of the clinician's armamentarium
for the treatment of hypertension and congestive
heart failure. efficacy has also been reported in the
treatment of hypertensive emergencies, proteinuria
and raynaud's syndrome. adverse reactions were
common in the initial clinical trials with captopril,
since the studies were performed using high doses
(up to 1000 mg/day) in patients with refractory
hypertension who also had other underlying disorders such as renal, autoimmune and collagen
vascular disease (vlasses et al. 1982). increased
clinical use and well controlled trials using lower
doses for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension have shown the ace inhibitors to be generally well tolerated, with a low incidence of
troublesome side effects (table i). these have been
previously reviewed, reflecting the first 5 years' use
of captopril and a shorter period for enalapril
(dibianco 1986). this article offers an updated view
of the more recently reported adverse reactions in
the literature for those agents which have been in
use long enough for sufficient evidence to accumulate to allow conclusions to be made (captopril,
enalapril and lisinopril). it also provides insight into
some of the major adverse reactions where additional information has been developed regarding
mechanisms, contributing or risk factors, and highrisk patient groups.

1. respiratory effects: cough
although upper respiratory symptoms of nasal
congestion, postnasal drip and sinusitis have been
reported (town et al. 1987), by far the most common respiratory complaint is a persistent, nonproductive cough usually described as 'dry' or
'tickling'. a significant variation exists in the literature with respect to the frequency of ace inhibitor-induced cough, possibly because this unexpected adverse effect is under-reported ifit is not
actively sought. product information for the 3
agents lists the occurrence as being from 1.3 to 2.9%.
the pooled data from several single-centre pro-

spective or retrospective studies which specifically
looked at the side effect of cough within their
population revealed an average incidence of 15%
(just 1989). the cough may be more bothersome
at night, and is occasionally worse in the supine
position (town et al. 1987). the severity ranges
from mild symptoms not requiring discontinuation of the ace inhibitor to incapacitating cough
that significantly disrupts the patient's lifestyle. preexisting cough may also be exacerbated (coulter & .
edwards 1987).
the cough occurs independently of the dose and
is more predominant in women (inman 1986;
stoller et al. 1988). the average time of onset is 1
week and the cough lasts as long as the drug is
taken, remitting within a few days to weeks after
it is discontinued (carruthers 1986; just 1989).
changing to another agent within the class is not
considered an option because of the likelihood of
cross-sensitivity with regard to this effect of the
drugs (andrejak et al. 1988). cough has also been
shown to occur on rechallenge (coulter & edwards
1987; stoller et al. 1988; town et al. 1987).  xxxd383xxx  aerosol was effective in controlling a
captopril-induced cough in 1 patient for 5 to 6
weeks, but is not recommended because of the effect of topical anaesthetics on the swallowing reflex
and the possibility of drug-induced bronchospasm
(brown & turton 1988). uncontrolled trials have
also suggested an improvement in the condition
with the administration of  xxxd3259xxx  or diclofenac
(biour et al. 1988; nicholls & gilchrist 1987), suggesting the possible involvement of prostaglandins
in the mechanism of action. it has been shown that
captopril increases circulating plasma levels of
prostaglandins (swartz & williams 1982). it is
theorised that  xxxd1903xxx  directly stimulates
unmyelinated afferent vagal c fibres, . the initial
chemical mediator of the cough reflex in the lung
(just 1989; o'hollaren & porter 1990). this stimulation also elicits laryngeal constriction and hyperresponsiveness of the extrathoracic airway (bucca
et al. 1990). it has been suggested that ace inhibitors may uncover an asthmatic tendency in
patients with pre-existing bronchial hyperreactivity
(lipworth et al. 1989).

17

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

table i. comparison of major adverse reactions of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
adverse reaction

hypotension
overall
htn
chf
orthostatic
htn
chf
headache
htn
chf
dizziness
htn
chf
fatigue
nausea
diarrhoea
constipation
dysgeusia
cough
angioedema
rash
oliguria, insufficiency
proteinuria
neutropenia

enalapril 8

captopril 8

usinoprilb

occ
(%)

dc
(%)

ace
(%)

dc
(%)

ace
(%)

(%)

rarec
50.oc

3.6c

2.3d
6.7d

o.ld
1.9d

1.se
5.oa

o.s1.38

1.2d
2.2d

<o.ld
<o.ld

1.28

0.58

5.5

0.3

5.2d
1.8d

0.3d
o.1 d
5.38

0.28

4.3d
7.9d
2.5
1.8
1.7

0.4d
0.6d
<o.ld
0.2d
o.ld

3.5
2.38

0.3
0.38
0.38

2.9

0.5-2c

1.5
2.2
0.9
0.5-2
3.1
151
0.1
6.0
0.1-0.2
0.6
var9

0.3
151
0;2d
1.3
1.4
<o.lh

0.4d

3.8
0.3-18
151
0.1 8
3.2
0.3-18
0.73

de

0.3

a stumpe et al. (1984). unless otherwise noted.
brush & merrill (1987). unless otherwise noted.
c approximately 7000 patients; squibb (1988).
d 2314 patients with htn. 673 patients with chf; merck sharpe & dohme (1988a).
e 2003 patients. including 420 with chf; merck sharpe & dohme (1988b).
f just (1989).
g 0.01 % in patients with serum creatinine < 141 i'mol/l (1.6 mg/dl) and no collagen-vascular disease; 0.2% in patients with serum
creatinine > 141 i'moi/l (1 .6 mg/dl) and no collagen-vascular disease; 3.7% in patients with collagen vascular disease and serum
creatinine > 141 i'moi/l (1 .6 mg/dl); squibb (1988).
hinman et al. (1988).
abbreviations: ace = percentage of occurrence; dc = percentage of required discontinuance; htn = hypertension; chf =congestive
heart failure.

2. dermatological effects
2.1 rash
skin rashes are one of the more common complications of antihypertensive treatment with ace
inhibitors, appearing in 1.4 to 4.3% of patients
(weber 1988). most often the rash is a maculo-

papular eruption, predominantly occurring on the
arms and upper torso, accompanied by pruritus. it
is usually seen within the first 4 weeks of therapy,
but most frequently develops within the first few
days. it is often transitory, lasting for only a few
hours or days, and is rarely the cause for discontinuation of treatment.

18

drug safety 7 (i) 1992

it is still not clear whether the rash is specific
to a particular ace inhibitor, or whether it reflects
an action of the entire class. captopril-induced
rashes have disappeared when enalapril was substituted (navis et al. 1984; rotmensch et al. 1983);
however, the same has occurred when captopril replaced enalapril following a similar reaction (kubo
& cody 1984). since the occurrence of rash is
somewhat more common with captopril than other
ace inhibitors, it was originally postulated that this
and other adverse reactions (e.g. dysgeusia) are associated with the sulfhydryl group of captopril (jaffe
1986). it was later determined that this higher incidence was most probably related to excessively
high doses (600 to 1200 mg/day) administered
in early studies, especially in those patients with
renal impairment and/or collagen-vascular disease
(vlasses et al. 1982). in many later trials, lower
captopril doses «150 mg/day) were administered
without adverse effects or with a significant reduction in these effects (veterans administration cooperative study group on antihypertensive agents
1983). it has also been suggested that rash is the
result of the direct pharmacological action of captopril on the inhibition of kinase-ii, the same enzyme as ace (wilkin et al. 1980). kinin activity
would then be potentiated in the skin, thereby
leading to the histamine-mediated inflammatory
reaction. since the ace inhibitors all work in a
similar manner, inhibition of this particular enzyme would appear to be a function of the entire
class.
2.2 pemphigoid reaction
although the autoimmune syndrome pemphigus is considered to be an extremely rare manifestation of drug intolerance, it has been reported to
occur occasionally with sulfhydryl compounds such
as  xxxd2870xxx , pyrithioxine and captopril (jaffe
1986).
appearance of a pemphigus-like eruption secondary to captopril therapy was reported ·in a 72year-old man who had been receiving the drug in
doses of 100 mg/day for treatment of essential
hypertension (katz et al. 1987), and histologically

proven bullous pemphigus was reported in a 77year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus,
stroke and hypertension given captopril 25mg twice
daily (mallet et al. 1989). the chemical structure
of captopril is similar to that of  xxxd2870xxx  in
relation to the stereochemical position of the sulfhydryl groups; a direct toxic or biochemical effect
without an immune response (similar to that occurring with  xxxd2870xxx ) is suggested as a possible explanation (parfrey et al. 1980; ruocco et al.
1982).
2.3 angioedema
angioedema can be defined as a well demarcated, non pitting oedema that occurs as large erythematous areas in skin and subcutaneous tissue,
more commonly involving the face, lips and tongue
(slater et al. 1988). its incidence in relation to ace
inhibitors has been reported to be 0.1 to 0.2%
(merck sharp & dohme i 988a,b; squibb 1988). in
most instances the episode is mild; however, it can
be associated with respiratory distress (cameron
1990; jett 1984; suarez et al. 1986). episodes usually occur with the start of therapy but have been
reported to occur later in treatment (chin & buchan
1990; jett 1984; slater et al. 1988; wood et al. 1987).
in a summary of reports of adverse reactions submitted by the british committee on safety of medicines, angioedema was reported in 13 patients
treated with enalapril over a i-year period and in
6 patients treated with captopril over a 6-year period (committee on safety of medicines 1987). in
most instances, the angioedema occurred following
the first dose of enalapril, and within the first few
days for enalapril and captopril. after cessation of
treatment, signs and symptoms disappeared within
a few days. two patients receiving enalapril required steroid therapy.
other authors reported their experiences with
ace inhibitor-induced angioedema during a 17month period (seidman et al. 1990). they treated
6 patients with the condition, i captopril-induced
and the remainder secondary to enalapril. the
patients presented with shortness of breath and
dysphagia associated with oedema of the tongue

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

and floor of the mouth. symptoms developed in
all patients within l2h of their initial dose of an
ace inhibitor. two of the 6 patients required intubation and observation in an intensive care unit,
while the others were treated supportively or managed on an outpatient basis. there were no fatalities and all symptoms resolved on withdrawal of
the offending agent.
enalapril postmarketing surveillance studies
performed by merck sharp and dohme (slater et
al. 1988) offered another review. based on a population of approximately 36 000 patients exposed to
the drug, they determined that angioedema occurred during the first week of therapy at the rate
of 1 case per 3000 patients per week, or 1 case per
1000 treated. after the first week, the incidence declined 14-fold. angioedema occurred without gender preference and at a wide dosage range. the cases
were generally mild and resolved on stopping the
drug; 7 patients experienced angioedema from both
captopril and enalapril. although the mechanism
of ace inhibitor-induced angioedema has yet to
be explained, theoretical considerations suggest that
it may be mediated in part by immune mechanisms, kinin mediation and/or genetic and environmental factors (slater et al. 1988). it has been suggested that if angioedema is suspected with any
ace inhibitor, therapy should be discontinued and
an agent from another class substituted (chin &
buchan 1990). similarly, if the patient has a history of idiopathic angioedema, he or she should be
considered to be at increased risk of developing
ace inhibitor-related angioedema and should be
treated cautiously with these agents (orfan et al.
1990).
2.4 alopecia
a 68-year-old woman with congestive heart failure who was taking furosemide ( xxxd2167xxx ) 40 my
day and a potassium supplement was started on
captopril, with titration of dose up to 25mg every
8h. she experienced spontaneous loss of hair, rash
and pruritus; the rash and pruritus subsided after
the dose of captopril was reduced, but the hair loss
became more severe. one month after discontin-

19

uing captopril she experienced spontaneous hair
regrowth. she was not rechallenged with an ace
inhibitor, and it is not known whether the captopril itself or an interaction with furosemide and
potassium resulted in the adverse effects (motel
1990).
2.5 hushing
hushing was reported in a patient (age not
stated) taking enalapril (dose not stated) who exhibited intense erythema of the upper trunk, neck
and face 2 weeks after initiation of therapy. he did
not complain of cough. the flushing resolved within
48h after enalapril was discontinued, and reappeared on rechallenge. the authors invoke increased skin bradykinin as an explanation (cohen
1989).

3. haematoiogicai effects
3.1 anaemia
captopril and enalapril have been reported to
lower blood haemoglobin and haematocrit, but the
changes are of the order of 3 gil of haemoglobin
and about i % in the haematocrit (merck sharpe &
dohme i 988a,b; squibb 1988). changes of this,
magnitude are not usually considered to be clinically significant. extensive postmarketing surveillance of captopril and enalapril has not revealed
clinically significant anaemia (edwards et al. 1987;
inman et al. 1988).
small decreases in haemoglobin and haematocrit may be more important in patients with chronic
renal failure receiving haemodialysis. in 1 report,
4 of 12 patients receiving captopril and 2 of to
receiving enalapril experienced a greater than 10%
reduction in haematocrit (onoyama et al. 1989).
these investigators found that the effect could be
slightly reversed by administration of the antiestrogenic steroid mepitiostane. it has been noted
that ace inhibitors (onoyama et al. 1989) and
other vasodilators, particularly hydralazine (anagnovstou et al. 1976), inhibit renal erythropoietin
formation. it has been suggested that renal ischaemia may be the stimulus for erythropoietin for-

20

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

mati on, and this effect may not be peculiar to ace
inhibitors (anagnovstou et al. 1976).
3.2 neutropenia
the frequency of neutropenia appears to be
greater than that with other forms of hypertensive
therapy only in patients with renal, autoimmune
or collagen-vascular diseases. a large postmarketing survey involving 4124 patients over 4 years
(edwards et al. 1987) used both spontaneous reports and an event survey of physicians to detect
important adverse effects. four cases of neutropenia or leucopenia were reported. two patients
improved after captopril was discontinued; a third
had pre-existing neutropenia worsened by captopril. prescription-event monitoring of 13 713
patients for i year on enalapril detected only 2 cases
of neutropenia, neither of which could be definitely
attributed to the drug (inman et al. 1988).
agranulocytosis was observed in an 83-year-old
woman after therapy with enalapril 10 mg/day was
begun because of myocardial infarction. she had
been taking verapamil 120 mg/day for hypertension and occasional  xxxd2402xxx  5mg sublingually for stable angina. six months after enalapril therapy had begun, she was hospitalised for
fever and leucopenia. her leucocyte count was 740
x 109 eells/l, 91% lymphocytes and 9% monocytes. no neutrophils were observed in a peripheral blood smear, and bone marrow examination revealed few myeloid precursors. verapamil
and enalapril were both discontinued and she was
discharged 10 days later with normal blood counts.
the lengthy exposure to verapamil prior to enalapril therapy without haematological problems
suggests that enalapril was a more likely cause (ellis et al. 1991).
the incidence of neutropenia rises to 3 to 4%
in patients with autoimmune or collagen-vascular
diseases (merck sharpe & dohme i 988a,b; squibb
1988). these patients frequently receive high.;:r
doses of ace inhibitors because of resistant hypertension, and have impaired renal function, both of
which may lead to significantly higher plasma concentrations of these renally-eliminated drugs (we-

ber 1988); however, it should be noted that these
reactions are not clearly associated with dose.
3.3 thrombocytopenia
thrombocytopenia has rarely occurred with
ace inhibitors. it developed in 2 sisters who were
both taking enalapril and had similar human leucocyte antigen (hla) typing; the condition resolved after the drug was stopped (grosbois et al.
1989). commenting on this case, ackroyd (1989)
noted that i sister had been taking quinidine for
many years and both drugs were discontinued simultaneously in this patient; thrombocytopenia
may first occur after many years on quinidine.
moreover, grosbois and associates used a point
system for assigning probability of association of
drug and effect that may have assigned an unduly
high score to the drug with less than a 16-day exposure. no drug-specific antibodies were sought in
the grosbois case, and neither patient was rechallenged.

4. central nervous system effects
4.1 general effects
all of the ace inhibitors have been shown to
cause dose-related cns disturbances such as dizziness and vertigo, presumably related to their
hypotensive effects (ferguson et al. 1982; merck
sharp & dohme i 988b; stumpe et al. 1984). these
seldom require withdrawal of the drug. headache,
insomnia, paraesthesias and fatigue have been reported to occur in 0.5 to 6.3% of patients (merck
sharp & dohme 1988a,b; squibb 1988).
4.2 deterioration in huntington's disease
in the only published case report available, captopril was thought to cause a deterioration in the
condition of a patient with huntington's disease
(goldblatt & bryer 1987).
captopril was initiated in this woman with
newly diagnosed hypertension in a dose of 18.75
mg/day. due to lack of response, the daily dose
was increased over 5 days to a total of 469.75mg.

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

at this point the patient's clinical state deteriorated
and she experienced generalised rigidity, incontinence and inability to communicate. her blood
pressure remained elevated. captopril was withdrawn and other agents were substituted. neurological symptoms improved and in 5 days the
patient was back to her baseline status. since ace
exists in diminished amounts in patients with
huntington's disease (arrequi et al. 1979), it was
suggested that these patients have an increased susceptibility to the inhibitory effects of these drugs.
4.3 depression
ace inhibitors have generally not been associated with depression. on the contrary, captopril
and enalapril have been associated with mood elevation in patients with existing depression (cohen
et al. 1984; zubenko et al. 1984). however, i report does describe a major depressive episode with
suicidal ideation attributable to enalapril use (patterson 1989). in this case, the drug was added to
the patient's antihypertensive regimen in a dose of
2.5 mg/day. three weeks later, when her blood
pressure was controlled on enalapril 5 mg/day, she
began to complain of fatigue and malaise, leading
eventually to an extreme depressive state. subsequent discontinuation of enalapril resulted in remission of the symptoms within 2 weeks; rechallenge caused their re-emergence. the authors
postulate that the mechanism of enalapril-induced
depression may be related to the ability of the drug
to cross into the cns and exert its biochemical
effects on enkephalin metabolism (stine et al. 1979).

5. endocrine/metabolic effects
5.1 sodium and potassium balance
given the role of aldosterone in sodium retention and potassium wasting, it should not be surprising that a drug that decreases plasma aldosterone levels through inhibition of angiotensin-ii
formation would be capable of inducing natriuresis, diuresis and potassium conservation that
potentially could result in hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypovolaemia or combinations of these

21

events. in the consensus study (consensus
trial study group 1987), 7 patients receiving enalapril were withdrawn from the study because of
intolerable hypotension, whereas no patients in the
placebo group were withdrawn for this reason. it
appears that hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia
become clinical problems mainly with excessive
initial ace inhibitor doses, in patients with impaired potassium excretion or impaired sodium retention as a result of renal disease, if potassium
intake is excessive or if the patient receives other
potassium-conserving drugs (nicholls 1987).
a case of severe hyponatraemia associated with
lisinopril was reported by hume et al. (1990). a
63-year-old woman was hospitalised for worsening
shortness of breath. she had a history of hypertension and chronic obstructive lung disease with
multiple hospitalisations. before admission she was
taking sustained release theophylline 300mg twice
daily, salbutamol (albuterol) inhaler 2 puffs at bedtime and lisinopril 10 mg/day. on admission the
serum sodium was 134 meqfl, potassium 3.9 meqf
l, chloride 99 meq/l, bicarbonate 25 meq/l, urea
nitrogen 2.8 mmol/l and creatinine 44 jlmol/l. she
had colonisation of the sputum with streptococcus
pneumoniae and neisseria meningitidis and was
treated for pneumonia with antibiotics. high blood
pressure was treated with nifedipine but this was
changed to lisinopril 10 mg/day because of persistent headache. she was discharged after 2 days
in stable condition. approximately 2 months later
she was again admitted with worsening shortness
of breath, anorexia, coughing, increased thirst and
leg oedema of 2 weeks' duration. her serum sodium was 109 meqfl, potassium 6.2 meqfl, chloride 77 meqjl, bicarbonate 25 meqjl, urea nitrogen 14.9 mmol/l and creatinine 26 jlmol/l. at this
time the blood osmolality was 253 mosm/l and
that 'orthe urine was 438 mosm/l. sputum cultures showed the same organisms as in the previous hospitalisation and she was treated with
 xxxd455xxx . because the hyponatraemia was
thought to be related to the syndrome of inappropriate  xxxd3495xxx  secretion secondary to
pneumonia, 1000 ml/day fluid restriction was initiated and lisinopril was withdrawn. over the next

22

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

3 days her serum sodium increased to 135 meq/
l. her blood pressure had risen to 180 to 190/90
to 95mm hg and lisinopril was again instituted at
iomg/day. during the next 3 days her fluid intake
was liberalised to 1400 ml/day. the serum sodium declined to 127 meq/l over the next 4 days
and lisin6pril was again discontinued. she was discharged on sustained release theophylline 300mg 3
times daily, prednisone 10 mg/day, salbutamol inhaler 2 puffs every 6h, and sustained release verapamil 240 mg/day. six weeks after discharge her
serum sodium was  xxxg1984xxx  meq/l, with other electrolyte concentrations normal. the authors suggest that
recently identified renin-angiotensin systems in the
brain may be involved in control of thirst and sodium and water handling, and note that ace inhibitors may also affect renal homeostatic mechanisms mediated by prostaglandins. there is
considerable controversy surrounding the importance of these systems, however (ujhelyi et al. 1989).
the complicated illness of this patient makes evaluation difficult, and even the rechallenge with lisinopril is not conclusive because of the confounding effect of liberalised fluid intake.
ventricular fibrillation associated with profound hypokalaemia has occurred in a patient who
was withdrawn from captopril without an increase
in potassium intake; in another patient taking enalapril and later captopril, collapse followed 2 weeks
of increased potassium intake in the form of a salt
substitute, with wide-qrs complex and idioventricular rhythm noted after successful resuscitation
(packer & lee 1986). these reports underscore the
importance of proper attention to potassium intake when ace inhibitor therapy is either begun
or discontinued. the importance of slight degrees
of hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia in the
provocation of ventricular arrhythmias has been
shown in a study of elderly patients receiving either
thiazides or a potassium-sparing regimen (lkram
1987).
5.2 metabolic effects
in the majority of patients, unfavourable metabolic effects do not occur. most studies report no
change in fasting blood sugars in diabetic and non-

diabetic patients with hypertension after receiving
ace inhibitors (sullivan et al. 1985). fasting blood
sugars declined in patients receiving enalapril for
mild to moderate hypertension (helgeland et al.
1986); decreased requirements for insulin or oral
hypoglycaemic agents were observed in a population of diabetic patients receiving ace inhibitors
for hypertension (ferriere et al. 1985). captopril
appears to blunt the cholesterol-elevating effects of
thiazides (weinberger 1983).  xxxd3472xxx  excretion
has been observed to be increased following the
administration of ace inhibitors (navis et al.
1985). these reports involve small numbers of
patients and statistical hypothesis testing was not
done, so an estimate of their frequency is not possible.
5.3 serum chemistry
creatine kinase (ck) was noted to be elevated
in 41 patients receiving captopril who had 47 determinations of ck before receiving the drug and
161 determinations after it was started. changes
were not statistically significant in patients receiving less than captopril 37.5 mg/day, but ck was
significantly elevated after the dose in the group
receiving more than 50 mg/day. in this group, the
mean (± so) of 105 determinations of ck rose
from 719 ± 43 to 860 ± 46 mg/l. only the cardiac muscle fraction was elevated; however, lactate
dehydrogenase and alanine and aspartate amino
transferases (alt, ast) were unchanged even in
patients with liver disease, making it unlikely that
the ck was released from skeletal or cardiac
muscle, although myocardial infarction was not
specifically ruled out in these patients. the authors
speculate that a recently-identified ck deactivator
in plasma may have been competitively bound by
the sulfhydryl group of captopril, but this suggestion is unsubstantiated (katayama et al. 1987). it
is not possible to determine whether the patients
in this study experienced myocardial damage as a
result of ace inhibitor therapy, or whether coincidental infarction was the cause.

23

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

5.4 gynaecomastia
two cases of ace inhibitor-related gynaecomastia are documented in the literature. the first
report involved a 34-year-old man suffering from
systemic lupus erythematosus and uncontrolled
hypertension (markkusse & meyboom 1988). nifedipine and captopril 75 mg/day were added to a
medication regimen that included cyclophosphamide, prednisone and furosemide. seven months
later, painful gynaecomastia gradually developed
on the patient's left side. laboratory analysis was
negative. no endocrine abnormalities were found,
and other causes of breast enlargement were ruled
out. captopril was stopped and the patient's symptoms resolved over the next 2 weeks. rechallenge
was not conducted. the authors suggest that gynaecomastia might be induced by drugs containing
sulfhydryl, although breast enlargement occurred
in a second report involving enalapril (nakamura
et al. 1990). a 72-year-old man with mild essential
hypertension had been receiving captopril 75 mg/
day for 4 months when he noticed painful gynaecomastia the size of an egg on the left side. no
urological, hepatic, renal or metabolic abnormalities were found. captopril was discontinued and
nifedipine 30 mg/day started. one month later, the
breast enlargement and mamillary pain vanished,
but the patient complained of flushing and foot
oedema. enalapril 5 mg/day was instituted, but the
patient complained of recurrence of gynaecomastia
again within 2 weeks and refused to take the drug.
resolution of symptoms ensued.

6. gastrointestinal effects
6.1 dyspepsia
the most frequent gastrointestinal adverse effects reported are diarrhoea and dysgeusia (table i).
the frequency of nausea appears to be similar to
that in patients receiving placebo (merck sharpe &
dohme 1988a,b; squibb 1988); the overall incidence of diarrhoea is somewhat higher than with
placebo. given the unique role of the renin-angiotensin system in compensation of volume loss, it
is possible that, with some patients, fluid and elec-

trolyte loss may become clinically significant if
diarrhoea is prolonged. the reports of these effects
have been reviewed previously (dibianco 1986).
6.2 taste disturbances
taste disturbances appear to be more frequent
with captopril than with other ace inhibitors (table
i). this is generally attributed to the sulfhydryl
group unique to its structure, but taste disturbances are also reported with enalapril (merck
sharpe & dohme 1988b). in the new zealarid
postmarketing experience with captopril \edwards
et al. 1987), 6% of patients receiving captopril were
reported by their physicians to have altered taste
sensation (altered taste of food or metallic taste in
the mouth). this study used a taste survey involving 272 responding patients: 44 lost the sense of
taste completely, versus 70 of 770 patients not on
captopril; the difference is statistically significant.
there were no statistically significant differences in
the frequency of other taste alterations between drug
and non drug subjects, suggesting that only the
complete loss of taste is related to captopril therapy
(edwards et al. 1987). no clear relationship to dose
has been shown, and the problem usually resolves
within 2 to 3 months with continued administration.
glossopyrosis, or 'burning tongue', was reported in i case involving the use of captopril in
a 39-year-old man with congestive heart failure
secondary to idiopathic cardiomyopathy (drucker
& johnson 1989). seven days after the initiation
of captopril, the patient complained of a 'burning
tongue'. results of physical examination revealed
a smooth anterior two-thirds of the tongue with
loss of papillae and hyperaemia. the drug was
withheld for the next 4 days with subsequent resolution of symptoms. on rechallenge, the patient
once again complained of severe burning of the
tongue. the drug was discontinued, symptoms
abated, and the tongue returned to normal within
a week. clinical findings and laboratory studies
ruled out other causes of glossopyrosis. the patient
did not receive treatment with any other ace in-

24

drug safety 7 (j) 1992

hibitor. the authors offer no conjectures as to
mechanism of action.
6.3 liver
liver dysfunction is an uncommon result of
ace inhibitor therapy. one report (tabibian et al.
1987) describes a 54-year-old man with a 6-year
history of congestive heart failure and atrial fibrillation treated with digoxin, furosemide and  xxxd2402xxx . his condition worsened and captopril 25mg 3 times daily was added. one month
later he experienced anorexia, nausea, pruritus and
vague abdominal discomfort. two months later he
was admitted to the hospital for jaundice. there
were no other cutaneous signs of liver disease.
serological tests for hepatitis a and b were negative. the total bilirubin was 428 ~mol/l (250 mg!
l). other blood chemistry was as follows: alkaline
phosphatase 1054 u /l, alt 730 u /l, ast 130
u/l, and prothrombin time 11.8 sec (control value
not stated). all signs, symptoms and chemistry
normalised after captopril was discontinued. a liver
biopsy revealed histological evidence of intracellular and intracanalicular bile stasis.

7. cardiovascular effects
7.1 hypotension
the capacity of ace inhibitors to produce
symptomatic hypotension in some patients after
the first dose is well known (cleland et al. 1985).
it should not be surprising that blockade of a system whose main function is volume homeostasis,
and whose first response is elevation of blood pressure, would result in the lowering of blood pressure
to a level commensurate with the perceived volume status. marked hypotension has been reported
in sodium- and water-depleted patients (hricik
1985) and in patients losing volume through diarrhoea and other effects (mcmurray & matthews
1987). packer (1987) points out that in the normal
state, intraglomerular pressure (filtration pressure)
is maintained by vasoconstriction of the efferent
arteriole in response to renin-angiotensin activation following reduction in glomerular perfusion

from any cause, but that sodium balance is the main
trigger of the system (packer 1987). this was studied (packer et al. 1987a) in heart failure patients
with identification of hyponatraemia as the major
risk factor for functional renal insufficiency due to
hypoperfusion. these authors state that 3 factors
must be present for profound hypoperfusion to ensue from ace inhibitor treatment: the patient must
be sodium depleted, the renin-angiotensin system
must be markedly elevated (as in heart failure
patients, many of whom are intravascularly hypovolaemic) and renal perfusion must already be
compromised. these findings suggest that hypovolaemia and hyponatraemia predispose patients
to profound hypotension following administration
of an ace inhibitor.
the question of an association of stroke and
myocardial infarction with elevated plasma renin
activity (pra) remains controversial. weinberger
and associates (1973) reported a lower frequency
of cardiovascular complications in hypertensive
patients with low pra compared to other patients
with essential hypertension. these complications
were not further described; plasma angiotensin levels were not studied. in 2 studies of hypertensive
patients, brunner et al. (1972, 1973) reported similar frequencies of stroke and infarction in patients
with normal or elevated pra but a lower frequency ofthese complications in patients with low
pra. diastolic blood pressure was significantly
higher in the groups with normal and elevated pra
compared with the group with low pra; angiotensin levels were not reported. it is impossible to determine from these reports whether there is a causal
effect of elevated pra or whether pra serves as
a marker for other biochemical abnormalities. the
studies are further confounded by the low reproducibility (± 14%) of the renin assay. christlieb et
al. (1974) found that hypertensive patients who had
cardiovascular events had a higher prevalence of
risk factors than patients without these complications and were more likely to have normal or elevated pra, but there was no association of risk
factors with pra. the authors note that a causal
effect cannot be established and that elevated pra
may be a marker for other abnormalities. it should

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

be further noted that these studies were conducted
before the advent of widespread ace inhibitor use,
and the patients' pra elevation was not the result
of ace inhibitor therapy. thus, these patients
probably had elevated angiotensin levels, unlike
patients whose pra is elevated as a result of interruption of the negative feedback loop by ace
inhibitors. a corollary question is whether cardiovascular disease activates the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system (raas), because in that setting, ace inhibitors may provide protective effects. michorowski and ceremuzynski (1983) studied this question in patients with uncomplicated
myocardial infarction (mi) and patients whose mi
was complicated by conduction disturbances or
severe ventricular dysfunction. they found significant elevations in pra, aldosterone, noradrenalin and adrenaline in patients with complicated
mi; pra correlated significantly with aldosterone,
adrenalin and noradrenalin levels. these authors
believe that complicated mi activates the raas
and that ace inhibitors may have beneficial effects in these patients, but this awaits further study.

8. renal effects
8.1 functional renal insufficiency
it is a common clinical observation that in
patients given drugs which acutely lower mean arterial pressure, prerenal azotaemia develops transiently until intrarenal compensatory mechanisms
readjust intrarenal haemodynamics. this is brought
about by the renin-angiotensin system. until recently, the prevailing view was that in patients
whose renal function deteriorates following captopril, the mechanism is prolonged renal hypoperfusion and ischaemia as a result of blockade of this
compensatory mechanism (maher 1984). this view
is supported by studies of captopril and enalapril
such as that of packer and associates, who studied
the efficacy of captopril and enalapril in patients
with severe chronic heart failure (packer et al.
1987b). they noted that some patients experienced
no change or an improvement in renal function,
while functional renal insufficiency developed in
others. they also noted that patients developing

25

renal insufficiency received higher doses of furosemide, and had lower central venous pressures,
than the patients who did not develop renal failure.
moreover, the patients who developed renal insufficiency experienced an excessive lowering of
central venous pressure (to < 15mm hg) or mean
arterial pressure (to <60mm hg), unlike those
whose renal function was preserved. these investigators found that the renal effects could be ameliorated by sodium repletion (packer et al. 1987a).
a less common mechanism of injury attributed
to captopril is immune-complex glomerulopathy
(maher 1984). it is difficult to separate drug effects
from disease effects: evidence is accumulating that
undetected immune-complex glomerulopathy may
be common in the hypertensive population. in 1
study, histological changes consistent with immune-complex glomerulopathy were seen with
equal frequency in hypertensive patients not taking
ace inhibitors and those being treated with the
drugs (captopril collaborative study group 1982).
the incidence of proteinuria in patients receiving
captopril has been reported to be no different from
that in the hypertensive population (lewis 1987).
studies utilising low doses of ace inhibitors
frequently report no change or an improvement in
renal function in hypertensive patients. enalapril
40 mg/day was compared with sustained release
verapamil 240mg twice daily in 1 study of 15
patients with essential hypertension (katzman et
al. 1990). neither drug altered glomerular filtration
rate (gfr) or renal vascular resistance, and there
were no signs of sodium or water retention. a
crossover study of lisinopril versus conventional
therapy in 13 hypertensive patients with renal disease of various origins (heeg et al. 1987) showed
a reduction in proteinuria with lisinopril; increased
serum potassium concentrations developing during iisinopril treatment could be compensated by
further dietary potassium restriction. a multicentre trial of enalapril and the investigational drug
ramipiril (rosenfeld & zabludowski 1989) reported that, in the study group of 202 hypertensive
patients, observed effects of both drugs were mild
and there was no further deterioration in renal
function in patients with diabetic nephropathy or

26

renal insufficiency from other causes. those authors suggested that ace inhibitors may be protective against progressive deterioration in renal function in these patients. these observations have been
confirmed by others (bjorck et al. 1986; ikeda et
al. 1989; simon et al. 1983).
the importance of volume and sodium balance
in preserving renal perfusion has been discussed
above in section 7.1 (hricik 1985; mcmurray &
matthews 1987; packer 1987; packer et al. i 987a).
packer (1987) identified 3 risk factors for the development of functional renal insufficiency in heart
failure patients: hyponatraemia, long-acting ace
inhibitors as opposed to short-acting agents, and
diabetes mellitus. the risk of developing renal insufficiency during ace inhibition was 13% if none
of the risk factors was present, 38% with i factor
present, 76% with 2, and 100% with all 3 present.
there is growing acceptance of the intuitive notion that short-acting ace inhibitors may have less
risk of renal insufficiency than longer-acting agents
(table i), possibly because towards the end of the
dosing interval with short-acting agents, the effect
of the drug is diminishing so that renal perfusion
is intermittently restored between doses. this concept is strengthened by studies comparing long- and
short-acting agents (frank 1989; packer et al. i 986).

8.1.1 high-risk groups
there- are certain patient groups in which the
altered renal haemodynamics caused by ace inhibitors should be avoided. in 1 study of 10 patients
with hypertension and psoriasis taking captopril
(madeddu et al. 1986), 3 patients developed nephrotic-range proteinuria (> 2g urinary protein per
day). it appears that patients with psoriasis frequently have hypertension and there is a high prevalence of cardiovascular disease with increased activity of the renin-angiotensin system (ena et al.
1985). these patients probably should not receive
ace inhibitors. for reasons not completely understood, patients with collagen-vascular disease have
an increased frequency of side effects of ace inhibitors (rotmensch et al. 1988); these patients
should probably not receive the drugs.
patients with unilateral renal artery stenosis

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

comprise another group in which ace inhibitors
seem unwise therapy, although this is controversial. these patients lose a significant amount of perfusion pressure to the stenosed kidney following
blood pressure reduction, with decreased glomerular filtration in the stenosed kidney as a result of
the loss of the intrarenal renin-angiotensin compensatory mechanism; however, the other kidney
compensates for the loss of renal function in the
stenosed kidney. it has been suggested that it is
unwise to allow the acceleration of deterioration in
the stenosed kidney even though the benefits of
blood pressure reduction may be great (brunner et
al. 1987). whether the beneficial effects on the normal kidney outweigh the detrimental effects on the
stenosed kidney is a question that requires further
study. in contrast, it is universally accepted that
bilateral renal artery stenosis is an absolute contraindication to ace inhibitors because patients
rely on elevated blood pressure to perfuse the kidney downstream of the stenotic arterial segment.
ace inhibitors appear to be capable of slowing
the progression of hypertensive and diabetic (keane
et al. 1989) and hypertensive (mann & ritz 1987)
nephropathy. the role of intraglomerular hypertension in human hypertensive and diabetic kidney disease is unclear, although many studies of
various quality have shown reduced proteinuria and
retardation of disease progression; it may be too
early to declare that ace inhibitors are protective
of renal function until more elaborate studies are
performed (feig & rutan 1989).

9. other effects
data derived from prescription event monitoring by the british drug safety research unit revealed 19 reports of deafness among a total of
12543 patients taking enalapril in whom the duration of treatment was recorded (inman & rawson
1987). there was no record of deafness after treatment was completed. the authors postulated that
this rare adverse effect may be related to other more
common upper respiratory effects, such as pharyngeal irritation and nasal congestion, the cause of
which remains unclear.

27

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

vulvovaginal pruritus and dysuria were described in an 80-year-old woman with essential
hypertension begun on enalapril 2.5 mg/day
(heckerling 1990). within 48h she developed vulvovaginal pruritus and burning at the end of urination, without frequency, urgency or vaginal discharge. she discontinued enalapril on her own and
within 24h all symptoms subsided. they reappeared after the drug was restarted because of persistent, uncontrolled hypertension. a physical
examination was normal and urinalysis, urine culture and papanicolaou smear were unremarkable.
an agent from another class was substituted for the
enalapril and the symptoms again disappeared
within 24h. enalapril-induced elevation of bradykinin and  xxxd1903xxx , both of which stimulate nociceptive fibres in vaginal mucosa, was suggested as the cause.
a case of kaposi's sarcoma evidently related to
captopril was reported in a 70-year-old heterosexual man who presented with a 2-month history of
3 nodular angiomatous lesions on his left arm; histopathological findings were consistent with kaposi's sarcoma (puppin et al. 1990). he had a history of essential hypertension treated with captopril
75 mg/day and  xxxd58xxx  200 mg/day without
complication. he had no history of blood product
transfusion or intravenous drugs. tests for anti-hi v
antibody and hiv antigen were negative, and the
patient had no history of fever, fatigue, anorexia,
lymphadenopathy or opportunistic infection. captopril was discontinued, and within i month the
lesions had begun to disappear; after 3 months no
lesions were seen. biopsy showed residual features
of kaposi's sarcoma. it is not known whether captopril alone or an interaction with  xxxd58xxx  resulted in the lesions. captopril has been shown to
have immunosuppressive effects as evidenced by a
50% reduction of lymphocytic proliferation observed during therapy with the drug (kallenberg et
al. 1981). these effects could possibly be mediated
by an increase in plasma  xxxd1903xxx  (johnson & aurell 1981). in vitro suppression of human
natural killer mononuclear cells has been noted in
the presence of copper sulfate (sugiyama et al.
1986). the inhibition of suppression by the addi-

tion of catalase but not superoxide dismutase suggests that the reaction these authors described is
mediated by peroxide.

10. use in pregnancy
the ace inhibitors are classified in the us as
pregnancy risk factor category c. this category
is defined as follows: either studies in animals have
revealed adverse effects on the fetus (embryocidal,
teratogenic or other) but there are no controlled
studies in women, or studies in women and animals are not available. the drugs should be given
only if the potential benefit justifies the potential
risk to the fetus (federal register 1980).
captopril has been shown to be embryocidal in
animals and is known to cause an increase in stillbirths in some species (broughton pipkin et al.
1980). these drugs do not appear to be human teratogens, although there are 2 reports in the literature of possible teratogenicity secondary to captopril. in the first (duminy & burger 1981), the
malformed fetus was discovered following voluntary abortion in a patient with renovascular hypertension who had been treated during her first
trimester with captopril, propranolol and amiloride. the malformation consisted of the left leg ending at midthigh, without distal involvement. no
skull formation was present above the brain tissue.
due to the small size of the fetus (1.5cm) defect
due to the abortion itself could not be ruled out.
the second case involved a mother with a history
of renal artery stenosis and malignant hypertension
who was treated throughout her pregnancy with
captopril, minoxidil and propranolol (kaler et al.
1987). the infant, delivered at 38 weeks, had multiple abnormalities including hypertrichosis, abnormal facial features, fifth finger clinodactyly,
omphalocele, cryptorchidism and a ventriculoseptal defect. although the hypertrichosis could be attributable to the use of minoxidil, the aetiology of
the other defects could not be determined.
there is also literature available that describes
inhibitory effects of these agents on the fetal renin
system with consequent alterations in systemic and
renal haemodynamics (boutroy & vert 1984). low

28

levels of  xxxg99xxx  have been observed in the
newborn after transplacental exposure to ace inhibitors (guignard & gouyon 1988). the development of oligohydramnios has been reported in
7 fetuses whose mothers had taken ace inhibitors
during pr~gnancy (broughton pipkin et al. 1989).
two fetuses died in utero while 2 neonates died
with persistent anuria. two of the survivors were
grossly retarded and a third required peritoneal dialysis from day 3 to day 10 for persistent anuria.
oliguria has not been reported in women who conceive while taking one of these agents and subsequently discontinue the drug when pregnancy is diagnosed.
the results of a survey on the use of captopril
and enalapril in 37 high-risk pregnancies were published in 1988 (kreft-jais et al. 1988). the mothers
had been treated for chronic essential or renal
hypertension. the outcomes of therapy included
the following morbid events: 2 of the pregnancies
exposed to enalapril miscarried, 2 fetal deaths occurred with captopril and 1 with enalapril. all 3
deaths were associated with severe protein uric
hypertession secondary to anuria. preterm delivery occurred in 11 women given captopril and 1
given enalapril; all were delivered by caesarian section. six of 26 liveborn babies were small for gestational age, 4 in the captopril- and 2 in the enalapril-treated group. two preterm infants born to
women given captopril had a patent ductus arteriosus, one requiring surgery. with the exception of
anuria, the severe maternal disease, premature delivery and fetal/newborn hypoxia were probably the
most likely causes of the adverse events.
another example of the deleterious effect of enalapril on fetal development was recently described
(cunniff et al. 1990). a 34-week male child was
delivered by emergency caesarean section to a
woman with systemic lupus erythematosus and
severe chronic hypertension who had received enalapril 20 mg/day, propranolol 40 mg/day and
 xxxd2294xxx  mgfday throughout her
pregnancy. the infant required intubation and aggressive ventilatory management to maintain adequate oxygenation and ventilation. physical
examination revealed features of the oligohydram-

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

nios sequence. a diagnosis of pulmonary hypoplasia was made. the infant's condition continued to
deteriorate and he died at age 25h. autopsy examination revealed severe renal tubular malformation, including a decreased number of lobulations
in many of the glomeruli and a great paucity of
tubules in the upper portion of the renal medulla.
the authors question whether the renal defects were
secondary to reduced renal blood flow due to enalapril, a direct teratogenic effect or the combination of enalapril and other medications.
an instance of acute renal failure in a neonate
was attributed to maternal exposure to enalapril
(schubiger & flury 1988). a 34-week an uric girl
was delivered by caesarean section to a woman who
had received enalapril 10mg twice daily during
pregnancy. peritoneal dialysis was started in the infant 60h after birth. ace activity was completely
suppressed and remained unmeasurable 12h after
dialysis was started. both active and total renin
concentrations and plasma renin activity had values 10 times those of normal infants (maury et al.
1984), while plasma angiotensin-ii concentrations
were extremely low. dialysis was continued for 10
days after birth. creatinine and renin levels eventually returned to normal by 3 months of age.
seven cases of neonatal renal failure in infants
were reported by researchers at the us food and
drug administration (rosa et al. 1989). the preterm neonates were described as being hypotensive, and had peak serum creatinine levels ranging
from 275 to 1525 ~mol/l (36 to 200 mg/l). anuria
and hypotension were prolonged at birth, did not
respond to conservative measures such as hydration and required dialysis. only 2 of the affected
neonates appeared to recover full renal function.
one infant died of renal failure 8 days after delivery, and another died a month later due to staphylococcal sepsis. the authors recommend that
full consideration be given to the risks involved
with ace inhibitor therapy before these agents are
prescribed during pregnancy.

11. use in children
captopril has been used safely and effectively
in the management of systemic arterial hypertension in children (mirkin & newman 1985). it has

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

also been successful in decreasing the albumin excretion rate in normotensive children with insulindependent diabetes mellitus and microalbuminuria
(cook et al. 1990). one child in this study developed diarrhoea after 2 months of therapy. both enalapril and captopril were able to reduce urinary
protein excretion in a short term study of patients
with persistent proteinuria caused by a variety of
diseases (trachtman & gauthier 1988). no adverse effects were reported; however, the authors
admit that more experience is needed with this
patient population regarding long term effects.

references
ackroyd jf. thrombocytopenia and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. british medical journal 298: 964, 1989
anagnovstou a, baranowski d, pillay vkg, kurtzman na, vercelotti g, et al. effect of renin on extra-renal erythropoietin
production. journal of laboratory and clinical medicine 88:
705-715, 1976
andrejak m, andrejak mt, osterman g. enalapril, captopril, and
cough. archives of internal medicine 148: 249, 1988
arrequi a, iverseb ll, spokes egs, emson pc. alterations in
postmortem brain  xxxg36xxx  activity and
some neuropeptides in huntington's disease. advances in
neurology 23: 517-525, 1979
biour m, lejunne c, hughes fc, cheymol g. diclofenac et toux
induite par les inhibiteurs de i'enzyme de conversion. therapie
43: 121-122, 1988
bjorck s, nyberg g, mulec h, granerus g, herlitz h, et al. beneficial effects of  xxxg36xxx  inhibition on
renal function in patients with diabetic nephropathy. british
medical journal 293: 471-474, 1986
boutroy mj, vert p. captopril administration in pregnancy impairs fetal angiotensin converting enzyme activity and neonatal adaptation. lancet 2: 935-936, 1984
brown rc, turton cwg. cough and  xxxg36xxx  inhibition. british medical journal (clinical research)
296: 1741, 1988
broughton pipkin f, baker pn, symonds em. ace inhibitors in
pregnancy. lancet 2: 96-97, 1989
broughton pipkin f, turner sr, symonds em. possible risk with
captopril in pregnancy: some animal data. lancet i: 1256, 1980
brunner hr, laragh jh, bair l, et al. essential hypertension:
renin and aldosterone, heart attack and stroke. new england
journal of medicine 286: 44 i-447, 1972
brunner hr, sealey je, laragh jh. renin as a risk factor in
essential hypertension. american journal of medicine 55: 295302, 1973
brunner r, waeber b, nussberger j. renal effects of converting
enzyme inhibition. journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 9
(suppl. 3): s6-s i4, 1987
bucca c, roila g, pinna g, oliva a, bugiani m. hyperresponsiveness of the extrathoracic airway in patients with captoprilinduced cough. chest 98: i 133- i 13 7, 1990
cameron di. near fatal angioedema associated with captopril.
canadian journal of cardiology 6: 265-266, 1990
captopril coilaborative study group. does captopril cause renal
damage in hypertensive patients? lancet i: 988-990, 1982
carruthers sg. severe coughing during captopril and enalapril

29

therapy. canadian medical association journal 135: 217-218,
1986
chin hl, buchan da. severe angioedema after long-term use of
an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. annals of internal medicine i 12: 3 i 2-3 i 3, 1990
christlieb ar, gleason re, hickler rb, lauler dp. renin: a risk
factor for cardiovascular disease? annals of internal medicine
81: 7-13, 1974
cleland jgf, dargie hj, mcalpine h, bail sg, morton jj, et al.
severe hypotension after first dose of enalapril in heart failure.
british medical journal 29 i: 1309- i 3 i 2, 1985
cohen kr. flushing induced by angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor therapy. american journal of medicine 86: 358, 1989
committee on safety of medicines. angioedema and urticaria associated with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. british medical journal 294: 9 i, 1987
consensus trial study group. effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure: results of the cooperative north scandinavian enalapril survival study. new
england journal of medicine 36: 1429-1435, 1987
cook j, daneman d, spino m, sochett e, perlman k, et al.
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor therapy to decrease
microalbuminuria in normotensive children with insulindependent diabetes meilitus. journal of pediatrics 117 (suppl.
i, pi): 39-45, 1990
coulter dm, edwards ir. cough associated with captopril and
enalapril. british medical journal 294: 1521-1523, 1987
cuniff c, jones kl, phillipson j, benirschke k, short s, et al.
oligohydramnios sequence and renal tubular malformation associated with maternal enalapril use. american journal of obstetrics and gynecology 192: 187-189, 1990
dibianco r. adverse reactions with angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors. medical toxicology i: 122-141, 1986
drucker cr, johnson tm. captopril glossopyrosis. archives of
dermatology 125: 1437-1438, 1989
duminy pc, burger pt. fetal abnormality associated with the
use of captopril during pregnancy. south african medical
journal 60: 805, 198 i
edwards ir, coulter dm, beasley dmg, macintosh d. captopril: 4 years of postmarketing surveillance of all patients in
new zealand. british journal of clinical pharmacology 23: 529536, 1987
eilis a, lishner m, lang r, ravid m. agranulocytosis associated
with enalaprii. dicp - annals of pharmacotherapy 25: 461462, 1991
ena p, madeddu p, glorioso n, cerimele d, rappeili a. high
prevalence of cardiovascular diseases and enhanced activity of
the renin-angiotensin system in psoriatic patients. acta cardiologica 40: 199-205, 1985
federal register (us) 44: 37434-37467, 1980
feig pu, rutan gh. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors:
the end of end-stage renal disease? annals of internal medicine
iii: 451-453, 1989
ferguson rk, vlasses ph, irvin jd, swanson bn, lee rb. a
comparative pilot study of enalapril, a new converting enzyme
inhibitor and hydrochlorothiazide in essential hypertension.
journal of clinical pharmacology 22: 281-289,1982
ferriere m, lachkar h, richard j-l, bringer j, orsetti a, et al.
captopril and insulin sensitivity. annals of internal medicine
102: 134-135, 1985
frank gj. does the duration of action of angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitors affect their safety and adverse effects? journal of hypertension 7 (suppl. 5): 517-522, 1989
goldblatt j, bryer a. huntington's disease: deterioration in clinical
state during treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. british medical journal 294: 1659-1660, 1987
grosbois b, milton d, beneton c, jacomy d. thrombocytopenia
induced by angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition. british
medical journal 298: 189-190, 1989

30

guignard jp, gouyon jb. adverse effects of drugs on the immature kidney. biology of the neonate 53: 243-252, 1988
heckerling ps. enalapril and vulvovaginal pruritis. annals ofinternal medicine 112: 879-890, 1990
heeg je, dejong pe, van der hem gk, de zeeuw d. reduction
of proteinuria by angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition.
kidney international 32: 78-83, 1987
helgeland a, stmmmen r, hagelund ch, tretli s. enalapril, atenolol, and hydrochlorothiazide in mild to moderate hypertension. lancet i: 872-875, 1986
hricik de. captopril-induced renal insufficiency and the role of
sodium balance. annals of internal medicine 103: 222-223,
1985
hume al, jack bw, levinson p. severe hyponatraemia: an association with lisinopril? dicp - annals of pharmacotherapy
24: 1169-1172,1990
ikeda t, nakayama 0, gomi t, sakurai j, yamazaki t, et al.
captopril, an angiotensin l-converting enzyme inhibitor, decreases proteinuria in hypertensive patients with renal diseases. nephron 52: 72-75, 1989
ikram h. arrhythmias, electrolytes, and ace inhibitor therapy
in the elderly. gerontology 33 (suppl. i): 42-47, 1987
inman whw. enalapril-induced cough. lancet 2: 218, 1986
inman whw, rawson nsb. deafness with enalapril and prescription event monitoring. lancet i: 872, 1987
inman whw, rawson nsb, wilton lv, pearce gl, speirs cj.
postmarketing surveillance of enalapril i: results of prescription-event monitoring. british medical journal 297: 826-829,
1988
jaffe ia. adverse effects profile of sulfhydryl compounds in man.
american journal of medicine 80: 471-476, 1986
jett gk. captopril-induced angioedema. annals of emergency
medicine 13: 489-490, 1984
johnson sa, aurell m. immunosuppressive action of captopril
blocked by prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor. lancet i: 1005,
1981
just pm. the positive association of cough with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. pharmacotherapy 9: 82-87, 1989
kaler sg, patrinos me, lambert gh, myers tf, karlman r, et
al. hypertrichosis and congenital anomalies associated with
maternal use of minoxidil. pediatrics 79: 431-436, 1987
kallenberg cgm, van der laan s, dezeeuw d. captopril and the
immune system. lancet 2: 92, 1981
katayama s, inaba m, maruno y, omoto a, ltabashi a, et al.
captopril-induced creatinine kinase elevations: a possible role
of the sulfhydryl group. hypertension 10: 234-236, 1987
katz ra, hood af, anhalt gj. pemphigus-like eruption from
captopril. archives of dermatology 123: 20-21,1987
katzman pl, henningsen nc, fagher b, thuylin t, hulthen ul.
renal and endocrine effects of long-term converting enzyme
inhibition as compared with calcium antagonism in essential
hypertension. journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 15: 360364, 1990
keane wf, anderson s, aurell m, de zeeuw 0, narins rg, et
al. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and progressive
renal insufficiency. annals of internal medicine iii: 503-516,
1989
kreft-jais c, plouin pf, tchobroutsky c, boutroy 1. angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors during pregnancy: a survey of 22
patients given captopril and nine given enaiapril. british journal of obstetrics and gynaecology 95: 420-422, 1988
kubo jh, cody rj. enalapril, a rash, and captopril. annal. of
internal medicine 100: 616, 1984
lewis ej.  xxxg36xxx  inhibition: considerations regarding proteinuria. american journal of kidney diseases 10 (suppl. i): 30-38, 1987
lipworth bj, mcmurray jj, clark ra, struthers ad. development of persistent late onset asthma following treatment with
captopril. european respiratory journal 2: 586-588, 1989

drug safety 7 (1) 1992

madeddu p, ena p, dessi-fulgheri p, glorioso n, cerimele 0,
et al. captopril-induced proteinuria in hypertensive psoriatic
patients. nephron 44: 358-360, 1986
maher jf. clinicopathologic spectrum of drug nephrotoxicity.
advances in internal medicine 30: 295-316, 1984
mallet l, cooper jw, thomas t. bullous pemphigoid associated
with captopril. dicp: annals ofpharmacot!lerapy 23: 63, 1989
mann j, ritz e. preservation of kidney function by use of converting-enzyme inhibitors for control of hypertension. lancet
2: 622, 1987
markkusse hm, meyboom rhb. gynecomastia associated with
captopril. british medical journal 296: 1262, 1988
maury m, wakti h, richer c, francoual c, relier jp, et al. serum
 xxxg99xxx -converting enzyme activity in premature and full
term infants. biology of the neonate 45: 102-104, 1984
mcmurray j, matthews om. consequences of fluid loss in patients
treated with ace inhibitors. postgraduate medical journal 63:
385-387, 1987
merck sharpe & dohme. vasotec® (enalapril) product information package insert, west point, pennsylvania, 1988a
merck sharpe & dohme. prinvil® (iisinopril) product information package insert, west point, pennsylvania, 1988b
michorowski b, ceremuzynski l. the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the clinical course of acute myocardial infarction. european heart journal 4: 259-264, 1983
mirkin bl, newman tj. efficacy and safety of captopril in treatment of severe childhood hypertension: report of the international collaborative study group. pediatrics 75: 1091-1100,
1985
motel pj. captopril and alopecia: a case report and review of
known cutaneous reactions in captopril use. journal of the
american academy of dermatology 23: 124-125, 1990
nakamura y, yoshimoto k, saima s. gynecomastia induced by
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. british medical
journal 300: 541, 1990
navis gj, dejong pe, dezeeuw d. serum  xxxd3472xxx , ace inhibitors, and natriuresis. lancet 2: 156, 1985
navis gj, de jong pe, kallenberg cg, et al. absence of crossreactivity between captopril and enalapril. lancet i: 1017, 1984
nicholls mg. side effects and metabolic effects of convertingenzyme inhibitors. oinical and experimental hypertension a9
(2 & 3): 653-664, 1987
nicholls mg, gilchrist nl.  xxxd3259xxx  and cough induced by converting enzyme inhibitors. lancet i: 872, 1987
o'hollaren mt, porter ga. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and the allergist. annals of allergy 64: 503-506, 1990
onoyama k, sanai t, motomura k, fujishima m. worsening of
anemia by angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and its
prevention by antiestrogenic steroid in chronic hemodialysis
patients. journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 13 (suppl.
3): 527-530, 1989
orfan n, patterson r, dykewic~ ms. severe angioedema related
to ace inhibitors in patients with a history of idiopathic angioedema. journal of the american medical association 264:
1287-1289, 1990
packer m. why do the kidneys release renin in patients with congestive heart failure? a nephrocentric view of converting-enzyme inhibition. american journal of cardiology 60: 179-184,
1987
packer m, lee who provocation of hyper- and hypokalemic sudden death during treatment with and withdrawal of converting-enzyme inhibition in severe chronic congestive heart failure. american journal of cardiology 57: 347-348, 1986
packer m, lee wh, kesler po, medina n, yushak m, et al.
identification of hyponatremia as a risk factor for the development of functional renal insufficiency during converting enzyme inhibition in severe chronic heart failure. journal of the
american college of cardiology 10: 837-844, 1987a
packer m, lee wh, medina n, yushak m, kessler pd. func-

adverse effects of ace inhibitors

tional renal insufficiency during long-term therapy with captopril and enalapril in severe chronic heart failure. annals of
internal medicine 106: 346-354. 1987b
packer m. lee who yushak m. medina n. comparison of captopril and enalapril in patients with severe chronic heart failure. new england journal of medicine 315: 847-853. 1986
parfrey ps, clement m. vandenburg mj. wright p. captopril
induced pemphigus. british medical journal 194: 281, 1980
patterson jf. depression associated with enalapril. southern
medical journal 82: 402-403. 1989
puppin d, rybojad m. de la chapel ie c, morel p. kaposi's
sarcoma associated with captopril. lancet 336: 1251-1252. 1990
rosa fw. bosco la, graham cf. milstien jb, dreis m, et al.
neonatal anuria with maternal  xxxg36xxx 
inhibition. obstetrics-gynaecology 74: 371-374. 1989
rosenfeld jb, zabludowski j. the renin-angiotensin system, the
kidney, and hypertension. journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 13 (suppl. 3): s22-s26. 1989
rotmensch hh , vlasses ph, ferguson rk. resolution of captopril-induced rash after substitution of enalapril. pharmacotherapy 3: 131-133. 1983
rotmensch hh, vlasses ph, ferguson rk.  xxxg36xxx  inhibitors. ml!dical clinics of north america
72: 399-425, 1988
ruocco v. deluca m, pisani m, deangelis e, vitale 0 , et al.
pemphigus provoked by d- xxxd2870xxx : an experimental approach using in vitro tissue culture. dermatologica 164: 236248, 1982
rush je. merrill dd. the safety and tolerability of lisinopril in
clinical trials. journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 9 (suppl.
3): s99-s 107, 1987
schubiger g, flury g. enalapril for pregnancy induced hypertension: acute renal failure in a neonate. annals of internal medicine 108: 214-216, 1988
seidman md, lewandowski ca, sarpa jr, potesta e, schweitzer
vg. angioedema related to  xxxg36xxx  inhibitors. otolaryngology, head and neck surgery 102: 727731, 1990
simon g, marioka s, snyder dk, cohn in. increased renal plasma
flow in long-term enalapril treatment of hypertension. clinical
pharmacology and therapeutics 34: 459-465, 1983
slater fe, merrill dd, guess ha, roylance pj, cooper wd, et
al. clinical profile of angioedema associated with angiotensin
converting-enzyme inhibition. journal of the american medical association 260: 967-970, 1988
squibb er & sons. capoten@ (captopril) product information
package insert, princeton, new jersey, 1988
stine s, yang hy, costa e. intraventricular captopril inhibits in
situ metabolism of enkephalin and naltrexone sensitive analgesia. pharmacologist 21: 197, 1979
stoller jk, mehta ac, vidt dg. captopril-induced cough. chest
93: 659-661, 1988
stumpe ko, kolloch r, overlack a. captopril and enalapril:
evaluation of therapeutic efficacy and safety. practical cardiology 10: 111-124, 1984
suarez m, ho pwl, johnson es, perez g. angioneurotic edema,

31

agranulocytosis, and fatal septicemia following captopril
therapy. american journal of medicine 81: 336-349, 1986
sugiyama e, iwats m, yamashita n, yoshikawa t, maruyama
m, et al. immunosuppression by captopril in vitro: inhibition
of human natural killer activity by copper-dependent generation of  xxxd2298xxx . japanese journal of medicine 25:
149-154, 1986
sullivan pa, kelleher m, twomey m, dineen m. effects of converting enzyme inhibition on blood pressure, plasma renin activity (pra) and plasma aldosterone in hypertensive diabetics
compared to patients with essential hypertension. journal of
hypertension 3: 359-363, 1985
swartz sl, williams gh .  xxxg36xxx  inhibition and prostaglandins. american journal of cardiology 49:
1405-1409, 1982
tabibian n, alpert l, alpert e. captopril-induced liver dysfunction. american journal of medicine 80: 1173-1175, 1987
town gi , hallwright gp, maling tjb, o'donnell tv. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and cough. new zealand
medical journal 100: 161-163, 1987
trachtman h, gauthier b. effect of  xxxg36xxx  inhibitor therapy on proteinuria in children with renal
disease. journal of pediatrics 112: 295-298, 1988
ujhelyi mr, ferguson rk, vlases ph. angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors: mechanistic controversies. pharmacotherapy 9: 351-362, 1989
veterans administration cooperative study group on antihypertensive agents. low dose captopril in the treatment of
mild to moderate hypertension. hypertension 5 (suppl. 3): 319344, 1983
vlasses ph, ferguson rk, chatterjee k. captopril: clinical
pharmacology and benefit-to-risk ratio in hypertension and
congestive heart failure. pharmacotherapy 2: 1-17, 1982
weber ma. safety issues during antihypertensive treatment with
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. american journal
of medicine 84 (suppl. 4a): 16-23, 1988
weinberger mh. influence of an angiotensin converting-enzyme
inhibitor on diuretic-induced metabolic effects in hypertension. hypertension 5 (suppl. iii): 132-138, 1983
weinberger mh , yu pl, perkins bj. renin in hypertension: further evidence for a vasculotoxic role. clinical research 21: 458,
1973
wilkin jk, hammond jj , kirkendall wm. the captopril-induced
eruption - a possible mechanism: cutaneous kinin potentiation. archives of dermatology 116: 902-905, 1980
wood sm, mann rd, rawlins md. angioedema and urticaria
associated with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors.
british medical journal 294: 91-92, 1987
zubenko gs, nixon ra. mood elevating effect of captopril in
depressed patients. american journal of psychiatry 141 : 110iii , 1984
correspondence and reprints: dr roy c. parish. department of
pharmacy practice, college of pharmacy, the university of
georgia, athens, ga 30602, usa.

