british lownal of l\'rimto\oifii (1 992) 126, supplement 59. 2-7.

 xxxd3314xxx : mode of action and properties of the
 xxxg2197xxx  inhibition
n.s.kydkr
saniioz ri-sftiri-h itislimic, viciiiiii, aiislriti

summary

 xxxd3314xxx  (i,amisil®) has primary i'lingicidal action against many fungi as a result of its specific
mecfianism of  xxxg2197xxx  inhibition. iveated ilingi accumulate squalene while becoming
deficient in ergosterol. an essential component of lungai cell membranes. the  xxxd3440xxx  action is closely
associated with the development oi high intracelluiar squalene concentrations, which are believed to
interfere with fungal membrane function and cell wall synthesis. in the case of ciuuuthi albicans.
growth inhibition with terbinaiine appears to result from the ergosterol deficiency. the iiiamentous
form of this fungus is more susceptible than the yeast form. measurement of ergosterol biosynthesis by
incorporation of radiolabelled precursors indicates a correlation between inhibition of growth and
ergosteroi biosynthesis in a range of pathogenic iuugi.  xxxd3314xxx  is a potent non-competitive
inhibitor of  xxxg2197xxx  from candida (k,^ 30 niw). in contrast, inhibition of rat liver squalene
epoxidase only occurs at higher drug concentrations (k,^ 77 fim). and is competitive with squalene.
thus, terbinaiine has no effect on cholesterol biosynthesis in vivo.  xxxg2197xxx  is not an enzyme
of the cytochrome p-45() type, thereby avoiding potential inhibition of this class of enzymes.

 xxxd3314xxx  (i.,amisif®) is a recently introduced, orally
active, antifungal belonging to ttie allylamine class' of
synthetic antifungal agents. the structurally related
topical antifungal naftifinc- was the prototype of these
compounds from which terbinatine was developed during a programme of chemical synthesis.' the biological
and clinical properties of the allylamines have recently
been reviewed.^ the distinguishing features of these
agents include primary fungicidal action against the
majority of pathogenic fmigi. extremely high activity
against dermatophytes with more variable activity
against yeasts, and a high degree of selectivity for their
fungal target, 'ferbinatine. in common witb naftiiine and
related allylamines. acts by blocking fungal ergosterol
biosynthesis."'"' this article reviews the biochemical
action of  xxxd3314xxx  to provide a mechanistic basis for
understanding the clinical antifungal activity of the
compound.

inhibition of fungal ergosterol biosynthesis
effects on fwuja! cells

itgosterol is an essential component of virtually all
fungal cells as it is required for membrane integrity and
(.'nrrespondencf: dr neil s.rydcr. s;indoz forsr!uingsinstitiit, llritnner
stnissc sm, a - n i s wien. aiistriii.

also for growth. its importance is underlined by the fact
that most antifungal agents interfere with ergostero!
either by directly inhibiting its biosynthesis (allyiamines.
azoies. morpholines, thiocarbamates) or by interacting
with it in the cell membrane (polyenes).  xxxd3314xxx 
specifically inhibits fungal ergosterol biosynthesis at the
point of squalene epoxidation.'"'''' as a result of this
inhibition by  xxxd3314xxx . the treated fungal cells rapidly
accumulate tlic intermediate squalene and become
deficient in the end-product of the pathway, ergosterol.
incorporation of radiolabelled sterol precursors, such
as acetate, has been employed to study quantitatively
the effects of  xxxd3314xxx  on ergosterol biosynthesis in a
range of pathogenic fungi. control cells incorporate
acetate almost entirely into the ergosterol fraction of the
non-saponifiable lipids. while cells treated with therapeutically relevant concentrations of  xxxd3314xxx  incorporate tbe label predominantly into squalene (kig. 11.
furthermore. labelling is diminished in the 4-methylated
precursor sterols which are normally found in untreated
cells, indiiating that the inhibited step is prior to the
formation of the rigid sterol backbone. further evidence
of inhibition of cellular ergosterol biosynthesis by  xxxd3314xxx  is provided by experiments using fmcl/i(y/-uibelled
methionine. wbicb is specifically incorporated into the
ergosterol side-chain.'' this process is also dosedependently inhibited by  xxxd3314xxx . as has been shown
in several pathogenic fungi.^"

terbinafink modh of action

20 -

o.i

oj

1.(1

10

the results of these comparative studies are summarized in table i. there is a clear correlation between
inhibition of both fungal growth and ergosterol biosynthesis (fig, 2). the extreme sensitivity of the dermatophytes is revealed by the signilicant inhibition of ergosterol biosynthesis with  xxxd3314xxx  concentrations of < 1
ng/ml. on the other hand, it is apparent that factors
other than biochemical sensitivity also determine susceptibility, as there is a wider range of variation between
mic values than there is between sterol inhibitory
concentrations of the drug. one such factor appears to be
fungal morphology, the filamentous form being intrinsically more susceptible to disruption than the yeast form.
this is apparent in the case of c. (ilbkwis, where the mic

l e r b i n a r i n e ing/nil)
ligurt"

1. hfl'tvt of icrbiiuilitit.' un crgaslttol biosynthesis ol' the
tfirlri'c/ri/loij riibriim: iiiairpiiriilinn iif | i4-c'|iict'tytt' into
l, pitok'd 4-monomethyl and 4.4-diinl'lhyl stcrols ( a i, and
squiik'tu' ( • ! .

lld'ccts on cell-free siistenis

using l'ell-free extracts of camudii. it can be shown that
thf ergosterol biosynthesis inhibition by terbinafme is
no! dependent on cellular integrity.  xxxd3314xxx  dosedependently inhibits incorporation of labelled mevaloitate into sterols in a manner that is qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to that observed in whole i'ungal
cells.'''' ilxperiments using substrates that enter the
sterol pathway at earlier or later stages continued that
squalene epoxidation is the sole step inhibited by
therapeutic concentrations of terblnijone.'' "

conipiirisoii of ilifjcrent fiiiu]i

inhibition of acetate incorporation into ergosterol by
terbinaline has been measured quantitatively in a
number of pathogenic fungi as part of an investigation
into the bioclieniical basis for variation in susceptibility
between diflerent tungi, inhibition is qualitatively sitnilar in all cases, following the pattern shown in figure 1.
these biochemical results may be compared with the
drug concentrations required to inhibit growth of the
respective fungi—mic values (minimum inhibitory concentration for complete suppression of growth). however. mic values can vary considerably with the experimental conditions, and are used here for comparison
only. in addition, the yeast and myeelial forms of c.
alhicdiis were compared, using a selected strain that
exhibits complete phase change in suitable growth
media.'"^

tiible 1. cont'entrations of terbinaiinc iiig.m])
growth (mic) iind stero! biosynthesis

inhibiting lungal

sterol bi()synthcsi,s
i'ullglls

mic

trii'hopluiloii riiiyriim
t. mentiiiiiop)iiiles
asperijihiis fiimitjuiiis
iandiiia imriipshosis

01)03

ics,,

ll(l()2

0 02
0-04

m

0-07
0-oof)
0-008

1-2
0-5
0-2

i2s

0'014

it

o'ol 5
0-04

0-63
0-22

0-0()()5

l)-8
((•4

(', a!biains ai24 (yeast)
(.', ii!biiiiijs a i 2 6 (veastl
c, iiuniiiiis al 26 (invcclihll
c, n!a!'naii

11)11

0-9

iciu. [(-'.,^ = 11^1^ ciinceiuriuioiis lluil produfc s()% and 9s% inhibition, respectively, ;is measured by | i4-c|acx'tatc incorporation^ i mean

ol" i experiments).

100

•

ct

10

,.0

0.1

0.01

jtr

r

• '''•'"
1

1

1

0.01

0.1

ic -50(mg/ml)

figure 2. correlation bclwefnterbinaline-intlulvd inhibition of growth
i.mic) and ergostorol biosynthesis (ic^d) inarangeofpiithogenic fungi

|,si't; table 1 for values and liill names of fungi). y = yeasl form:
m = myeeliai form.

n.s.ryder

of terbinatinc for the hyphal form ls much lower than
that lor the yeast form (seen also with other c. idbicans
strains'^), although there is littlf difference in the
sensitivity of ergosterol biosynthesis between the two
morphologies. the results are similar with the
azoles,'^"' suggesting that the klamentous form is more
sensitive than the yeast form to disruption of sterol
biosynthesis. the ability of  xxxd3314xxx  to suppress the
invasive hyphal form may play a significant role in its
therapeutic efficacy against this organism.
the fungi listed in table 1 can be classified into tuu)
groups on the basis of the relationship between inhibition of growth and ergosterol biosynthesis by  xxxd3314xxx ; group i. in which complete suppression ot growth
(the mic) is achieved at drug concentrations that only
partially inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis: and group ii.
with an mic considerably higher than the drug concentration required for 95% inhibition ol ergosterol biosynthesis (fungi for which total blockade of sterol production
appears to be necessary for growth suppression). these
difterentes probably reflect the varying ability of different
fungi to adapt to enforced changes in their cellular lipid
composition.

mechanism of fungicidal action
in common with naftiline and other related allylamines,
 xxxd3314xxx  has a primary fungicidal action in vitro
(defined as > 9 9 % killing of fungal inoculum at the mic)
against most fungal pathogens, including dermatophytes. and dimorphic and filamentous fungi.'^'''' the
compound is also  xxxd3440xxx  against c. pariipsucsis, but static
against c. albicans. although the latter may be killed at
higher drug concentrations.'' the  xxxd3440xxx  mode of action
of terbinaline is considered to contribute significantly to
the clinical efficacy of the agent.•* particularly in chronic
refractory infections such as those of the nails, by
permitting shorter treatment durations and reducing the
rate of relapse.
because of its important role, the mechanism of this
 xxxd3440xxx  action of  xxxd3314xxx  has been extensively investigated. the current hypothesis is that fungal cell death is
caused by the accumulation of high levels of intracellular squalene. probably in combination with ergosterol
deficiency, as a result of the drug-induced inhibition ot"
 xxxg2197xxx . the following points support this
hypothesis;
1. the group i fungi (table 1), which require only
partial ergosterol biosynthesis inhibition for suppression
of growth, are also those that are subject to the  xxxd3440xxx 

action of  xxxd3314xxx . this suggests that ergosterol
deficiency is not the primary cause of death.
2. the azoles also inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis and
thus result in crgosterot deticiency, but are primarily
fungistatic in action. this suggests that squalene accumulation rather than ergosterol deficiency is the key
to the action of allylamines.
3. detailed parallel studies of cell death, growth
inhibition and lipid composition in several different fungi
treated with  xxxd3314xxx  indicated that cell death was
always associated with a large increase in intracellular
squalene levels. the association was observed over
various ranges of both treatment duration and drug
concentration. a typical example is shown in figure 5
for t. tnentagropluites, in which only a slight decrease in
ergosterol content was seen,''' a similar pattern was
observed with naftitine.
4. the fact that the onset of cell death is gradual (fig.
5} suggests that  xxxd3440xxx  action is the result of epoxidase
inhibition rather than a direct killing effect at the cell
surface.
a summary of the proposed mechanism of attii)n of
 xxxd3314xxx  is shown in figure 4. however, the question
remains, how does squalene accumulation exert a toxic
effect on the fungal cell.' the highly lipophilic squalene
appears to be deposited in iipid droplets, and ultrastructural studies of fungi treated with  xxxd3314xxx  show the
presence of large numbers of lipid-staining vesicles in the
cytoplasm and in the cell wall.-"-' treatment with
naftifine produces a similar phenomenon.'- biochemical
studies indicate that, in siiccluironuiccs cells treated with
naftitine. the resultant squalene is present in the cytoplasm ratlier than in the membrane fraction.-' one
possibility is that the squalene vesicles act as a lipid
sponge, weakening the cellular membranes by extracting essential lipid components from them. disintegration
of the vacuolar membrane in particular would release
lytic enzymes which could be lethal to the cell. further
studies are in progress to elucidate the precise mechanism for the  xxxd3440xxx  action of  xxxd3314xxx .

selective inhibition of  xxxg2197xxx 
l-'iuhia} st{uak'iic epoxidase

the above experimental data provide strotig evidence
that the primary target of  xxxd3314xxx  in fungi is the
en/yine  xxxg2197xxx . this is a complex membrane-bound enzyme system requiring molecular oxygen. its mechanism is poorly understood at present, but

terbinafink mode of action

20

10
hgiirt" j. kuiifjifida! iiclion {il'lc'rliiniilinf
l()(k)5 /(g/nil) in tjic'ru/j/ii/dur
memniirophfiles: viulilc ul'li fount hon sfalc)
! • ) : sciiiiik'ml' fontcnt lii); fryostfrol contt'nl
id) liuiiiplcii l'ni[ii rficrt'iue 19).

12

squulene ep(i\ida.se inhibition

1

i

p^fldsterol
deficiencv

.squ;)lenl'
accumulation

1

\

i

deposition of
lipid ve.sicles

——~—*^i

(irowth arrcsl

48

time ( h o u r s )

tkrbinafink

inlerference »itb
meiiibriine function
cell ;;rovvth

24

0.01

characterized-'' -'' and the inhibitory effects of  xxxd3314xxx 
investigated. tcrbinatine (and also naltitine) is a potent
and spcciiic reversible inhibitor of this enzyme, displaying non-competitive kinetics with respect to the substrate squalene and colactors i'ad and nadh.' terbinahnc also inhibits a soluble enzyme from the same
source.-'' the potency of inhibition is in agreement with
that observed in tells and cell-free extracts of cnndiihi
(i able 2. compare with table 1) and can. therefore, fully
account lor the antifungal activity of terbinahne. it is
interesting to note that differences in sensitivity of the
epoxidase do not explain the difference in susceptibility
to terbinatine shown by the two candida species (table
2). it is not known whether the  xxxg2197xxx  of
dcrmatophytes is exceptionally sensitive to the drug as.
so far. no suitable experitiiental model has been developed.

disruption of
cellular membranes

1

i

fincista ik action

funck idai a< tion

table 2. inhibition of ft'll-trcc stenil biosyntht'sis  xxxg714xxx !
squiilent' cpnxidase activity by terhinalinc

terbinaline icso
i'igure 4. i'rnposetl iiifcliiinisni oflunyiciiliil iiiul i'liiiiii.slittif ;ii-lion ot"

source
ciiiiiliitii iiumims lyeast)
c. piirapshosis

it is clearly not an enzyme of the cytochromc
superfamily. the dctiuled biochemistry of squalcnc
cpoxidiise and its inhibitors has recently been reviewed^"^
and will not be discussed here.
the niicrosomiil epoxidase from cundidu has been

ceil-free extract*
o-dj
ool

squalene epoxidaset
0-0 j
0-(14

kiit liver
csd^ concentration th;il pruduccs ->()% inhibilioii.
krgosterol biosynthesis measured by incorporation of [! 4-c|niev;i!()iitf.''
kpoxidasc assay using niiitosoiniil en/ynic,'-"'

n.s.rydhr

the molecular nil'thiinism by which terbinaline inhihits the epoxidase is still not clear, and is the subject of
ongoing investigations. 'i'he observed kinetics and selectivity (see helow) tend to rule oul viirious mechanisms
based on covalent interaction, or competition with the
substrates or electron transport supply ol the enzyme. it
is possible that terbinaiine interacts with two sites on the
epoxidase, including a lipid binding site.-^-'
injiibition si'hrlivilii

as squalenc epoxidase is recognized as playing an
essential role in the biosynthesis of cholesterol in
mammals, it was considered important to detine the
effects of terhinaiine on the mammalian enzyme. the
compound was found to have only weak activity in a rat
liver model of cell-free stero! biosynthesis involving drug
concentrations several orders of magnitude higher than
those needed to inhibit a similar fungal system {table 2).
subsequent studies showed that oral terbinatine has
no effect on cholesterol levels or biosynthesis in animals
or in patients treated with the compound. this favourable situation is due to selectivity at the enzymatic level.
the nianimalian epoxidase being much less sensitive
than the fungal enzyme to inhibition by terbinatine.'-^-'' inhibition of the rat liver microsomal epoxidase is observed otily at high concentrations of terbinatine (table 2). and is qualitatively different from the
inhibition seen in candida, being competitive with both
squalene and liver soluble cytoplasmic factors.'
the fact that  xxxg2197xxx  is the primary target
ot terbinaftne has several implications for the clinical use
of the compound. first,  xxxg2197xxx  is not an
enzyme of the cytochrome l'-45() type (unlike the target
of the azoic antifungals |. this avoids any in-huilt
tendency to inhibit this physiologically diverse and
important class of enzymes. this has been confirmed by
in-vitro  xxxg813xxx  in-vivo studies in both animals and
humans.'^ " second, fungal pathogens that develop
resistance to other antifungals should not show crossresistance to terbinatine. so far. this has only been
demonstrated in laboratory experiments.'- " but such a
teature may become clinically relevant in the future.

conclusions
terbinatine exerts its antifungal action by means of a
potent specific inhibition of fungal  xxxg2197xxx . a
mechanism that is unique among orally active antifungals. this mechanism appears to be responsible for the
primary fungicida! action of the drug against dermato-

phytes and many other pathogenic fungi. inhibition of
the epoxidase is specitic and selective for the fungal
enzyme. terbinatine has no signitlcant effect on mammalian cholesterol biosynthesis and does not inhibit
enzymes of the cytochrome p-45() class.

references
1 pt'tranyi c, kyder n.s. stiitz a. allyliimiin; ticrivhtivcs: new class of
syiitlil'til- ini!iriink;il ngcnts iiiliibitiny funyiii  xxxg2197xxx .
sik'm-f 1984:224: 1259 4 1 .
2 geor^iupoulos a, i'ctranyi g, mieth h, drews ). in vitro activity of
nal'lilinc, ii new antifungal agent. antimirroh .aiients chcmolhcr
i4si: 19: js6-9.
i stiitz a. synthesis and structure-activity correlations within
allylaniinc antimycoties. ann n y acad sci 19s8: s44: 4(i-fi2.
4 kyder ns, mieth h. allylamine antifungal drugs. ctirr top med
mfirol 1991:4: 1 5s-ss.
5 ryder ns. seidl (;,'rriikep[\ mitect onhfaniiiiiyi'oiit d^u^;llal'lililie
on gruwtli ol and sterol biosynlhesis in ciindiditnlhh'uns. aniiniiiroh
,'\!li-iits clwmother i 9s4: 25: 4s j-7,
6 ryder ns. specilic inhibition of fungal sterol biosynthesis by sf hh527. a new allylamine antiriiycotic agent. aiiuwiiroh ai{cnts
clu-nwthn- i9ss: 27: 2s2-(i.
7 ryder ns, uiipont m-c, inhibition of  xxxg2197xxx  by
ailylaniine antimyeotic compounds: a comparative study of the
lungai and mammalian enzymes, liioihcin / 19t^5: 2il): 7(i5-7(l.
8 ryder ns. isiochemicai motte of action of the allylamine aniimyeotif agenis naftiiine and terbinaiine. in: in vitro and in vivo
evduitilian ot aiilitiiniinl aiicnls llwata k. \'an den bossche h. eds|.
amsterdam: klsevier. l4s(i; 89-99.
9 ryder ns. mechanism of action of the allylamine antimycotics. in:
recenl trends in the discovery, l\'velopnmu and f.viijuatioi} of
antifiiniitil aijnits (kromtling ra, ed). barcelona: ).r. prous, 1987:
4si-y.
h) kyiicr ns. mechanism of action and biochemical selectivity of
allylainine an1iniy<'otic agents. ann ;\' v aciid sci i98s: 544: 20h20.
i i ryder ns. mode ol'action of allylamines. in: sterol ltios;inilu'sis
inhibitors: i'liuriniuniliculund.ajirorlu'nncal av;w(.s'(bergi). plempcl
m. edsl, chiche.ster: ellis horwood, 19hh: 1 sl-fi7.
12 ryder ns. the metrhanism of action of terbinaiine. clin h.xp
dfrmatol 1989: 14: 98-100.
i i ryder ns. (ifftvt of aliylamine antimyeotic agents on lungai slerol
biosynthesis measured by steroi side-chain methylation. / gcii
microbiol i9ss: i j l : li95-(-.(12.
14 kyder ns, bioeliemical iiiode of action and cnantiomeric selectivity
of si)/ 89-485. a new triazole antimyeotic. / xjrd vet mi/ci/ 1 990:
28: i8s-94.
1 s schaude m. ackerbauer m. ,mieth h. inhibitory effect of antifungal
agents on germ tube formation in candida iilbiams. mykoscn 1987;
10: 281-7,
i fi van den bossche h, wiilemsens c, marichal p et iil. the molecular
basis for ihe antifungal activities of i\'-siibstituted azole derivatives.
!-'ocus on r 5 1 21 i. in: xk'dc of action ul atilifuniial atji-nts itrinci
apj, ryley |i;. edsl. cambridge: cambridge tniversity press, i9s4:
521-41.

17 petranyi c meingassner 1(1. mieth ii. antifungal activity of the
allylamine derivative lerbinafine in wire, aulimicwh aijenls cheinother i9s7: ji: i jf)t-8.
18 l'etranyi c, stiit/ a, kyder ns el al. i'ixperimental antimyeotic
activity of naftifine and terbinaiine. in: recent trends in the

 xxxd3314xxx  mode ol- action

disrovern, de^-elojimrnl und t'a'nltiaticn ul aniiftiniitil .lijcrks ll'romtling ra.edl, barcelona: |,k, prous, 1987:441 50,
1 9 ryder ns, seidi (.1, petranyi g, stiit/. a. mechanisni of lhe fungicidal
action of sf 86-j27. a new allylamine antimyeotic agent. in:
recent advances in chemothfrapfi (ishiyami ], ed i. tokyo: university
oftokyo press. 1985; 2 t s h - 9 .
20 meingassner \c, sleytr 1!b, petranyi c. s1-' 8fi-i27: effects on the
iiltrastruclure of'rni7r()j''t,i(l("i lueitttuiivplnites in vhro, in: i'nxeedinijs of the ! ith inienuititinul coniircss ii/ {.'henmthenipii, vienna
(spitzy kh, karrer k, eils). vienna: h. liggerman, 198}; ps
4.8/4-7.
21 .vleingassner ic muller m, sleytr l!b, sf hh-i27: eflects on the
ultrastructure of ch»(m( nibicans in vitro. in: proceedings of the i ith
intcriuilionul congress of chemotheraptj, viffi/iu (spitzy kh, karrer k,
eds), vienna: h. rggerman. 198i: ps 4,8/4-8.
12 meingassner jc., sloytr (i, petranyi (1, morphological chanjte.s
inihict'd by naltiline, a new antifungal agent, in triihojihtjton
n\eiitiiijriyi)h!ites. j hivest dernuito! 1981: 77: 444-^1.
ii long mt, steel cc, mercer i'll. location of squalene accumulation
and physiological effects of ergiislerol depletion in naftiline-grown
yeast, liiochem soc trans 1988; 16: 1044 5,
24 ryder ns.  xxxg2197xxx : enzymology and inhibition. in:
liiochemistrij of cell walls and membranes in i'unni ikuhn p). trinci
apj. lung mjcfii/., eds). berlin; springer-verlag. 1990: 1 8 9 - 2 0 i .
2 5 ryder ns. ixipont m-c. properties of a particulate squalene
epoxidase from candida idbitiins. liiochini liiophfis .-viu 1984: 794:

2() ryder ns.  xxxg2197xxx  as the target of antifungal allylamines. i'l'stic sci 1987: 21: 281-8.
27 kyder ns.  xxxg2197xxx  as a target ivir the allylamines.
liitnhem soc trans 1991: 19:774-7.
28 sehuster i. 'i'he interaction of representative members from two
classes of antimycotics—the azoles and the allylamines—with
cytochrome p-4s0 in .steroidogenic tissues and liver, xetiobioticii
1985: 15: 529-4fi.
29 schuster i, potential of allylaniitics lo inhibit cytochrome p-4s().
in; recent trends in ll\e discoverii, ik-velopmenl and i'vidtiutinn of
/lfi(i/'u«f/«//lfl('ji(,s(fromtling ra, ed). barcelona; |.k. prous, 1987;
471-8,
io len.scn \c, back 1)|, interaction of  xxxd3314xxx  with cytochrome p450 ifi wlroand in vivo m man. hrjclin i'harnmcol 1988:2(r. 2 ihl',
i i back dj. stevenson p. tjia |f. comparative effects of two antimyeotic agents, ketocona/ole and terhinaiine, on the metaholism of
idlbutaniidc,  xxxd2054xxx , cyclosporin and ethoxycoumarin
by human liver microsomes in vitro, lir j clin i'litirniiunl 1989; 28:
ififv-70.
i2 iatoux p, (iredt m, boeda p. kesislance to inhibitors of sterol
biosynthesis in lield isolates or laboratory strains of the eyespot
pathogen i'seudoccrcositorclla herpotrichoides. pestic sci 1988: 21:
119-jo.
j i carter ca, kendall s|, burden ks, ct ul. the iipid compositions of
two isolates of chidosporiiim cuciinicriniiin do not explain their
diflerenccs in sensitivity lo fungicides which inhibit sterol biosynthesis. pestic sci i989;2f>: 181-92.

