sulfamates and their
therapeutic potential
jean-yves winum,1* andrea scozzafava,2
jean-louis montero,1 claudiu t. supuran2*
1
laboratoire de chimie biomoléculaire, université montpellier ii, umr 5032,
ecole nationale supérieure de chimie de montpellier, 8 rue de l’ecole normale,
34296 montpellier cedex, france
2
laboratorio di chimica bioinorganica, room 188, dipartimento di chimica,
università degli studi di firenze, via della lastruccia 3,
i-50019 sesto fiorentino, italy

published online 11 october 2004 in wiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
doi 10.1002/med.20021
!

abstract: starting from the very simple molecule sulfamic acid, o-substituted-, n-substituted-, or
di-/tri-substituted sulfamates may be obtained, which show specific biological activities which
were or started to be exploited for the design of many types of therapeutic agents. among them,
sulfamate inhibitors of aminoacyl-trna synthetases (aarss) were recently reported, constituting
completely new classes of antibiotics, useful in the fight of drug-resistant infections. anti-viral
agents incorporating sulfamate moieties have also been obtained, with at least two types of such
derivatives investigated: the nucleoside/nucleotide human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) reverse
transcriptase inhibitors, and the hiv protease inhibitors (pis). in the increasing armamentarium of
anti-cancer drugs, the sulfamates occupy a special position, with at least two important targets
evidenced so far: the steroid sulfatases (stss) and the carbonic anhydrases (cas). an impressing
number of inhibitors of stss of the sulfamate type have been reported in the last years, with several
compounds, such as 667coumate among others, progressing to clinical trials for the treatment
of hormone-dependent tumors (breast and prostate cancers). this field is rapidly evolving, with
many types of new inhibitors being constantly reported and designed in such a way as to increase
their anti-tumor properties, and decrease undesired features (for example, estrogenicity, a problem
encountered with the first generation such inhibitors, such as emate). among the many isozymes
of cas, at least two, ca ix and ca xii, are highly overexpressed in tumors, being generally absent
in the normal tissues. inhibition of tumor-associated cas was hypothesized to lead to novel
therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cancer. many sulfamates act as very potent (low
nanomolar) ca inhibitors. the x-ray crystal structure of the best-studied isozyme, ca ii, with
three sulfamates (sulfamic acid, topiramate, and emate) has recently been reported, which

contract grant sponsor: 6th framework programme of eu (euroxy project).
correspondence to: jean-yves winum and claudiut. supuran, e-mail: winumj@univ-montp2.fr; claudiu.supuran@unifi.it
medicinal research reviews, vol. 25, no. 2, 186 ^228, 2005
ß 2004 wiley periodicals, inc.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

187

allowed for a rationale drug design of new inhibitors. indeed, low nanomolar ca ix inhibitors of
the sulfamate type have been reported, although such compounds also act as efficient inhibitors of
isozymes ca i and ii, which are not associated with tumors. a large number of anti-convulsant
sulfamates have been described, with one such compound, topiramate, being widely used clinically
as anti-epileptic drug. by taking into consideration a side effect of topiramate, an anti-epileptic
drug leading to weight loss in some patients, it has recently been proposed to use this drug and
related sulfamates for the treatment of obesity. the rationale of this use is based on the inhibition of
the mitochondrial ca isozyme, ca v, involved in lipogenesis. some sulfamates were also shown
to possess potent inhibitory activity against  xxxg430xxx , an
enzyme involved in cholesterol metabolism. one such agent, avasimibe, is in advanced clinical
trials for the treatment of hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis. thus, the sulfamate moiety offers
very attractive possibilities for the drug design of various pharmacological agents, which are on one
hand due to the relative ease with which such compounds are synthesized, and on the other one, due
to the fact that biological activity of most of them is impressive. ß 2004 wiley periodicals, inc. med res
rev, 25, no. 2, 186–228, 2005

key words: antibiotic; anti-cancer drug; anti-convulsant; anti-obesity drug; anti-viral agent;
avasimibe; carbonic anhydrase inhibitor; coumate; emate;  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitor;
sulfamate; sulfamic acid; topiramate

1. introduction
modern drug research anticipates the development of safe and innovative drugs that are expected to
bind highly selective to target receptors. this strategy helps to keep control over undesirable side
effects and to produce a unique pharmacological response. the various genome sequencing programs
have unraveled families of functionally similar proteins exhibiting related binding pockets.1
frequently enough, these proteins are involved in completely different biochemical pathways
accomplished in distinct compartments of an organism. accordingly, selective drugs have to address
specifically the small differences in the constitution of the binding sites of the various enzymes/
isozymes with which they are presumed to interact. more difficult to predict are side effects arising
from unexpected binding of a drug to functionally none-related proteins. also in such cases similarity
in shape and exposed physiochemical properties of the binding pockets must be taken into account.1
considering the vast combinatorial multiplicity to combine 30–50 atoms to compose typical drugsize molecules, the task to find a highly selective ligand for any of the known drug target receptors
appears achievable. however, interestingly enough, the tool box of medicinal chemists is composed
by a fairly small number of privileged building blocks recurrently used in potent drug molecules.1
one of such preferred chemical building blocks is the (substituted) sulfonamide group and its closely
related variant,2–6 the sulfamate moiety. indeed, considering the very simple compound sulfamic
acid 1, the parent molecule of this class of biologically active derivatives, at least four principal types
of derivatives can be obtained, the o-substituted derivatives 2, the n-substituted compounds 3, and
the o,n-di/trisubstituted compounds 4 and 5, respectively.
all compounds of type 1–5 possess pharmacological applications, as it will be shown shortly
throughout this review. indeed, the parent molecule 1 is a rather potent inhibitor of the zinc enzyme
carbonic anhydrase (ca, ec 4.2.1.1), the x-ray crystal structure of its adduct with the mostly widespread isozyme ca ii being reported recently7 (see detailed discussion later in the text). the osubstituted derivatives 2 possess inhibitory activity against several types of unrelated enzymes,
such as the cas and the steroid sulfatases (stss,  xxxg2222xxx .2) among others,2–6,8–10 whereas the
n-substituted compounds 3 primarily show applications as sweeteners.11 the di/trisubstituted
sulfamates 4 and 5 on the other hand show a very large variety of biological activities, as it will be

188

*

winum et al.

presented in the review. the present paper will deal mainly with derivatives of types 2, 4, and 5, since
the sulfamate sweeteners have thoroughly been reviewed earlier.11 the surprising pharmacological
and medicinal chemistry applications of these compounds will be reviewed considering the specific
targets with which they interact. to our best knowledge, this review broadens the area by being the
first comprehensive one for this class of derivatives considering all their biological activity and
possible pharmacological applications.

2. antibiotic sulfamates with aminoacyl trna synthase
inhibitory activity
the emergence of bacterial strains resistant to a number of anti-microbial agents is becoming a
serious worldwide health problem facing the medical community today. with the imminent threat of
the spread of vancomycin resistant enterococci (vre) and methicillin resistant staphylococcus
aureus (mrsa) in clinical practice, current anti-bacterial research efforts are focused on the
discovery of new targets and inhibitors directed towards them. among such recently evidenced
targets, the aminoacyl-trna synthetases (aarss) represent a family of essential enzymes responsible
for maintaining the fidelity of protein synthesis. they play an exclusive role in decoding the genetic
sequence on mrna by catalyzing the attachment of amino acids to their cognate trna prior to
delivery to the ribosome. the pivotal metabolic role played by bacterial aars enzymes has received
much attention as they are regarded as potential targets for developing new classes of anti-bacterial
agents.12,13
isolated in 1957 from streptomyces calvus, nucleocidin 6 is a naturally 5 0 -o-sulfamoyl
nucleoside which exhibits a broad anti-bacterial spectrum against both gram positive and gram
negative bacteria.14 however, its high toxicity has prevented its therapeutic use. the related 5 0 -osulfamoyl adenosines 7, 8, 9, 10 and some of their analogs15–18 have also been described and
demonstrated to possess anti-bacterial activity.
some of these derivatives were then shown to act by interfering with the biosynthesis of aarss,19
the sulfamoyl nucleoside acting as  xxxd81xxx  (amp) analogs. in this case, the
sulfamoyl group can mimic the 5 0 -phosphate moiety of the nucleotide and because of its unionized
nature can allow an enhanced penetration of the molecule through cellular membranes. it should be
noted that some sulfamoyl nucleosides with unnatural heterocyclic bases have been recognized for
their potent herbicidal activity.15–18

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

189

the strategy behind the development of new classes of antibiotics is to target mechanisms
important for bacterial cell growth.12,13 compounds which can selectively inhibit specific bacterial
aars without affecting their mammalian counterparts have been demonstrated to be effective antibacterials, with a novel mechanism of action.12,13

this approach has generated highly potent compounds, especially isoleucyl-trna synthetase
inhibitors which exhibited anti-bacterial activity against staphylococcus species and were effective
in the topical treatment of staphylococcal and streptococcal infections (clinical antibiotic

190

*

winum et al.

table i. inhibition of s. aureus trna synthetase by sulfamates 12a–c22

mupirocin).20 the goal followed by different research groups was to synthesize stabilized analogs of
aminoacyl adenylate 11 which is an intermediate in the two stage catalysis reaction of aa-trnas.
sulfamate surrogates 12 of the acylphosphate, intermediate of the aminoacylation reaction, have
demonstrated tight binding affinity and stability to a series of aarss (tables i–iii). for example, the
aminoacyl sulfamates 12a–c, 12d–i, and 13a–d showed nanomolar affinity for diverse aarss,
whereas their affinity for the human leurs was much higher, validating these targets as important for
the design of novel antibiotics devoid of significant toxicity for the human host.22,23,30
different aminoacyl sulfamates have been reported such as alars,21 argrs,22  xxxg1021xxx ,22
thrrs,22 ilers,23  xxxg1671xxx ,24  xxxg2012xxx ,25 and tyrrs26 and for some of them, and the interaction with
their cognate aa-trnas evaluated. as exemplified in the above mentioned tables, some aminoacyl
sulfamates analogs of type 13 are potent nanomolar inhibitors, also showing some selectivity for the
bacterial enzyme as compared to the human homolog (table iii).22–24
it must also be mentioned that pope et al.23 reported an isoleucylsulfamate analog 14 (sb234764) incorporating the dihydroxytetrahydropyran moiety of pseudomonic acid. in this model,
the dihydroxytetrahydropyran ring is analogous to the ribose moiety of the adenylate, with the

table ii. inhibition activities of sulfamates 12d–j toward
escherichia coli ilers23

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

191

table iii. inhibitory activity of thiazole sulfametes 13 against different amino acyl
rss and their selectivity for the bacterial versus the human enzyme30

a,b-unsaturated ester mimicking adenine. this derivative showed very high binding affinity to the
s. aureus ilers in the femtomolar range.23
to optimize the inhibition, structure–activity relationship of the adenine moiety in the sulfamate
analogs of different acyl adenylate 12 were described.27 inhibition of metrs and ilers from
escherichia coli by sulfamate analogs of met-amp and ile-amp with modifications of the adenine
group led to highly potent ilers inhibitors, especially the 2-iodo analog with ic50 values in the
nanomolar range.
it is also worth mentioning that the natural nucleoside antibiotic ascamycin (2-chloro-9-b-[5-o(n-l-alanyl)sulfamoyl-d-ribofuranosyl]-adenine) 15, isolated from streptomyces sp.28 although no
data of aars synthetases inhibition is available, this compound is described to exert its selective
anti-bacterial effect via a dealanylating enzyme localized on the cell membrane. dealanylated
ascamicyn can then cross bacterial cell membrane and inhibit cell protein synthesis.29
other analogs were created, which provided information on modifications to the nucleoside
motifs mentioned above. yu et al. have investigated a large series of aminoacyl adenylate mimics of
type 13 and 16 in which the adenine ring have been replaced with a variety of other heterocycles such
as thiazole30 and tetrazole.31 several of the thiazole derivatives 13 proved to have potent and selective
enzyme activity against gram positive and gram negative bacteria with ic50 values in the nanomolar
range (table iii).30
zydowsky et al. have reported in a patent in 1998,31 the synthesis of adenylate mimics bearing
tetrazole moieties, structurally related to 16, which inhibit isoleucyl-trna synthetase and have
efficacy against a broad spectrum of bacteria, fungi, and parasites. thirty-one compounds having a
very large number of substitution patterns have been investigated incorporating amino, alkyl, aryl,
cycloalkyl, alkoxy, and aryloxy groups. all the derivatives possessed enzyme inhibitory activities
with ic50 (e. coli ilers) in the range of 0.3–135 nm. these results showed that major modification in
the adenine ring can be tolerated without loss of the nanomolar level of inhibition.
until now, different research groups have described diverse l-aminoacid sulfamoyl adenosine
substrate analogs with highly potent and selective inhibition of aarss. since for the moment
no derivative belonging to this category is in clinical trials, these results suggest that aars inhibitors will continue to be of major interest for the design and the development of new anti-bacterial
agents.

192

*

winum et al.

3. anti-viral sulfamates
viral infections represent a major medical problem worldwide. among them acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), has been the most
devastating diseases since 1981, affecting over 40 million people at the end of 2003. treatment for
aids employs inhibitors of at least two of the enzymes required for replication of hiv, the reverse
transcriptase and the protease, and combination anti-retroviral therapy has become an effective
approach to manage hiv infection and reduce the viral load in hiv-infected patients (inhibitors of
the third enzyme, the integrase are also in clinical investigations, as well as other approaches for
interfering with the hiv life cycle).5,6,33,34 presently used anti-retroviral drugs consist of (i) nucleoside and nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (nrtis and ntrtis), (ii) non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (nnrtis), (iii) protease inhibitors (pis), and (iv) fusion inhibitors. the use of
these drugs in different combinations dramatically reduced the rate of hiv- and aids-related
morbidity and mortality starting in 1996.5,6,32–37 furthermore, anti-viral drugs can be used in the
management and treatment of other viral diseases such as hepatitis b and c, herpes simplex, varicella
zoster, influenza, and cytomegalovirus infections among others.5,6,33,34
the nucleoside analogs represent the first anti-hiv drugs that have been used clinically,
with zidovudine, and azt, the best known representatives.5,6,32–38 the importance of finding
metabolically stable analogs of mono-, di-, and tri-phosphate of nucleosides and acyclonucleosides
has been the subject of much research effort. different approaches have been described to facilitate
the transport through cell membrane of such drugs. one of them consists of mimicking the first
phosphate moiety by different bioisosters, such as the sulfamate –oso2nh–, which should be able
to cross membranes easily (due to the increased lipophilic character of such compounds, as compared
to those containing a phosphate moiety), and then be phosphorylated to produce nucleoside analogs
in their anti-viral active, triphosphate form.5,6,32–38
natural and unnatural 5-o-sulfamoylnucleosides, such as nucleocidin, were found to be
extremely toxic to uninfected cells, which prevented the clinical use and commercialization of any of
the compounds. vince et al. 39 described in 1995 the synthesis of sulfamoyl nucleosides related to
carbovir 17, but no anti-hiv activity was detected in this series of derivatives.
furthermore, these authors described the preparation of the zidovudine (azt) triphosphate
analog 18 in which the sulfamoyl moiety was used as replacement for the a-phosphate of azt
triphosphate (the active metabolite of zidovudine).32–37 this derivative displayed weak inhibition of
hiv rt compared to azt triphosphate, indicating that the modified phosphate moiety does not
exhibit the appropriate binding recognition for the enzyme active site.
jennings et al. 40 have reported the preparation of analogs of 5-iodo-2 0 -deoxyuridine-5 0 diphosphate. among the different products prepared, the sulfamoyl derivative 19, analog of the
monophosphate of 5-idu, showed activity against herpes simplex virus type 1.
carasco et al. reported anti-herpetic analogs of nucleoside diphosphate hexoses in which the
diphosphate bridge has been replaced by the –oconhso2 –o– group, as in 20.41–43 the structure–
activity relationship studies demonstrated that the 5 0 -o-sulfamoyl moiety was necessary for activity,
the sugar part being important for transport through the cell membrane. these compounds were
suggested to act by blocking the glycosylation of viral proteins leading to inhibition of viral
replication.
following the same idea, camarasa et al. 44 described the preparation and anti-hiv properties of
nucleoside diphosphate hexose in dideoxy series. the two nucleotides mimics 21 and 22 obtained,
showed anti-hiv activity in mt-4 cells at concentrations that are below the toxicity threshold.
among the drugs used for the treatment of hiv infection are also the protease inhibitors (pis).
recently, the group of vara prasad45 has reported the synthesis and the biological evaluation of nonpeptidic hiv protease inhibitor (pis) incorporating sulfamate moieties, analogs of the lead molecule
pd178390, of type 23.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

193

using the 5,6-dihydropyran-2-one template of the lead molecule 23, the authors investigated a
large series of derivatives 24 incorporating various substitutions and sulfamate functionalities. one of
the best derivatives in this series was compound 25 which showed ic50 value of 0.5 mm against the
wild type hiv protease, with a therapeutic index of >200. as for other types of anti-virals directed
against hiv, the main objectives in the design of novel protease inhibitors pis regards: (i) generation

194

*

winum et al.

of compounds with efficacy against wild type and mutant viruses;46 (ii) obtaining drugs with low
toxicity, that would primarily not induce lipodistrophy, increase triglyceride levels, or produce type ii
diabetes (as most of the first generation pis did);46 (iii) drugs that may be administered in simple
schedules, preferentially as monodose, without interference with the food intake, etc.46 the sulfamate
derivative may indeed be of great help in achieving such goals, due to the favorable physiocochemical properties of compounds incorporating them, but the 5,6-dihydropyran-2-one derivatives
discussed here are still in clinical development and it is not known whether they may find a place in the
increasing armamentarium of hiv-directed anti-virals.

4. anti-cancer sulfamates
a. sulfamates as inhibitors of steroid sulfatases
steroid sulfatases (stss,  xxxg2222xxx .2) are  xxxd3258xxx  hydrolyzing enzymes belonging to the larger
family of sulfatases.8 sts is a glycosylated protein with the molecular weight of the monomer around
63–73 kda, with conflicting evidences provided that the enzyme exists in oligomeric forms (reports
of monomeric to hexameric enzyme are available in the literature).8 the gene encoding sts is on
chromosome x, and predicts a 583 amino acid residues protein. sts is an integral membrane protein
predominantly associated with the endoplasmic reticulum, but smaller fractions are also present in
the golgi apparatus and the cell surface.8 the x-ray crystal structure of sts at a resolution of 2.60 å
has recently been reported, being similar to the related proteins arylsulfatases a and b.47 the active
site of sts contains a ca-formyl glycine (fgly) residue derived from a conserved cysteine through a
post-translational microsomal oxidation.47 this aldehyde moiety of fgly is hydrated in sts (as in
arylsulfatases a and b), being critical in the catalytic turnover, as it is involved in the transesterification of the sulfate substrate.8,47 in this way, an intermediate is formed, possessing a covalent
bond between the aldehyde hydrate moiety and the released sulfate group.8,47 a histidine residue
(which protonates the alcoholate/phenolate leaving group) and a divalent metal ion (mg2þ and ca2þ
in arylsulfatases a and b, respectively, and probably ca2þ in sts) are also involved in catalysis.8,47
presumably, the metal ion is responsible for the sulfate binding within the active site of the enzyme,
but most of these findings were demonstrated for arylsulfatases a and b, and not for sts for the
moment.8,47
sts not only regulates the formation of estrone from  xxxd2046xxx  (e1s), but also controls the
hydrolysis of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (dhea-s) (scheme 1).8,48–51  xxxg2222xxx  (es)
and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfatase ( xxxg2231xxx )—which represent older names of the same enzyme,
sts (rarely used presently)—catalyze the hydrolysis of e1s or dhea-s, releasing the corresponding unconjugated steroids (scheme 1).47–51 sulfamates of type 2, close mimics of sulfates,
were discovered to act as potent inhibitors of stss by potter and reed52,53 and thus, sts became a
key therapeutic target for developing agents against hormone-dependent tumors.8,48–53 inhibition of
sts by sulfamates, generally possessing the general formula 2, r-oso2nh2 (where r is an aromatic
moiety/polycyclic ring system, see later in this review)48–53 is of critical interest for designing novel
therapies not only against breast cancer,8,48–53 but also for androgen-dependent skin diseases,54 in
cognitive dysfunctions in which sts inhibition was shown to enhance learning and spatial memory,55
or for the design of immune modulators, as it was shown that sts inhibition plays a role in regulating
t-helper cell function.56
excellent reviews on sts inhibitors (stsis) are available,8,48–51 in which the drug design of
these agents is presented in a historical context (since the steroidal sulfamates among others were the
first compounds for which this feature has been described).52,53 here we shall discuss sulfamate
stsis based on their chemical structure rather than on historical backgrounds, and we shall deal with:
(i) aromatic (phenyl- and biphenyl-derived) stsis, (ii) heterocyclic stsis, and (iii) steroidal
sulfamates. it should be mentioned that up to now, only very few studies used purified sts, and most

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

195

scheme 1. origin of estrogens in hormone-dependent tumors, and the role of  xxxg2222xxx  (sts).

investigators worked with microsomal preparations of the enzyme, in particular from the placenta.8
thus, it is rather difficult to compare inhibitors which were assayed in different studies, with diverse
enzyme preparations and assay methods. furthermore, most of the time ic50 (and not ki values) were
provided for these inhibitors, the first parameter being dependent on the enzyme concentration
(unlike the second one).8 in consequence, when comparing inhibitors from different studies, only a
qualitative ranking of their potency can be obtained.8 the most important types of stsis will be
discussed in the next sections.
1. aromatic (phenyl- and biphenyl-derived) sulfamates as  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors
ahmed’s group investigated in detail the most simple such compound, phenyl sulfamate and its 3- or
4-substituted congeners of types 26–28 as stsis,57–62 also showing that the pka of the sulfamate
moiety is one of the key factors affecting potency of these enzyme inhibitors (generally with the more
acidic compounds acting as stronger inhibitors57). in one of these studies, the aliphatic sulfamates of
the type r–oso2nh2, where r=c2 –c14 n-alkyl or halogenoalkyl moieties, have also been
investigated, but their potency as stsis was shown to be very weak (ic50 of >10 mm).58
for the simple aromatic derivatives 26–28, as seen from data of table iv, the parent compound,
phenyl sulfamate 26a, and some of its 3- or 4-methyl-substituted derivatives 26b, are practically
devoid of sts inhibitory activity,57 but substitution either in the 3- or 4-position with halogens or
electron withdrawing groups (cyano, nitro) leads to a strong enhancement of the activity (the best
inhibitor in this series was 3-nitrophenylsulfamate 26g).57,58 the same was observed for carbonyl
compound type 27a–h, with sts inhibitory activity generally increasing with the increase of the
aliphatic chain (best inhibitor was the octyl derivative 27g, with an ic50 of 3.4 mm, but the nonyl
derivative was then less active, ic50 of 13 mm), whereas the phenyl-, benzyl-, or styryl-substituted
compounds 27i–k were less active as compared to the aliphatic derivatives.59 good activity showed
the esters 28, with the cycloalkyl derivatives generally more active than the corresponding n-alkyl

196

*

winum et al.

analogs.61,62 thus, as for the structurally related ketones 27, for the n-alkyl esters 28a–j, sts
inhibitory activity generally increased with the increase of the aliphatic chain, the best inhibitor being
the n-heptyl derivative 28g (ic50 of 3.4 mm). activity then diminished with a further increase of the
alkyl chain to the c8–c10 derivatives. for the cycloalkyl compounds, activity increased from c5 to
c8, with the last compound (28n) achieving submicromolar activity (ic50 of 0.17 mm).61,62 it should
be mentioned that all these compounds reported by ahmed’s group were tested on placental
microsomes sts.57–62
interesting activity showed the benzophenone mono- or bis-sulfamates 29 reported by
nussbaumer’s group63 (these compounds were tested against recombinant, purified sts). thus,
diversely mono-substituted derivatives of types 29a–d showed quite similar inhibitory properties,
with ic50’s around 5 mm, whereas the isomeric bis-sulfamates 29e and 29f were much more active,
showing submicromolar ic50’s (table iv).63
the biphenyl-derived sulfamates of type 30 also showed good sts inhibitory properties, such
compounds being reported by several groups.64–66 thus, the parent compound 30a is a weak inhibitor, but substitution of the second phenyl ring (with electron-withdrawing moieties of the cyano
or ester type) generally leads to a marked increase in potency. mono-64 or dicyano-substituted
biphenyl sulfamates65,66 were shown to be potent inhibitors, with one such derivative, tzs-8578
(2 0 ,4 0 -dicyano-biphenylsulfamate) showing promising in vivo activity in inhibiting the growth of

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

197

breast tumors in a post-menopausal breast cancer rat model.66 the tyramine-derived sulfamates
31 designed by li et al.67 were among the most potent non-steroidal sulfamates reported [ic50 of
1.6 nm (placental microsomes), and 56 nm (hek-239 transfected cells) for the tetradecanoamide
31h (du-14)]. sts inhibitory activity was very much influenced by the length of the chain of the
alkanoylamide moiety, with best activity detected for the tetradecanoamide mentioned above. in
consequence, using such derivatives as lead compounds, the same group68 reported structurally
related derivatives in which the ethylene bridge of the tyramine-based compounds 31 has been
shortened to 0 or 1 ch2 moieties, or enlarged to the propylene derivatives, whereas the alkanoylamide
groups were varied from c8 to c16 derivatives.68 still no better inhibitors as compared to 31 have
table iv.  xxxg2222xxx  (sts) inhibition with aromatic sulfamates 26–3357– 69

(continued)

198

*

winum et al.

table iv. (continued)

been detected in this way. but the most potent stsis of this type were reported by poirier’s group
(derivatives of type 32),69 with the best compounds, the hexyl derivative 32a and the octyl derivative
32b showing an ic50 of 0.4 nm and 0.5 nm, respectively, being more potent than emate (ic50 of
0.9 nm), the standard stsi par excellence (see discussion later in the text).

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

199

potter’s and reed’s groups recently reported the first dual inhibitors of sts and aromatase, of
type 33.70 some of the halogeno-substituted derivatives 33b–d showed ic50 values for sts in the
range of 20–40 nm, and for aromatase in the range of 0.8–12 nm. the blockade of both enzymes
involved in estrogen biosynthesis (aromatase and sts) would thus afford compounds with more
effective potency in the endocrine therapy of tumors.70
very interesting compounds of type 34, were reported by von angerer’s group.71 these 2phenyl-indole sulfamates 34 possess a large variety of r1–r3 groups, such as: r1 ¼ ethyl; (ch2)n –
con–cyclobutyl (n ¼ 5, 6); (ch2)6 –n-cyclobutyl; (ch2)10 –so2 –cyclopentyl; r2 ¼ h, oh,
sulfamoyl; r3 ¼ h, oh, sulfamoyl, cn, coome, conh2 among others, and showed ic50 values
in the range of 5 nm–0.5 mm, against sts from mcf-7 human breast cancer cells.71
li’s group72 reported sulfamates possessing the tamoxifen scaffold, of type 35, some of which
showed good sts inhibitory activity (the dimethyl-substituted compound 35a showed an ic50 of
17 mm against rat liver microsomal sts) (table iv).
2. heterocyclic sulfamates as  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors
potter’s and reed’s groups73–75 designed some of the most interesting stsis reported up to date.
thus, the coumarin-based derivatives of type 36 (table v) mimic the a and b rings of the sts
substrate estrone-3-sulfate. the nature of the r1 and r2 groups in derivatives 36 has been found to
be the most important factor influencing the sts inhibitory activity of these derivatives.73–75 the
parent compound in the series, 36a was inactive, but the 4-methylcoumarin-7-o-sulfamate 36b,
coumate, already showed some inhibition at 0.1 mm, and was used as lead compound for the
design of more potent stsis. indeed, different alkyl moieties (me, et, n-pr) in the 3 and 4 positions of
the coumarin ring led to more potent inhibitors (derivatives 36c–g), whereas cyclization of the r1–
r2 moieties, by means of (ch2)n groups led to a dramatic increase of activity. these tricyclic
inhibitors were called 665coumate (36h), 666coumate (36i), 667coumate (36j), etc.,
depending on the number of atoms in the third cycle (the last compound synthesized was
6615coumate, 36q).75 the oxepin derivative 37 structurally related to coumarins 36 has also been
reported by the same group.73
sts inhibitory activity in the coumate series was indeed very good, with these tricyclic
compounds achieving low nanomolar affinity for the human placental microsomes enzyme.73–75
thus, 665coumate is a moderate inhibitor, with an ic50 of 200 nm, but activity rapidly increases
by increasing the number of methylene groups in the third cycle, arriving at 8 nm for 667coumate
(which is in clinical trials, being the most advanced compound among all stsis investigated up to
now),73–75 2.4 nm for 669coumate and 1 nm for 6610coumate. a further increase in the size
of this ring leads to a decrease of the sts inhibitory properties, with 6615coumate being again a
moderate inhibitor (similarly with the oxepine-sulfamate 37). it should also be mentioned that these
compounds are non-estrogenic, which constitutes a very positive pharmacological feature.73–75
nussbaumer’s group76,77 reported very interesting  xxxd1757xxx  and thiochromenone sulfamates
of type 38, with good sts inhibitory activity (table vi).
although both 6- and 7-sulfamate derivatives of this type were obtained, the most investigated
were the former derivatives, 38. the nature of the 2-substituent (r) and that of the heteroatom x
greatly influenced the sts inhibitory activity of these derivatives.76,77 thus, the 2-phenethyl and
2-nonyl chromenones 38a,b were moderate inhibitors, whereas activity increased when changing the
2-moiety to tert-butyl, cyclododecyl, 4-pentylbicyclo[2.2.2]-oct-1-yl, or 1-adamantyl (always in the
 xxxd1757xxx  series, x=o). the last derivative, 38h was one of the best stsis ever reported (ic50
of 5.6 nm, against purified, recombinant sts).76,77 activity was increased even more for the
corresponding thiochromenones (38i–k), with the adamantyl derivative 38i being a highly potent
inhibitor (ic50 of 0.34 nm).76,77 still, some of these compounds showed estrogenic activity, which
was not correlated with the sts inhibitory activity.77 compound 38g in this series, which was shown

200

winum et al.

*

table v. sts inhibition with coumarin-based sulfamates 36 and the oxepin derivative
3773–75

a

humanplacental microsomes enzyme.

to lack estrogenicity while potently inhibiting sts, has an ideal in vitro profile for the treatment of
breast cancer by inhibiting sts, and was selected for preclinical evaluation.77 the synthesis and
results from the in vitro evaluation of 6-(adamantan-2-ylidene-hydroxybenzoxazole)-o-sulfamate
39 as an irreversible inhibitor of sts has also been reported.78 this compound was found to be a
potent inhibitor of purified sts and specific for this enzyme relative to human arylsulfatases a and b.
in cellular assays with human keratinocytes, sebocytes, and fibroblasts, 39 blocked sts activity with
ic50 values in the range of 0.15–0.8 nm, and in mcf-7 breast cancer cells with ic50 ¼ 2.3 nm, while
it did not bind to estrogen receptors alpha and beta. thus, 39 is a candidate for further investigation of
its potential as a drug to be used in androgen- and estrogen-dependent diseases.78 nussbaumer’s
group79 also reported some fluorogenic substrates for sts, belonging to the benzo-coumarin-sulfate
type of derivatives, starting from the coumarin-based sulfamate inhibitors reported by potter’s
group73–75 which were discussed above.
3. steroidal sulfamates as  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors
the steroidal sulfamates were, from the historical point of view, the first type of potent sulfamate
stsis discovered.52,53 in a group of steroid sulfate surrogates investigated by potter’s group, it has

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

201

table vi. sts inhibition with (thio) xxxd1757xxx -based sulfamates 38 and benzoxazole
sulfamate 3976–78

been discovered that estrone-3-o-sulfamate, emate, 40a, acts as a very potent stsi, with an ic50 of
around 18 nm.52,53,80 this important discovery led thereafter to a detailed investigation of diversely
substituted emate derivatives, of type 40b–k (table vii).80,81 the reason why novel derivatives
were investigated was mainly due to the fact that it has been observed that emate is highly
estrogenic in vivo, and thus it could not be developed for clinical use, although it possessed such an
impressive sts inhibitory activity.82
in this series of derivatives of type 40, the nature of the r1 and r2 groups strongly influenced
biological activity. such bulky groups (n-propyl or allyl) led to very ineffective stsis, whereas
methoxy, nitro, and difluoromethyl were quite beneficial for activity, with the 2-nitro- (40d) and 2difluoromethyl- (40k) derivatives being extremely potent inhibitors, more efficient than emate
itself.80,81
excellent sts inhibitory properties were also reported for the reduced emate, derivative 41
(r=h), denominated e2mate, as well as for the corresponding bis-sulfamate 42 (r=h), the
corresponding 2-methoxy- or 2-ethyl-substituted derivatives 41, 42 (r ¼ meo or et) among
others.51,83 the oxime 43 was also shown to be a potent stsi (ic50 of 80 nm).84 some of these
compounds were also shown to be active in inhibiting the growth of multi-drug-resistant breast
cancer cells.51,83
other modifications of the d ring in this type of steroidal stsis have been reported by several
groups.85–88 li et al.85 showed that the isomeric amides 44 and 45 (r ¼ c7–c10 unbranched
aliphatic chains) behave as very potent stsis, with some of these derivatives (such as 44a and 45a,
table viii) showing ic50 values of 0.5 nm. the length of the alkyl chain was the main parameter

202

winum et al.

*

table vii. sts inhibition with steroidal sulfamates 4080,81

a

humanplacental microsomes enzyme.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

203

influencing sts inhibitory activity, but no detailed inhibition data are provided for all the synthesized
compounds in this valuable study.85 poirier’s group86 obtained the 17a-benzyl- or 17a-tert-butylbenzyl-derivatives of estradiol-3-o-sulfamate 46a and 46b, which showed impressive sts inhibitory
activities, these compounds having ic50 values of 0.39 and 0.15 nm, respectively, against sts from
kidney 239 transfected cells. fisher et al.87,88 reported the synthesis and sts inhibitory activity of a

204

*

winum et al.

table viii. sts inhibition with steroidal sulfamates 40–4780,81

very interesting series of derivatives of type 47, to which an additional six-membered ring has been
attached to ring d of the steroid system. the nature of the moiety r substituting the imide nitrogen
atom of this ring critically influenced sts inhibitory activity, with the n-propyl ( xxxd751xxx ), 2pyridylmethyl (47j), and benzyl derivatives (47l) behaving as very potent inhibitors (ic50 values in
the range of 1–3 nm, against placental microsomes sts), whereas other substitutions were less
favorable (table viii). ciobanu and poirier89 reported a solid phase, parallel synthesis of a library of
17a-substituted estyradiol sulfamates of type 48, in which the r and r1 moieties were hydrophobic
elements of molecular diversity. very good sts inhibitory properties (in the low nanomolar range)
were detected for many members of this series, such as the phenylalanine derivative possessing the
scaffold 48.89 brust’s group90,91 investigated 16a-fluoroestradiol-3,17b-disulfamate 49, which
behaves as a very potent stsi. the 18f-labeled derivative of 49 was also used to measure the amount
of es in various rat brain regions using quantitative in vitro autoradiography.90 because this
radiotracer also binds to earbonic anhydrase (ca) present in the brain, it is only of limited use for
in vivo imaging studies (see the next section for the sulfamates as inhibitors of cas). the distribution
of 18f-labeled derivative of 49 was also studied in rats, tumor-bearing nude mice, and piglets.91 in all
species evidence for binding to a second target, ca, was obtained. es and ca inhibitors significantly
reduced the radiotracer uptake in various organs but not in tumors. it was concluded that 18f-labeled
49 binds to es and ca in vivo but this binding was not strong enough to allow tumor imaging by
means of positron emission tomography (pet).91 many other steroidal stsis were reported in the
patent literature and were recently reviewed by nussbaumer and billich.8

b. sulfamates as inhibitors of carbonic anhydrases
the metallo-protein carbonic anhydrase (ca, ec 4.2.1.1) is one of the most widely-spread
biological catalysts over all the phylogenetic tree, with five distinct classes of such enzymes presently
known2–4,92–94: the a-cas (present in vertebrates, bacteria, algae, and cytoplasm of green plants),

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

205

the b-cas (predominantly in bacteria, algae, and chloroplasts of both mono as well as dicotyledons),
the g-cas (in archaea and some bacteria),92 the d-cas, isolated in some marine diatoms,93 and the
e-cas, recently found in cyanobacteria and some chemolithoautotrophic bacteria.94 these
enzymes catalyze the reversible hydration of carbon dioxide to bicarbonate, handling in this way
one of the simplest and most important biomolecules (co2), generated in many physiological
processes.2–4,92–94 many of the presently known cas possess other catalytic activities (such as
esterase, hydrolyze, etc.) but their significance from the physiologic/pathologic point of view is
unknown.2–4 an increasing number of such enzymes are constantly being discovered both in higher
vertebrates, humans included, as well as in many other organisms, such as archaea, bacteria,
protozoa, plants, etc.2–4,92–94 modulating the activity of these enzymes via specific inhibitors or
activators, as well as the study of their gene expression in different pathologies, allows for novel
therapeutic approaches in many diseases.2–4 the a- and b-cas are zinc enzymes, whereas for the gand d-classes, alternative metal ions can be used, such as fe(ii), cd(ii), or co(ii) among others.92,93
little is known for the moment regarding the metal ion requirement of the recently isolated e-cas.94
the best studied enzymes are the a-cas, as they are present in higher vertebrates, including
humans, and also because they were the first to be discovered.1–5 fourteen different such isozymes or
ca-related proteins (carp) were described in humans, with very different catalytic activity,
susceptibility to be inhibited, subcellular localization, and tissue distribution. 1–5,95 basically, there
are several cytosolic forms (ca i–iii,  xxxg299xxx ), four membrane-bound isozymes (ca iv, ca ix, ca
xii, and ca xiv), one mitochondrial form (cav—with two isoforms, cava and  xxxg297xxx ) as well as a
secreted ca isozyme, ca vi1–3,95–97 (table ix). the tissue distribution and the proposed, multiple
physiological functions of the catalytically active mammalian ca isozymes are shown in table x.
it may be seen that there are virtually no organs or tissues in humans (higher vetrebrates), in which
these enzymes do not play very important physiological roles, connected with the secretion of
electrolytes, ion transport, ph homeostasy, metabolism and biosynthetic reactions, cell adhesion,
cell proliferation and differentiation, modulation of neuronal transmission, etc. (table x). several
ca isozymes (such as ca ix, xii, and carp viii) were reported to be predominantly present in
cancer cells, generally lacking from the non-tumoral corresponding tissues,2–5,96–98 and this is the
reason why ca inhibitors (cais) are now considered as important agents for the design of novel
anti-cancer therapies.96–98
the zn(ii) ion of a-cas is essential for catalysis.1–5 x-ray crystallographic data (on isozymes
i–v, xii, and xivof human or murine origin) showed that the metal ion is situated at the bottom of a
15 å deep active site cleft, being coordinated by three histidine residues (his 94, his 96, and his 119)
and a water molecule/hydroxide ion.1–5,95–97 the zinc-bound water is also engaged in hydrogen
bond interactions with the hydroxyl moiety of thr 199, which in turn is bridged to the carboxylate
moiety of glu 106; these interactions enhance the nucleophilicity of the zinc-bound water molecule,
and orient the substrate (co2) in a favorable location for the nucleophilic attack.1–5 the active form
of the enzyme is the basic one, with hydroxide bound to zn(ii).1–5 this strong nucleophile attacks the
co2 molecule bound in a hydrophobic pocket in its neighborhood (the elusive substrate-binding site
comprises residues val 121, val 143, and leu 198 in hca ii, the best studied isozyme),1–4,97 leading
to the formation of bicarbonate coordinated to zn(ii). the bicarbonate ion is then displaced by a water
molecule and liberated into solution, leading to the acid form of the enzyme, with water coordinated
to zn(ii), which is catalytically inactive.1–5 to regenerate the basic form, a proton transfer reaction
from the active site to the environment takes place, which may be assisted either by active site
residues (such as his 64—the proton shuttle in isozyme ca ii or ca ix) or by buffers present in the
medium.1–5 the process may be schematically represented by equations (1) and (2) below:
2þ

ezn2þ --oh þ co2 , ezn2þ --hco
3 , ezn --oh2 þ hco3
2þ

2þ



þ

ezn --oh2 , ezn --ho þ h

ð1þ
ð2þ

206

*

winum et al.

table ix. higher vertebrate a-ca isozymes, their relative co2 hydrase activity,
affinity for sulfonamide inhibitors, and sub-cellular localization2 –5,95–97

#
moderate at ph 7.4, highat ph 8.2 or higher.
*thenative carpisozymesdonotcontain zn(ii), sothat theiraffinity for thesulfonamide inhibitorshasnot beenmeasured.
by site-directed mutagenesis it is possible to modify these proteins and transform them in enzymes with ca-like activity,
which probablyare inhibitedby sulfonamides, but no studies onthis subjectare available presently.

the rate limiting step in catalysis of most a-cas is the second reaction, i.e., the proton transfer
that regenerates the zinc-hydroxide species of the enzyme.1–5
cas are inhibited primarily by two main classes of inhibitors: the metal complexing inorganic
anions (such as cyanide, cyanate, thiocyanate, azide, hydrogensulphide, etc.) and the unsubstituted
sulfonamides possessing the general formula rso2nh2 (r ¼ aryl; hetaryl; perhaloalkyl) which
coordinate to the metal ion of the enzyme.1–5,95–97 several sulfonamide cais were used for decades
as diuretics, anti-glaucoma, anti-epileptic, anti-ulcer agents, or as drugs for treating other neurological/neuromuscular disorders,2–4 whereas presently several such agents still find wide applications
in therapy, mainly as topically acting anti-glaucoma drugs,2–4 anti-cancer,5,97–99 or anti-obesity
agents.100 although as mentioned above, sulfonamides were considered the moiety par excellence
for designing potent cais, in recent years many sulfamates were shown to possess very strong such
properties. this is the first review of sulfamates as cais.
the first sulfamates, which were investigated as cais, of type 50, were reported by lo et al.101
in the search of topically acting anti-glaucoma agents. indeed, several m- or p-imidazolylphenyloxyethyl/propylsulfamates 50 were shown to possess ca inhibitory properties (ic50 in the
range of 23–250 nm, against bovine red cell ca) and to moderately decrease intraocular pressure in
albino rabbits after topical administration directly into the eye.101
but the investigation of the simplest sulfamate, i.e., sulfamic acid 1, as cai has been performed
some years later by briganti et al.102 who showed that sulfamic acid is a moderately weak cai, with
ki of 21 mm against the human isozyme hca i, and of 97 mm against hca ii—for the esterase activity

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

207

of these enzymes. the x-ray crystal structure of the adduct of this compound with the physiologically
most important isozyme (hca ii) has been subsequently reported by the same group.7 it was shown
that sulfamic acid binds to the zinc ion of the enzyme as a dianion, via its (nh)so32 sulfamate
bianionic species (zn–n distance of 2.07 å), whereas the nh moiety of the inhibitor also participates
in a hydrogen bond with thr 199og (fig. 1). an additional third hydrogen bond is formed from this
nh to an adjacent water molecule at 2.75 å distance. the second nearest contact of the ligand to zn,
an oxygen atom, leading to extra-coordination, is at a distance of approximately 3.07 å from the
metal ion, whereas the remaining two oxygens of the so3 moiety are involved in two other hydrogen
bonds, one with the backbone nh group of thr 199 at a distance of 2.99 å and the other to a water
table x. tissue distribution and proposed function of catalytically active
mammalian ca isozymes96,97

208

*

winum et al.

table x. (continued )

molecule at a distance of 2.87 å. this extended extra-coordination results in a distorted tetrahedral
arrangement around the metal ion, the remaining three ligands of zinc being his 94, his 96, and his
119 (as in the uninhibited enzyme).7 in summary, this very simple inhibitor showed a large number of
favorable contacts in the binding pocket of ca ii, and may be used as a lead molecule for the design of
tighter-binding cais. this has been achieved in several studies, which will be presented in the
following section.
indeed, two sugar sulfamates103,104 topiramate 51 and rwj-37497 52 were recently shown to
behave as very potent cais and their x-ray crystal structures in complex with isozyme hca ii have
been reported105,106 (see fig. 3).

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

209

figure 1. hca ii adduct with sulfamic acid1 (as dianionic species) as determined by x-ray crystallography.7 the zinc coordination
sphere and amino acid residues in the neighborhood of the bound inhibitor are shown (figures represent distances in —). reproduced from abbate et al.7 with permission from american chemical society, copyright 2002.

both sugar derivatives 51 and 52 bind with their sulfamate moiety to zinc, resulting in a
tetrahedral coordination of the metal ion (fig. 2), which is coordinated to the three histidine residues
as in the uninhibited enzyme (his 94, 96, and 119) as well as the nitrogen atom of the sulfamate
moiety, which is presumably in deprotonated state, as for the sulfonamide cais complexed within the

figure 2. the hca ii^emate 40a adduct: the enzyme is shown as ribbon diagram, with the zinc ion (central blue sphere) and its
protein ligands (his 94, 96, and 119) shown. the inhibitor molecule lies towards the hydrophobic half of the enzyme cavity. reproduced from abbate et al.110 with permission from elsevier, copyright 2004.

210

*

winum et al.

active site of the enzyme.1–4,97,107 in addition, both compounds make two hydrogen bonds to the side
chain oxygen atom of thr 199 and the backbone nh nitrogen atom of the same residue. the hydroxy
group of thr 199 forms an additional hydrogen bond with glu 106, such that the thr 199 hydroxyl
acts as a hydrogen-bond acceptor for inhibitor binding. a total of eight hydrogen bonds between
topiramate bound to the enzyme and amino acid residues from the cavity have been evidenced, which
explain the very potent inhibitory activity of topiramate against hca ii (ki of 5 nm).106 despite the
similarity in anchoring to the zn(ii) ion, a surprising difference is observed in the binding mode of the
two inhibitors with respect to the ring system. topiramate also forms several hydrogen bonds to
amino acid side chains in a hydrophilic binding pocket (asn 67, gln 92) and to a water molecule that
donates a hydrogen bond to thr 200 (fig. 2a). in addition, this water interacts with the oxygen atom
of the six-membered ring of 51. rwj-37497 52 on the other hand, shows a quite different binding
mode in which the ring system is rotated by approximately 180 in comparison to that of topiramate.
therefore, surprisingly, the cyclic sulfate group points towards a more hydrophobic pocket lined by
residues leu 198, pro 202, phe 131 (although this moiety is more hydrophilic as compared to the
corresponding diisopropylidene moiety of topiramate), and except for the sulfamate anchoring group
no further hydrogen bonds are observed (fig. 2b). rwj-37497 was reported to have an ic50 of 36 nm
against hca ii.105 it is interesting to note that the topiramate related analog 53, possessing the
sulfamate-methyl moiety in a different position as compared to 51, is a much weaker cai as
compared to topiramate or rwj-37497, having ki’s of 400 mm against hca i, 16 mm against hca ii
and 27 mm against bca iv (h, human; b, bovine; m, murine isozymes).106
potter’s and reed’s groups also investigated the ca inhibitory properties of several of the stsis
developed during their research of novel therapies for hormone-dependent tumors (see the preceding
section for details).108,109 some of their best stsis, such as 667coumate 36j, emate 40a, the
bis-sulfamate 42 (r ¼ et) as well as the coumarin sulfamate 36 (r1 ¼ me; r2 ¼ cyclohexylethyl)
were tested as hca ii inhibitors, being shown to possess ic50 values of 17, 9, 290, and 15 nm,
respectively.108,109 it may be seen that except for the bis-sulfamate 42 possessing an ethyl group in
ortho (which presumably interferes with the coordination to the zn(ii) ion within the enzyme active
site), the other sulfamates investigated showed very strong ca ii inhibitory properties, which may be
a beneficial feature for the anti-tumor effects of such pharmacological agents. thus, cas may act as
delivery systems for stsis to their site of action, especially in tumors where the ph is acidic. in this
site, the inhibitor may be released from the ca active site and act as an inhibitor of the sts, showing
in this way a dual anti-tumor activity (i.e., inhibition of two enzyme types involved in tumorigenesis,
ca (as isozymes ix and xii), and sts). the same group also reported docking studies of some of
these inhibitors to hca ii108 and hca xii.109 the predictions regarding emate binding to hca ii108
have shown that the compounds bind within the active site in a different orientation than that observed
after the report of the x-ray crystal structure of emate with hca ii, which has been done soon
thereafter110 (figs. 3 and 4).
the binding of emate 40a to the hca ii is similar to that of other sulfamates/sulfonamides,
considering the interactions of the zinc anchoring group (fig. 4), but differs considerably when the
steroidal scaffold of the inhibitor is analyzed. this part of the inhibitor interacts only within the
hydrophobic half of the ca active site (fig. 3), interacting with residues val 121, phe 131, val 135,
and pro 202, and leaving the hydrophilic half able to accommodate several water molecules not
present in the uncomplexed enzyme (fig. 4). in addition, a very short bond of 1.78 å between the zinc
ion and the coordinated nitrogen atom of the sulfamate moiety is observed, which may explain the
high affinity of this inhibitor for hca ii (ki of 10 nm).110
but the most interesting studies regarding the design of cais of the sulfamate type with putative
anti-tumor applications have been reported by winum et al.9,10 in these studies, detailed sar data
were obtained for two series of sulfamates, the first one preponderantly including aromatic and
steroidal derivatives9 (table xi), whereas the second one including mostly aliphatic sulfamates10
(table xii), which were tested for their interaction with the red cell isozymes hca i and ii, but also

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

211

figure 3. schematic representation of the binding mode of topiramate 51 (a) and rwj-37497 to hca ii (b).105,106 hydrogen bonds
between enzyme and inhibitor are shown as dotted lines. distances are given in — and are measured between the corresponding
non-hydrogen atoms. reproduced from antel et al.107 with permission from crc press, copyright 2004.

for the first time, with the tumor-associated isozyme ca ix, which is overexpressed in a large range
of tumors.111
as seen from data of table xi, very potent (nanomolar) inhibitors were detected against the three
investigated ca isozymes.9 best hca i inhibitors were phenylsulfamate 54a, and some of its

212

*

winum et al.

figure 4. detailed schematic representation of emate 40a bound within the hca ii active site (figures represent distances in —).
reproduced from abbate et al.110 with permission from elsevier, copyright 2004.

4-halogenoderivatives, as well as the aliphatic compound n-octyl sulfamate 54r (ki’s in the range of
2.1–4.6 nm—these are among the most potent hca i inhibitors ever reported!). against hca ii,
low nanomolar inhibitors (1.1–5 nm) were phenylsulfamate 54a and some of its 4-halogeno-/nitroderivatives, n-octyl sulfamate 54r, and estradiol 3,17b-disulfamate 54u among others. all the
investigated sulfamates showed efficient ca ix inhibitory properties, with inhibition constants in
the range of 18–63 nm. the best ca ix inhibitor detected so far was 4-chlorophenylsulfamate
54d (ki of 18 nm). these data are critical for the design of novel anti-tumor properties, mainly for
hypoxic tumors that overexpress ca ix,111 which are non-responsive to radiation or chemotherapy.
the anti-tumor properties of the stsis (discussed above in this review) in clinical trials may on the
other hand also be due to their potent inhibitory properties of ca isozymes involved in
tumorigenicity, such as ca ii and especially ca ix, and constitute an attractive dual mechanism
of action for such anti-tumor agents.9,10
due to the excellent and unexpected ca inhibitory properties of the only aliphatic sulfamate 54r
investigated in the first study,9 the same group reported a large series of aliphatic and some
polycyclic) sulfamates of type 55, and their interaction with the same physiologically relevant three
ca isozymes, i.e., hca i, ii, and ix10 (table xii).
for this new series, the best hca i inhibitor was n-tetradecylsulfamate  xxxd1661xxx  and some
(substituted)benzyl/phenethyl sulfamates (inhibition constants in the low micromolar range).
against hca ii, low nanomolar inhibitors (0.7–3.4 nm) were n-decylsulfamate 55g and the
(substituted)benzyl/phenethyl derivatives mentioned above, 55v–x. good ca ii inhibition was also
observed for the hydroxy/keto-derivatives of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfamate 55ab and 55ac.
efficient hca ix inhibitory properties, with inhibition constants in the range of 9–23 nm, was
observed for the aliphatic sulfamates c10 –c16 (with the best inhibitor the n-dodecyl derivative, ki of
9 nm), and the (substituted)benzyl/phenethyl sulfamates 55v–x. the inhibition profile of the three
investigated isozymes with this type of compounds was rather different, allowing us to hope that the

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

213

table xi. inhibition data for derivatives 54 investigated by winum et al.,9 against
isozymes i, ii, and ix

asee structure inthetext.
a
human (cloned) isozymes, by the esterase method.
b
catalytic domainof human, clonedisozyme, by the co2 hydrationmethod.
nt, not tested.

preparation of ca ix-selective inhibitors is possible. these data are critical for the design of novel
anti-tumor therapies, mainly for hypoxic tumors that overexpress ca ix, which are non-responsive
to radiation or chemotherapy.10

5. anti-convulsant sulfamates
topiramate 51 is a clinically used anti-epileptic drug discovered by maryanoff’s group103 around
1980 by using an empirical approach, the maximal electroshock seizure (mes) test. topiramate is
orally active and efficacious in various forms of epilepsy, refractory to other medication, has a rapid
absorption, high bioavailability, and long duration of action.103,104 an interesting feature of this
drug is that it has no structural relationship to any other anti-epileptic used clinically (such as the
phenytoins, carbamazepines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, or gaba-scaffold derived antiepileptics).104 it is somehow related to  xxxd3564xxx  (1,2-benzoxazol-3-yl-methanesulfonamide), as
both drugs contain a zinc anchoring group known to bind to the zinc ion of cas, the sulfonamide one
in the case of  xxxd3564xxx , and the sulfamate one in the case of topiramate.112,113 in fact, it has been

214

*

winum et al.

table xii. inhibition data for sulfamates 55 investigated by winum et al.,10
against isozymes hca i, ii, and ix

asee structure inthetext.
a
human (cloned) isozymes, by the co2 hydrationmethod.
b
catalytic domainof human, clonedisozyme, by the co2 hydrationmethod.

shown that both drugs are potent cais (see also the preceding section for the ca inhibitory properties
of topiramate).106,112,113
the mechanism of action of this drug is not fully understood yet.114,115 several mechanisms of
action were proposed so far116 such as the enhancement of gaba-ergic transmission,117–119 the
antagonism of kainate/ampa receptors120–122 and the inhibition of action potentials created in
neurons via antagonizing the activation of naþ channels.123,124 another mechanism of action of
topiramate that has not been viewed as critical up to now,103,104,125 but that will be considered here in
detail, is the inhibition of different ca isozymes.106,112,113 it is hypothesized that the anti-convulsant
effects of topiramate or related sulfonamides (such as  xxxd3564xxx ) may be due to co2 retention
secondary to inhibition of the red blood cell and brain enzymes.112 thus, at first topiramate was
classified as a very weak (millimolar) ca inhibitor,103 but it seems that rather unpurified enzymes
have been used for assays. more recently, the same group reported different results,126 showing that
topiramate is a much stronger ca inhibitor (now in the micromolar range) in a different assay set-up,
using enzymes from different sources. nevertheless, even in the latter report, the efficacy against a

216

*

winum et al.

series of ca isozymes was ten times lower compared to acetazolamide, the sulfonamide cai mostly
used.126 this is in contradiction to data of our laboratory106 that clearly suggest topiramate to be a
very potent ca inhibitor. these findings match with many clinically observed side effects of
topiramate,127–129 which agree with the typical pharmacological profiles of strong sulfonamide ca
inhibitors used as systemic anti-glaucoma agents (acetazolamide,  xxxd2592xxx ,  xxxd1872xxx )2–4 and include paresthesias, nephrolithiasis, and weight loss, among others.3,4 however, while
a comparably strong ca isozyme inhibition profile has been established,106 the anti-convulsant
activity of topiramate appears to differ mechanistically from that of acetazolamide. this observation
is indicated by some recently published in vivo investigations130,131 and agree with former
observations that derivatives of either topiramate 51103 or rwj-37497 52104 comprising a secondary
sulfamate moiety exhibit anti-convulsant activity, however lacking inhibition of ca isozymes. more
recent studies114 with respect to the mechanism of action of this drug consider the binding of
topiramate to certain membrane ion channel proteins at their phosphorylation sites, resulting in an
allosteric modulation of the channel conductance and subsequent the inhibition of protein phosphorylation. anyhow, from all these data, it is clear that this drug has many receptors/enzymes/
proteins involved in ion transport with which it interacts, which probably contribute in different
proportions to its strong anti-epileptic properties.
by using topiramate 51103 or rwj-37497 52104 as lead molecules, maryanoff’s group reported
a very large series of sugar sulfamates in the search of novel types as anti-convulsants bearing

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

217

sulfamate moieties in their molecule.104 some of the most interesting compounds in this series,
of types 56–63 and their biological activity are shown in table xiii.
all the structural elements present in the two lead molecules 51 and 52 have been varied in the
new compounds synthesized in this valuable study, such as: (i) the sulfamate group, which was
modified to the mono- or di-substituted sulfamate derivatives (of types 56 or 60 among others), but
more drastic modifications have also been done (e.g., carbamato; azidosulfonyloxy; sulfamide;
amino; methylsulfamoyl, etc. moieties instead of the o–so2nh2 one), which led to inactive
compounds, so that it has been demonstrated that the sulfamate moiety is critical for this type of
biological action;104 (ii) the linker between the sulfamate group and the pyrane ring. both shortening
or extending, the distance between these two structural elements lead to inactive compounds, so that
the ch2 moiety has been preserved in all the most active derivatives of types 56–63; (iii) the
table xiii. anti-convulsant activity of sulfamates 56–63, structurally related to
topiramate 51 and rwj-37947 52104

218

*

winum et al.

substituents on the 2,3- and 4,5-fused 1,3-dioxolane rings, being shown that in the first case best
activity is maintained for propylidenedioxy such moieties (the groups present in the two lead
molecules), whereas for the second such ring the two methyl groups can be replaced by h or ethyl
with maintaining some of the activity (derivatives 57a,b) or can be replaced by the cyclic sulfate/
sulfite moiety present in 52, 60, and 61; (iv) the pyranose ring, being shown that the carbocyclic
analog of topiramate, 62, still possess potent anti-convulsant activity (table xiii); (v) the absolute
sterochemistry, with some compounds possessing the different sterochemistry as compared to
topiramate or rw-37947, of the type 63a,b, showing interesting anti-convulsant activity. a lot of
highly active anti-convulsant sulfamates were detected in this way, such as derivatives 59c, 60a, 60e,
60i, 60j, 61–63, but the best one remained rw-37947.104

6. anti-obesity sulfamates
there are unexpectedly few efficient pharmacological approaches for the treatment of obesity at this
time, and most of them are unsatisfactory. furthermore, this disease is widespread both in the
developed and developing world, and the number of affected persons is increasing. thus, effective
and new approaches are needed for the development of anti-obesity agents possessing different
mechanisms of action.100 very recently, a thought-provoking new approach for the treatment of this
condition has been proposed by antel et al.,132 which takes into consideration the inhibition of
de novo lipogenesis by modulating the activity of a key enzyme involved in this process, i.e., ca, with
isozymes v and probably also ii being the key targets,100 whereas the compound for which this
application has been exemplified is topiramate 51.
ca v is the only isozyme present in mitochondria, among the many a-ca isoforms found
in animals. this isozyme was shown to be involved in several biosynthetic processes, such as
ureagenesis,97,100 gluconeogenesis,97,100 and lipogenesis, both in vertebrates (rodents) as well as
invertebrates (locust). indeed, in several important biosynthetic processes involving pyruvate
carboxylase (pc), acetyl coa carboxylase (acc), and carbamoyl phosphate synthetases i
and ii, bicarbonate, carbon dioxide is not the real substrate of these carboxylating enzymes, and
the provision of enough bicarbonate is assured mainly by the catalysis involving the mitochondrial isozyme ca v (probably assisted by the high activity cytosolic isozyme ca ii)97,100
(fig. 5)
thus, mitochondrial pc is needed for the efflux of acetyl groups from the mitochondria to the
cytosol where the fatty acid biosynthesis takes place.100 practically, pyruvate is carboxylated to
oxaloacetate in the presence of bicarbonate and pc. the bicarbonate needed to this process is
generated under the catalytic influence of the mitochondrial isozyme ca v. the mitochondrial
membrane is impermeant to acetyl-coa which condenses with oxaloacetate to form citrate, which
is thereafter translocated to the cytoplasm by means of the tricarboxylic acid transporter. in the
cytosol, the citrate is cleaved and regenerates acetyl-coa and oxaloacetate. as oxaloacetate also
cannot cross the mitochondrial membrane, its decarboxylation regenerates pyruvate which can be
then transported into the mitochondria by means of the pyruvate transporter97,100 (fig. 5). the acetylcoa thus generated in the cytosol is in fact used for the de novo lipogenesis, by carboxylation in
the presence of acc and bicarbonate, with formation of malonyl-coa. the bicarbonate needed in
this process is furnished by the ca ii catalyzed conversion of co2 to bicarbonate. subsequent steps
involving the sequential transfer of acetyl groups lead to longer chain  xxxd2154xxx .97,100 as a whole,
two ca isozymes are critical to the entire process of fatty acid biosynthesis: ca v within the
mitochondria (to provide enough substrate to pc), and ca ii within the cytosol (for providing
sufficient substrate to acc). it was in fact demonstrated that inhibition of cas by sulfonamides
(such as trifluoromethanesulfonamide (tfm), a very potent but unstable ca inhibitor2–4) can
decrease lipogenesis in adipocytes in cell culture.133 in such experiments, an undiscriminate

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

219

figure 5. the transfer of acetyl groups from the mitochondrion to the cytosol (as citrate) for the provision of substrate for de novo
lipogenesis.100,136 all steps involving bicarbonate also need the presence of ca isozymes: ca v inthe mitochondrion and ca ii inthe
cytosol (see discussion inthe text). reproduced fromvullo et al.136 2004 with permission from american chemical society, copyright
2004.

inhibition of all ca isozymes present in these tissues is achieved by the used inhibitor, such as tfm or
acetazolamide.133
topiramate 51, the anti-epileptic drug discussed above, shows an unexpected ‘‘side effect,’’
mainly observed in obese patients, whom were reported to lose up to 20% of body weight,134 although
no pharmacological explanation of this phenomenon has been provided. furthermore, topiramate
was shown to reduce energy and fat gains in lean (fa/?) and obese (fa/fa) zucker rats.135 as
mentioned above, our group has recently demonstrated that topiramate 51 is a very potent (low
nanomolar) inhibitor of several ca isozymes, such as ca i, ii, and iv, and the x-ray crystal structure
of its complex with hca ii has also been determined, revealing the basical molecular interactions that
explain the high affinity of topiramate for the ca active site.106
correlating this in vitro findings with the reported clinical side effects of the drug that caused
weight loss in humans and animals134,135 antel et al.133 and vullo et al.136 reported the inhibition
constant of this drug against the mitochondrial isozymes from human and murine source, hcavand
mcav, showing the compound to be a good inhibitor (inhibition constant around 60–70 nm). it was
then claimed that the inhibition of mitochondrial and/or cytosolic ca isozymes represents a means of
controlling weight loss, with the preferred compound being topiramate or any other sulfamate/
sulfonamide cai showing effective ca v/ca ii inhibition profiles.133,136 this discovery offers a
revolutionary new approach for the treatment and prophylaxis of obesity, based on the inhibition of
cas, enzymes involved in several steps of de novo lipogenesis, both in the mitochondria and the
cytosol of cells. this seems to be the beginning of a very new and promising approach for the
treatment of obesity, with the hope that new compounds showing this property will be soon developed
and available for clinical use.

7. sulfamates with miscellanneous pharmacological activity
a. sulfamates in the treatment of hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis
atherosclerosis is common to many cardiovascular diseases and is characterized by arterial wall
thickening and loss of elasticity and the formation of plaques that can rupture with consequent

220

*

winum et al.

thrombosis.137–140 atherosclerotic plaques consist of accumulated intracellular and extracellular
lipids, smooth muscle cells, connective tissue, and glycosaminoglycans. a primary lipid found in
foam cells is cholesteryl ester, which is formed from cholesterol and long-chain fatty acyl-coenzyme
a in the presence of acyl  xxxd1739xxx :cholesterol acetyltransferase (acat).137–140 research into
novel anti-hypercholesterolemic therapeutics represents an important area of drug discovery. acyl
 xxxd1739xxx : cholesterol acyltransferase (acat; ec 2.3.1.26) is an ubiquitous intracellular enzyme
that catalyzes the acylation of intracellular free cholesterol to form cholesterol esters.137–140 acat is
a key enzyme, playing a physiological role in hepatic and intestinal lipoprotein assembly and
secretion, steroid hormones production, and dietary cholesterol absorption.137–140
acat inhibitors, represent an established approach to the inhibition of atherosclerosis.
although early acat inhibitors gave disappointing results in clinical trials due to their very low
efficacy and adrenotoxicity, a breakthrough in the discovery of lipid-regulating and anti-atherosclerotic agent has been achieved in 1994, by the report of an interesting series of acat inhibitors
and the discovery in 1996 of avasimibe 64.137–140

the acyl sulfamate avasimibe (previously known as ci-1011) is a potent, new, orally bioavailable acat inhibitor which has displayed beneficial effects in decreasing plasma lipids and
direct anti-atherosclerotic activity, independent of lipids effects, in various animal models of
hypercholesterolemia. this compound is currently under investigation in clinical phase iii trials and
has demonstrated low toxicity and a low incidence of side effects in human trials.139,140

b. sulfamates as anti-arthritis and anti-osteoporosis agents
the arthritic diseases are systemic inflammatory diseases characterized by considerable damage of
connective tissue structures of the joint and adjacent structures leading to progressive cartilage and
bone destruction.141–143 diverse classes of therapeutic agents have been used over the past 40 years to
treat arthritis including adrenal corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.141–143
one of the clinical features of arthritis and also osteoporosis is bone resorption, leading to bone
loss.141–143 development of compounds, which can act by inhibiting this phenomenon was reported
to be beneficial for the treatment of these disorders. among them, bisulfamates such as ahr-15010
65, were reported to possess anti-arthritic activity in adjuvant arthritis rats, acting by an unique
mechanism of action.141–143 it was suggested that this mechanism resulted from the inhibitory effect
of ahr-15010 on cas as it was demonstrated that these enzymes (and more specifically, isozyme
ca ii) are involved in bone resorption2–5 (see also table x, and the discussion on ca inhibitors in
this review). the use of cais could be a valuable approach for the management of arthritic diseases,
but no progress in this field has been registered ultimately.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

221

8. conclusions
as seen from data presented in this review, the sulfamate moiety induces very interesting properties
to compounds incorporating it. all the variants and substitution patterns of such derivatives (osubstituted-, n-substituted-, or di-/tri-substituted sulfamates) lead to specific biological activities
which were or are to be exploited for the design of therapeutic agents. thus, several sulfamate type
inhibitors of aarss were recently reported, which may constitute completely new classes of
antibiotics, useful in the fight of drug-resistant infections. anti-viral agents incorporating sulfamate
moieties have also recently been reported, with at least two types of such derivatives much
investigated: the nucleoside/nucleotide hiv reverse transcriptase inhibitors, and the hiv pis.
most compounds of this type show significant anti-viral activity but were not developed for clinical
use.
in the increasing armamentarium of anti-cancer drugs, the sulfamates occupy a special position,
with at least two important targets evidenced in recent years: stss and cas (the tumor-associated
isozymes, ca ix and xii in the first place). thus, an impressive number of stsis of the sulfamate
type have been reported in the last 10 years by several research groups both in academia and industry,
with several compounds, such as 667coumate among others, progressing to clinical trials for the
treatment of hormone-dependent tumors (breast and prostate cancers primarily). this field is rapidly
evolving, with many types of new stsis being constantly reported and designed in such a way as to
increase their anti-tumor properties, and decrease undesired features (such as estrogenicity, a
problem encountered with the first generation such inhibitors, among which emate is the best
known example).
among the many isozymes of ca, at least two, ca ix and ca xii are highly overexpressed in
tumors, being generally absent (or present in minimal amounts) in the normal tissues. the presence of
these cas in tumors is generally correlated with bad prognosis, and non-response to chemo- or radiotherapy. thus, the idea to inhibit such tumor-associated cas would lead to novel therapeutic
approaches for cancer. indeed, many sulfamates act as very potent (low nanomolar) ca inhibitors.
the x-ray crystal structure of the most investigated and physiologically relevant ca isozyme, ca ii,
with three sulfamates (sulfamic acid, topiramate, and emate) have recently been reported, allowing
for a rationale drug design of cais. indeed, in two recent studies, low nanomolar ca ix inhibitors of
the sulfamate type have been reported, although such compounds also act as very efficient inhibitors
of isozymes ca i and ii, which are not associated with the tumors.
a large number of anti-convulsant sulfamates have also been reported, with one such compound,
topiramate, being widely used clinically as anti-epileptic drug, useful also for the treatment of
refractory forms of the disease, which does not respond to other anti-epileptic drugs. considering a
side effect of this drug, it has recently been proposed the use of topiramate and related sulfamates for
the treatment of obesity. the rationale of this use is based on the inhibition of the mitochondrial ca
isozyme, ca v, involved in lipogenesis.
some sulfamates were also shown to possess potent inhibitory activity against acat, an enzyme
involved in cholesterol metabolism. one such agent, avasimibe, is in advanced clinical trials for
the treatment of hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis. finally, sporadic reports regarding the potential
use of sulfamates (with ca inhibitory properties) as anti-arthritis and anti-osteoporosis agents have
been published some time ago, but no active research in this area was done ultimately.
the conclusion drawn from all these data is that the sulfamate moiety offers very attractive
possibilities for the drug design of various pharmacological agents, which are on one hand due to
the relative ease with which such compounds are synthesized, and on the other one, due to the fact
that biological activity of most of them is impressive. it must also be mentioned that in some cases
(and the best example is the most famous drug from this class, topiramate) the real biological target of
such compounds remains elusive, which may constitute another challenge for finding even better
drugs.

222

*

winum et al.

acknowledgments
research from the authors’ laboratories was financed in part by the 6th framework programme of
eu (euroxy project). we are grateful to some of our colleagues (prof. barry potter, university of
bath, uk and prof. h. john smith, university of cardiff, uk) for helpful suggestions and reading
of this manuscript prior to publication.

references
1. weber a, casini a, heine a, kuhn d, supuran ct, scozzafava a, klebe g. unexpected nanomolar
inhibition of carbonic anhydrase by cox-2 selective celecoxib: new pharmacological opportunities due
to related binding site recognition. j med chem 2004;47:550–557.
2. supuran ct, scozzafava a, casini a. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. med res rev 2003;23:146–189.
3. supuran ct, scozzafava a. applications of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and activators in therapy.
exp opin ther patents 2002;12:217–242.
4. supuran ct, scozzafava a. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and their therapeutic potential. exp opin ther
patents 2000;10:575–600.
5. scozzafava a, owa t, mastrolorenzo a, supuran ct. anticancer and antiviral sulfonamides. curr med
chem 2003;10:925–953.
6. supuran ct, innocenti a, mastrolorenzo a, scozzafava a. antiviral sulfonamide derivatives. mini rev
med chem 2004;4:189–200.
7. abbate f, supuran ct, scozzafava a, orioli p, stubbs mt, klebe g. nonaromatic sulfonamide group as an
ideal anchor for potent human carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: role of hydrogen-bonding networks in
ligand binding and drug design. j med chem 2002;45:3583–3587.
8. nussbaumer p, billich a.  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. exp opin ther patents 2003;13:605–625.
9. winum jy, vullo d, casini a, montero j-l, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors:
inhibition of cytosolic isozymes i and ii and the membrane-bound, tumor associated isozyme ix with
sulfamates also acting as  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. j med chem 2003;46:2197–2204.
10. winum jy, vullo d, casini a, montero j-l, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors:
inhibition of transmembrane, tumor associated isozyme ix, and cytosolic isozymes i and ii with aliphatic
sulfamates. j med chem 2003;46:5471–5477.
11. spillane wj, ryder ca, walsh mr, curran pj, concagh dg, wall sn. sulfamate sweeteners. food chem
1996;56:255–261.
12. schimmel p, tao j, hill j. aminoacyl trna synthetase as targets for new anti-infectives. faseb j
1998;12:1599–1609, and references cited therein.
13. von der haar f, gabius h-j, cramer f. target directed drug synthesis: the aminoacyl-trna synthetases as
possible targets. angew chem int ed engl 1981;20:217–223.
14. thomas so, singleton vl, lowery ja, sharpe rw, pruess lm, porter jn, mowat jh, bohonos n.
nucleocidin: a new antibiotic with activity against trypanosomes. antibiot annu 1956–1957;716–
721.
15. shuman da, robins mj, robins rk. the synthesis of nucleoside sulfamates related to nucleocidin. j am
chem soc 1970;92:3434–3437.
16. takahashi e, beppu t. a new nucleosidic antibiotic at-265. j antibiot 1982;35:939–947.
17. kini gd, henry em, robins rk, larson sb, marr jj, berens rl, bacchi cj, nathan hc, keithly js.
synthesis, structure, and antiparasitic activity of sulfamoyl derivatives of ribavirin. j med chem
1990;33:44–48.
18. peterson em, brownell j, vince r. synthesis and biological evaluation of 5 0 -sulfamoylated purinyl
carbocyclic nucleosides. j med chem 1992;35:3991–4000.
19. block a, coutsogeorgopoulos c. inhibition of protein synthesis by 5 0 -sulfamoyladenosine. biochemistry
1971;10:4394–4398.
20. guay dr. treatment of bacterial skin and skin structure infection. exp opin pharmacother 2003;4:1259–
1275.
21. ueda h, shoku y, hayashi n, mitsunaga j, in y, doi m, inoue m, ishida t. x-ray crystallographic
conformational study of 5 0 -o-[n-(l-alanyl)-sulfamoyl]adenosine: a substrate analogue for alanyl-trna
synthetase. biochim biophys acta 1991;1080:126–134.
22. forrest ak, jarvest rl, mensah lm, o’hanlon pj, pope aj, sheppard rj. aminoalkyl adenylate and
aminoacyl sulfamate intermediate analogues differing greatly in affinity for their cognate staphylococcus
aureus aminoacyl trna synthetases. bioorg med chem lett 2000;10:1871–1874.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

223

23. brown mjb, mensah lm, doyle ml, broom njp, osbourne n, forrest ak, richardson cm, o’hanlon
pj, pope aj. rational design of femtomolar inhibitors of isoleucyl trna synthetase from a binding model
for pseudomonic acid-a. biochemistry 2000;39:6003–6011.
24. heacock d, forsyth cj, kiyotaka s, musier-forsyth k. synthesis and aminoacyl-trna synthetase
inhibitory activity of prolyl adenylate analogs. bioorg chem 1996;24:273–289.
25. belrhali h, yamenchuk a, tukalo m, larsen k, berthet-colominas c, leberman r, beijer b, sproat b,
als-nielsen j, grbel g, legrand j-f, lehmann m, cusak s. crystal structures at 2.5 å resolution of
 xxxg2012xxx  complexed with two analogs of seryl adenylate. science 1994;263:1432–1436.
26. brown p, richardson cm, mensah lm, o’hanlon pj, osborne nf, pope aj, walker g. molecular
recognition of tyrosinyl adenylate analogues by prokaryotic tyrosyl trna synthetases. bioorg med chem
1999;7:2473–2485.
27. lee j, kim se, lee jy, kim sy, kang su, seo sh, chun mw, kang t, choi sy, kim ho.
n-alkoxysulfamide, n-hydroxysulfamide, and sulfamate analogues of methionyl and isoleucyl
adenylates as inhibitors of methionyl-trna synthetases. bioorg med chem lett 2003;13:1087–1092.
28. isono k, uramoto m, kusakabe h, miyata n, koyama t, ubukata m, sethi sk, mccloskey ja.
ascamycin and dealanylascamycin, nucleoside antibiotics from streptomyces sp. j antibiot 1984;37:670–
672.
29. osada h, isono k. mechanism of action and selective toxicity of ascamycin: a nucleoside antibiotic.
antimicrob agents chemother 1985;27:230–233.
30. yu xy, hill jm, yu g, wang w, kluge af, wendler p, gallant p. synthesis and structure–activity
relationships of a series of novel thiazoles as inhibitors of aminoacyl-trna synthetases. bioorg med chem
lett 1999;9:375–380.
31. zydowsky t, yu g, hill j, rebek j, shue yk. aminoacyl adenylate mimics as novel antimicrobial and
antiparasitic agents. us patent 5726195, 1998.
32. de clercq e. highlights in the development of new antiviral agents. mini rev med chem 2002;2:163–
175.
33. de clercq e. new anti-hiv agents and targets. med res rev 2002;22:531–565.
34. de clercq e. strategies in the design of antiviral drugs. nat rev drug discov 2002;1:13–25.
35. richman dd. hiv chemotherapy. nature 2001;410:995–1001.
36. supuran ct, casini a, scozzafava a. protease inhibitors of the sulfonamide type: anticancer, antiinflammatory, and antiviral agents. med res rev 2003;23:535–558.
37. scozzafava a, mastrolorenzo a, supuran ct. non-peptidic chemokine receptors antagonists as emerging
anti-hiv agents. j enzyme inhib med chem 2002;17:69–76.
38. mastrolorenzo a, scozzafava a, supuran ct. small molecule antagonists of chemokine receptors as
emerging anti-hiv agents. exp opin ther patents 2001;11:1245–1252.
39. vince r, pham p. the synthesis and biological evaluation of sulfamoyl nucleosides related to carbovir and
azt. nucleosides nucleotides 1995;14:2051–2060.
40. jennings lj, macchia m, parkin a. synthesis of analogues of 5-iodo-2 0 -deoxyuridine-5 0 -diphosphate.
j chem soc perkin trans 1992;1:2197–2202.
41. camarasa mj, fernandez-resa p, garcia-lopez mt, de las heras fg, mendez-castrillon pp, alarcon b,
carrasco l. uridine 5 0 -diphosphate glucose analogues. inhibitors of protein glycosylation that show
antiviral activity. j med chem 1985;28:40–46.
42. fernandez-resa p, garcia-lopez mt, de las heras f, san felix a, alarcon b, carrasco l. diphosphate
modified antiviral analogues of uridine 5 0 -diphosphate glucose derivatives. eur j med chem 1986;21:
245–249.
43. fiandor j, garcia-lopez mt, de las heras f, mendez-castrillon pp, san felix a, alarcon b, carrasco l.
hexose-modified anti-viral analogues of uridine 5 0 -diphosphate glucose derivatives. eur j med chem
1986;22:59–65.
44. perez-perez mj, balzarini j, de clercq e, camarasa mj. glycosyl-oxycarbonylaminosulfonyl-2 0 ,3 0 dideoxynucleoside derivatives as lipophilic nucleotide mimics. synthesis and anti-hiv activity. bioorg
med chem 1993;1:279–284.
45. vara prasad jvn, markoski lj, boyer fe, domagala jm, ellsworth el, gajda c, hagen se, tait bd,
lunney ea, tummino pj, ferguson d, holler t, hupe d, nouhan c, gracheck s, vanderroest s, saunders
j, iyer k, sinz m. nonpeptidic hiv protease inhibitors: 6-alkyl-5,6-dihydropyran-2-ones possessing a
novel and achiral 3-(2-t-butyl-5-methyl-4-sulfamate)phenylthio moiety. bioorg med chem lett 1999;9:
2217–2222.
46. barbaro g, scozzafava a, mastrolorenzo a, supuran ct. highly active antiretroviral therapy: current
state of the art, new agents, and their pharmacological interactions useful for improving therapeutic
outcome. curr pharm des 2004; in press.

224

*

winum et al.

47. hernandez-guzman fg, higashiyama t, pangborn w, osawa y, ghosh d. structure of human estrone
sulfatase suggests functional roles of membrane association. j biol chem 2003;278:22989–22997.
48. poirier d, ciobanu lc, maltais r.  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. exp opin ther patents 1999;9:1083–1099.
49. smith hj, nicholls pj, simons c, le lain r. inhibitors of steroidogenesis as agents for the treatment of
hormone-dependent cancers. exp opin ther patents 2001;11:789–824.
50. ahmed s, james k, owen cp, sampson l, patel ck. review of  xxxg2222xxx  and its inhibitors-an
important new target against hormone dependent breast cancer. curr med chem 2002;9:263–273.
51. purohit a, woo lwl, chander sk, newman sp, ireson c, ho y, grasso a, leese mp, potter bvl, reed
mj. steroid sulphatase inhibitors for breast cancer therapy. j steroid biochem mol biol 2003;86:423–432.
52. howarth nm, purohit a, reed mj, potter bvl. estrone sulfamates: potent inhibitors of  xxxg2222xxx 
with therapeutic potential. j med chem 1994;37:219–221.
53. woo lwl, purohit a, reed mj, potter bvl. active site directed inhibition of  xxxg2222xxx  by nonsteroidal coumarin sulfamates. j med chem 1996;39:1349–1351.
54. hoffmann r, happle r. current understanding of androgenetic alopecia. part i: ethiopathogenesis. eur j
dermatol 2000;10:319–327.
55. wolf ot, kirschbaum c. actions of dehydroepiandrosterone and its sulfate in central nervous system:
effect on cognition and emotion in animals and humans. brain res rev 1999;30:264–288.
56. suitters aj, shaw s, wales mr, porter jp, leonard j, woodger r, brand h, bodmer m, foulkes r. immune
enhancing effects of dehydroepiandrosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate and the role of steroid
sulfatase. immunology 1997;91:314–321.
57. ahmed s, james k, owen cp, patel ck, patel m. acid dissociation constant: a potential physicochemical
factor in the inhibition of the enzyme  xxxg2222xxx  (es). bioorg med chem lett 2001;11:899–902.
58. ahmed s, james k, owen cp, patel ck, sampson l. the mechanism of irreversible inhibition of estrone
sulfatase (es) through the consideration of a range of methane- and amino-sulfonate-based compounds.
bioorg med chem lett 2002;12:1279–1282.
59. ahmed s, owen cp, james k, patel ck, patel m. novel inhibitors of the enzyme  xxxg2222xxx  (es).
bioorg med chem lett 2001;11:841–844.
60. ahmed s, james k, owen cp, patel ck, patel m. hydrophobicity, a physicochemical factor in the
inhibition of the enzyme  xxxg2222xxx  (es). bioorg med chem lett 2001;11:2525–2528.
61. patel ck, owen cp, ahmed s. the design, synthesis, and in vitro biochemical evaluation of a series of
esters of 4-[(aminosulfonyl)oxy]benzoate as novel and highly potent inhibitors of  xxxg2222xxx .
biochem biophys res commun 2003;307:778–781.
62. patel ck, owen cp, ahmed s. inhibition of  xxxg2222xxx  (es) by alkyl and cycloalkyl ester derivatives
of 4-[(aminosulfonyl)oxy]  xxxd306xxx . bioorg med chem lett 2004;14:605–609.
63. nussbaumer p, bilban m, billich a. 4,4 0 -benzophenone-o,o 0 -disulfamate: a potent inhibitor of steroid
sulfatase. bioorg med chem lett 2002;12:2093–2095.
64. ahmed s, james k, owen cp, patel ck. design, synthesis, and biochemical evaluation of ac ring mimics
s novel inhibitors of the enzyme  xxxg2222xxx . bioorg med chem lett 2002;12:1343–1346.
65. okada m, nakagawa t, iwashita s, takegawa s, fujii t, koizumi n. development of novel steroid
sulfatase inhibitors. i. synthesis and biological evaluation of biphenyl-4-o-sulfamates. j steroid biochem
mol biol 2003;87:141–148.
66. saito t, kinoshita s, fujii t, bandoh k, fuse s, yamauchi y, koizumi n, horiuchi t. development of novel
 xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. ii. tzs-8478 potently inhibits the growth of breast tumors in postmenopausal
breast cancer model rats. j steroid biochem mol biol 2004;167–173.
67. li pk, milano s, kluth l, rhodes me. synthesis and sulfatase inhibitory activities of non-steroidal estrone
sulfatase inhibitors. j steroid biochem mol biol 1996;59:41–48.
68. kolli a, chu gh, rhosed me, inoue k, selcer kw, li pk. development of (p-o-sulfamoyl)-n-alkanoylphenylalkyl amines as non-steroidal  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. j steroid biochem mol biol 1999;68:
31–40.
69. ciobanu lc, luu-the v, poirier d. non-steroidal compounds designed to mimic potent  xxxg2222xxx 
inhibitors. j steroid biochem mol biol 2002;80:339–353.
70. woo lw, sutcliffe ob, bubert c, grasso a, chander sk, purohit a, reed mj, potter bvl. first dual
aromatase- xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors. j med chem 2003;46:3193–3196.
71. golob t, liebl r, von angerer e. sulfamoyloxy-substituted 2-phenylindoles: antiestrogen-based
inhibitors of the  xxxg2222xxx  in human breast cancer cells. bioorg med chem 2002;10:3941–3953.
72. chu gh, peters a, selcer kw, li pk. synthesis and sulfatase inhibitory activities of (e)- and (z)-4hydroxytamoxifen sulfamates. bioorg med chem lett 1999;9:141–144.
73. woo lwl, purohit a, malini b, reed mj, potter bvl. potent active site-directed inhibition of steroid
sulphatase by tricyclic coumarin-based sulphamates. chem biol 2000;7:773–791.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

225

74. malini b, purohit a, ganeshapillai d, woo lw, potter bv, reed mj. inhibition of steroid sulphatase
activity by tricyclic coumarin sulphamates. j steroid biochem mol biol 2000;75:253–258.
75. purohit a, woo lwl, barrow d, hejaz ham, nicholson ri, potter bv, reed mj. non-steroidal and
steroidal sulfamates: new drugs for cancer therapy. mol cell endocrinol 2001;171:129–135.
76. nussbaumer p, lehr p, billich a. 2-substituted 4-(thio) xxxd1757xxx  6-o-sulfamates: potent inhibitors of
human  xxxg2222xxx . j med chem 2002;45:4310–4320.
77. nussbaumer p, winiski ap, billich a. estrogenic potential of 2-alkyl-4-(thio) xxxd1757xxx  6-osulfamates: potent inhibitors of human  xxxg2222xxx . j med chem 2003;46:5091–5094.
78. schreiner ep, wolff b, winiski ap, billich a. 6-(2-adamantan-2-ylidene-hydroxybenzoxazole)-osulfamate: a potent non-steroidal irreversible inhibitor of human  xxxg2222xxx . bioorg med chem lett
2003;13:4313–4316.
79. bilban m, billich a, auer m, nussbaumer p. new fluorogenic substrate for the first continuous steroid
sulfatase assay. bioorg med chem lett 2000;10:967–969.
80. purohit a, vernon ka, wagenaar hummelinck ae, woo lwl, hejaz ham, potter bvl, reed mj.
the development of a ring modified analogues of  xxxd2045xxx -3-o-sulphamate as potent steroid sulphatase
inhibitors with reduced oestrogenicity. j steroid biochem mol biol 1998;64:269–275.
81. reed je, woo lwl, robinson jj, leblond b, leese mp, purohit a, reed mj, potter bvl. 2difluoromethylestrone 3-o-sulphamate: a highly potent steroid sulphatase inhibitor. biochem biophys
res commun 2004;317:169–175.
82. elger w, schwarz s, hedden a, reddersen g, schneider b. sulfamates of various estrogens are prodrugs
with increased systemic and reduced hepatic estrogenicity at oral application. j steroid biochem mol biol
1995;55:395–403.
83. suzuki rn, newman sp, purohit a, leese mp, potter bv, reed mj. growth inhibition of multi-drugresistant breast cancer cells by 2-methoxyoestradiol-bis-sulphamate and 2-ethyloestradiol-bis-sulphamate. j steroid biochem mol biol 2003;84:269–278.
84. hejaz ha, purohit a, mahon mf, reed mj, potter bvl. synthesis and biological activity of the
superestrogen (e)-17-oximino-3-o-sulfamoyl-1,3,5(10)-estratriene: x-ray crystal structure of (e)-17oximino-3-hydroxy-1,3,5(10)-estratriene. j med chem 1999;42:3188–3192.
85. li pk, chu gh, guo jp, peters a, selcer kw. development of potent non-estrogenic  xxxg2222xxx 
inhibitors. steroids 1998;63:425–432.
86. ciobanu lc, boivin rp, luu-the v, labrie f, poirier d. potent inhibition of  xxxg2222xxx  activity
by 3-o-sulfamate 17alpha-benzyl(or 4 0 -tert-butylbenzyl)estra-1,3,5(10)-trienes: combination of two
substituents at positions c3 and c17alpha of estradiol. j med chem 1999;42:2280–2286.
87. fischer ds, chander sk, woo lw, fenton jc, purohit a, reed mj, potter bv. novel d-ring modified
steroid derivatives as potent, non-estrogenic,  xxxg2222xxx  inhibitors with in vivo activity. j steroid
biochem mol biol 2003;84:343–349.
88. fischer ds, woo lw, mahon mf, purohit a, reed mj, potter bv. d-ring modified estrone derivatives as
novel potent inhibitors of  xxxg2222xxx . bioorg med chem 2003;11:1685–1700.
89. ciobanu lc, poirier d. solid-phase parallel synthesis of 17alpha-substituted estradiol sulfamate and
phenol libraries using the multidetachable sulfamate linker. j comb chem 2003;5:429–440.
90. rodig h, brust p, romer j, kasch h, bergmann r, fuchtner f, steinbach j, johannsen b. distribution of
 xxxg2222xxx  in rat brain determined by in vitro autoradiography with 16alpha-[18f]fluoroestradiol3,17beta-disulfamate. appl radiat isot 2002;56:773–780.
91. brust p, rodig h, romer j, kasch h, bergmann r, fuchtner f, zips d, baumann m, steinbach j,
johannsen b. distribution of 16alpha-[18f]fluoro- xxxd2037xxx -disulfamate in rats, tumour-bearing
mice, and piglets. appl radiat isot 2002;57:687–695.
92. tripp bc, bell cb iii, cruz f, krebs c, ferry jg. a role for iron in an ancient carbonic anhydrase. j biol
chem 2004;279:6683–6687.
93. lane tw, morel fm. a biological function for cadmium in marine diatoms. proc natl acad sci usa
2000;97:4627–4631.
94. so ak, espie gs, williams eb, shively jm, heinhorst s, cannon gc. a novel evolutionary lineage of
carbonic anhydrase (epsilon class) is a component of the carboxysome shell. j bacteriol 2004;186:623–630.
95. lehtonen j, shen b, vihinen m, casini a, scozzafava a, supuran ct, parkkila ak, saarnio j, kivela aj,
waheed a, sly ws, parkkila s. characterization of ca xiii: a novel member of the carbonic anhydrase
isozyme family. j biol chem 2004;279:2719–2727.
96. pastorekova s, parkkila s, pastorek j, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrases: current state of the art,
therapeutic applications, and future prospects. j enz inhib med chem 2004;19:199–229.
97. supuran ct, scozzafava a, conway j, editors. carbonic anhydrase—its inhibitors and activators. boca
raton, fl: crc press; 2004.  xxxd1100xxx –384.

226

*

winum et al.

98. supuran ct. indisulam: an anticancer sulfonamide in clinical development. expert opin investig drugs
2003;12:283–287.
99. abbate f, casini a, owa t, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: e7070, a
sulfonamide anticancer agent, potently inhibits cytosolic isozymes i and ii, and transmembrane, tumorassociated isozyme ix. bioorg med chem lett 2004;14:217–223.
100. supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors in the treatment and prophylaxis of obesity. exp opin ther
patents 2003;13:1545–1550.
101. lo ys, nolan jc, maren th, welstead wj, gripshover df, shamblee da. synthesis and physicochemical properties of sulfamate derivatives as topical antiglaucoma agents. j med chem 1992;35:
4790–4794.
102. briganti f, pierattelli r, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. part 37. novel classes
of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and their interaction with the native and cobalt-substituted enzyme:
kinetic and spectroscopic investigations. eur j med chem 1996;31:1001–1010.
103. maryanoff be, nortey so, gardocki jf, shank rp, dodgson sp. anticonvulsant o-alkyl sulfamates.
 xxxd3400xxx  and related compounds. j med
chem 1987;30:880–887.
104. maryanoff be, costanzo mj, nortey so, greco mn, shank rp, schupsky jj, ortegon mp, vaught jl.
structure–activity studies on anticonvulsant sugar sulfamates related to topiramate. enhanced potency
with cyclic sulfate derivatives. j med chem 1998;41:1315–1343.
105. recacha r, costanzo mj, maryanoff be, chattopadhyay d. crystal structure of human carbonic
anhydrase ii complexed with an anti-convulsant sugar sulphamate. biochem j 2002;361:437–441.
106. casini a, antel j, abbate f, scozzafava a, david s, waldeck h, schafer s, supuran ct. carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors: sar and x-ray crystallographic study for the interaction of sugar sulfamates/
sulfamides with isozymes i, ii, and iv. bioorg med chem lett 2003;13:841–845.
107. antel j, weber a, sotriffer ca, klebe g. multiple binding modes observed in x-ray structures of carbonic
anhydrase-inhibitor complexes and elsewhere: consequences for structure-based drug design. in: supuran
ct, scozzafava a, conway j, editors. carbonic anhydrase—its inhibitors and activators. boca raton, fl:
crc press; 2004. pp 45–66.
108. vicker n, ho y, robinson j, woo ll, purohit a, reed mj, potter bv. docking studies of sulphamate
inhibitors of estrone sulphatase in human  xxxg293xxx . bioorg med chem lett 2003;13:863–
865.
109. ho yt, purohit a, vicker n, newman sp, robinson jj, leese mp, ganeshapillai d, woo lwl, potter bv,
reed mj. inhibition of  xxxg293xxx  by steroidal and non-steroidal sulphamates. biochem
biophys res commun 2003;305:909–914.
110. abbate f, winum jy, potter bv, casini a, montero jl, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors: x-ray crystallographic structure of the adduct of human isozyme ii with emate—a dual
inhibitor of carbonic anhydrases and  xxxg2222xxx . bioorg med chem lett 2004;14:231–234.
111. pastorekova s, pastorek j. cancer-related carbonic anhydrase isozymes. in: supuran ct, scozzafava a,
conway j, editors. carbonic anhydrase—its inhibitors and activators. boca raton, fl: crc press; 2004.
pp 253–280.
112. masereel b, rolin s, abbate f, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: anticonvulsant
sulfonamides incorporating valproyl and other lipophilic moieties. j med chem 2002;45:312–320.
113. ilies ma, masereel b, rolin s, scozzafava a, câmpeanu g, cı̂mpeanu v, supuran ct. carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors: aromatic and heterocyclic sulfonamides incorporating adamantyl moieties with
strong anticonvulsant activity. bioorg med chem 2004;12:2717–2726.
114. shank rp, gardocki jf, vaught jl, davis cb, schupsky jj, raffa rb, dodgson sj, nortey so, maryanoff
be. topiramate: preclinical evaluation of structurally novel anticonvulsant. epilepsia 1994;35:450–
460.
115. sills gj, leach jp, kilpatrick ws, fraser cm, thompson gg, brodie mj. concentration-effect studies
with topiramate on selected enzymes and intermediates of the gaba shunt. epilepsia 2000;41:s30–s34.
116. rosenfeld we. topiramate: a review of preclinical, pharmacokinetic, and clinical data. clin ther
1997;19:1294–1308.
117. herrero ai, del olmo n, gonzalez-escalada jr, solis jm. two new actions of topiramate: inhibition of
depolarizing gaba(a)-mediated responses and activation of a potassium conductance. neuropharmacol
2002;42:210–220.
118. kuzniecky r, ho s, pan j, martin r, gilliam f, faught e, hetherington h. modulation of cerebral gaba
by topiramate, lamotrigine, and gabapentin in healthy adults. neurology 2002;58:368–372.
119. reis j, tergau f, hamer hm, muller hh, knake s, fritsch b, oertel wh, rosenow f. topiramate
selectively decreases intracortical excitability in human motor cortex. epilepsia 2002;43:1149–1156.

sulfamates and their therapeutic potential

*

227

120. gibbs jw iii, sombati s, delorenzo rj, coulter da. cellular actions of topiramate: blockade of kainateevoked inward currents in cultured hippocampal neurons. epilepsia 2000;41:s10–s16.
121. skradski s, white hs. topiramate blocks kainate-evoked cobalt influx into cultured neurons. epilepsia
2000;41:s45–s47.
122. zullino df, krenz s, besson j. ampa blockade may be the mechanism underlying the efficacy of
topiramate in ptsd. j clin psych 2003;64:219–220.
123. mclean mj, bukhari aa, wamil aw. effects of topiramate on sodium-dependent action-potential firing
by mouse spinal cord neurons in cell culture. epilepsia 2000;41:s21–s24.
124. taverna s, sancini g, mantegazza m, franceschetti s, avanzini g. inhibition of transient and persistent
naþ current fractions by the new anticonvulsant topiramate. j pharmacol exp ther 1999;288:960–968.
125. perucca e. a pharmacological and clinical review on topiramate: a new antiepileptic drug. pharmacol res
1997;35:241–256.
126. dodgson sj, shank rp, maryanoff be. topiramate as an inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase isoenzymes.
epilepsia 2000;41:s35–s39.
127. fakhoury t, murray l, seger d, mclean m, abou-khalil b. topiramate overdose: clinical and laboratory
features. epilepsy behav 2002;3:185–189.
128. kuo rl, moran me, kim dh, abrahams hm, white md, lingeman je. topiramate-induced
nephrolithiasis. j endourol 2002;16:229–231.
129. ribacoba montero r, salas puig x. efficacy and tolerability of long term topiramate in drug resistant
epilepsy in adults. rev  xxxd122xxx  2002;34:101–105.
130. aribi am, stringer jl. effects of antiepileptic drugs on extracellular ph regulation in the hippocampal
ca1 region in vivo. epilepsy res 2002, 49:143–151.
131. stringer jl. a comparison of topiramate and acetazolamide on seizure duration and paired-pulse
inhibition in the dentate gyrus of the rat. epilepsy res 2000, 40:147–153.
132. antel j, hebebrand j, preuschoff u, david s, sann h, weske m. method for locating compounds which are
suitable for the treatment and/or prophylaxis of obesity wo patent 0207821, 2002.
133. lynch cj, fox h, hazen sa, stanley ba, dodgson sj, lanoue kf. role of hepatic carbonic anhydrase in
de novo lipogenesis. biochem j 1995;310:197–202.
134. gordon a, price h. mood stabilization and weight loss with topiramate. am j psychiatry 1999;156:968–
969.
135. picard f, deshaies y, lalonde j, samson p, richard d. topiramate reduces energy and fat gains in lean
(fa/?) and obese (fa/fa) zucker rats. obesity res 2000;8:656–663.
136. vullo d, franchi m, gallori e, antel j, scozzafava a, supuran ct. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
inhibition of mitochondrial isozyme v with aromatic and heterocyclic sulfonamides. j med chem 2004;
47:1272–1279.
137. sliskovic dr, krause br, picard ja, anderson m, bousley rf, hamelehle kl, homan r, julian tn,
rashidbaigi za, stanfield rl. inhibitors of acyl-coa: cholesterol o-acyltransferase (acat) as
hypocholesterolemic agents. the first water-soluble acat inhibitor with lipid-regulating activity. j med
chem 1994;37:560–562.
138. lee ht, sliskovic dr, picard ja, roth bd, wierenga w, hicks jl, bousley rf, hamelehle kl, homan r,
speyer c, stanfield rl, krause br. inhibitors of acyl-coa: cholesterol o-acyltransferase (acat) as
hypocholesterolemic agents. ci-1011: an acyl sulfamate with unique cholesterol-lowering activity in
animals fed noncholesterol-supplemented diets. j med chem 1996;39:5031–5034.
139. llaverias g, laguna jc, alegret m. pharmacology of the acat inhibitor avasimibe (ci-1011).
cardiovasc drug rev 2003;1:33–50.
140. burnett jr, huff mw. avasimibe pfizer. curr opin investig drugs 2002;3:1328–1333.
141. lo ys, nolan jc, walsh da, welstead wj. preparation of sulfamate esters for use against arthritis and
osteoporosis. eur pat appl 1990; 403185.
142. walsh da, lo ys, shamblee da, welstead wj, nolan jc, graff g. methylsulfamic acid esters. a new
chemical class of oral antiarthritic agents. j med chem 1990;33:2068–2070.
143. nolan jc, walsh da, lo y, gathright ce, radvany ch, foxwell m, whitman l, graff g, sancilio lf.
ahr-15010: a novel anti-arthritic agent. j pharm pharmacol 1990;42:533–537.

jean-yves winum received his ph.d. in chemistry from the university of montpellier ii (france) in 1998. he
then worked as post-doctoral fellow in the department of chemistry of georgetown university (washington,
dc) and in the department of organic chemistry of the university of geneva (switzerland). in 1999, he joined
the department of chemistry of the university of montpellier ii, where he is now assistant professor. his research
interests are focused on medicinal chemistry in the field of enzyme inhibitors.

228

*

winum et al.

jean-louis montero is full professor of chemistry in university of montpellier (france). he received his ph.d.
in chemistry from the university of montpellier in 1973. after a post-doctoral fellow at the university of utah, he
held a position of assistant professor at the university of montpellier ii in 1975. in 1978, he became associate
professor at the university of abidjan (ivory coast), and joined the university of montpellier ii in 1982. he was
appointed to his current position in 1985. his major scientific interests are sugar chemistry and molecular
recognition.
andrea scozzafava graduated at the university of florence (1971) where he became assistant professor of
chemistry in 1972 and associate professor in 1975, at the faculty of pharmacy. in 1980, he became full professor
at the university of sassari, italy and then in 1981 he returned at the university of florence, where he is currently
professor of general and inorganic chemistry. his main research interests include structure–function
relationships of metallo-enzymes, biotransformation processes in environment; biocatalytic synthesis for green
chemistry, x-ray crystallography of metallo-enzymes, drug design of enzyme inhibitors.
claudiu supuran received his b.sc. in chemistry from the polytechnic university of bucharest, romania (1987)
and ph.d. in chemistry at the same university in 1991. in 1990, he became assistant professor of chemistry at the
university of bucharest. after a stage at the university of florida in gainesville, he returned in bucharest, where
he became associate professor in the department of organic chemistry. in 1995, he moved at the university of
florence, italy, where he is currently research fellow and contract professor of chemistry. his main research
interests include medicinal chemistry, bio-organic and bio-inorganic chemistry, design of enzyme inhibitors and
activators, chemistry of sulfonamides, biologically active organo-element derivatives, qsar studies, x-ray
crystallography of metalloenzymes, metal complexes with biologically active ligands (metal-based drugs),
carbonic anhydrases, serine proteases, matrix metalloproteinases, bacterial proteases, and amino acid
derivatives among others.

