drugs aging 2004; 21 (13): 865-883
1170-229x/04/0013-0865/$31.00/0

review article

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

new progestogens
a review of their effects in perimenopausal and
postmenopausal women
régine sitruk-ware
rockefeller university and population council, new york, new york, usa

contents
abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 865
1. which progestins are new? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 868
2. testing the activities of progestins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 868
2.1 in vivo bioassays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 868
2.2 binding affinity to steroid receptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 869
2.3 mode of action of the progestins and transactivation of the receptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 869
3. specific activities of the new progestins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 870
3.1 dienogest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 870
3.2  xxxd1946xxx  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 871
3.3 19-norprogesterone derivatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 872
3.3.1 trimegestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 873
3.3.2 nestorone® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 874
3.3.3 nomegestrol acetate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 876
4. benefits and risks of progestins used in hormone replacement therapy: state of the
controversy and specific aspects of the new progestins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 877
4.1 progestins and cardiovascular disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 877
4.2 progestins and breast cancer risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 877
4.3 progestins: effects on mammary tissue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 878
4.4 proliferative versus antiproliferative effects with different progestins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 878
4.5 epidemiological data in postmenopausal women . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 879
5. conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 880

abstract

the progestins have different pharmacological properties depending upon the
parent molecule, usually testosterone or progesterone, from which they are
derived. very small structural changes in the parent molecule may induce considerable differences in the activity of the derivative. in postmenopausal women with
an intact uterus, progestins are used in combination with estrogen as hormonereplacement therapy (hrt). the development of new generations of progestins
with improved selectivity profiles has been a great challenge. steroidal and
nonsteroidal progesterone-receptor (pr) agonists have been synthesised as well,
although the latter are still in a very early stage of development. several new
progestins, which have been synthesised in the last 2 decades, may be considered
fourth-generation progestins. these include dienogest,  xxxd1946xxx , nestorone®
(population council, new york, ny, usa), nomegestrol acetate and trimegestone. the fourth-generation progestins have been designed to have no androgenic
or estrogenic actions and to be closer in activity to the physiological hormone
progesterone.  xxxd1946xxx  differs from the classic progestins as it is derived
from  xxxd3238xxx . it is essentially an antimineralocorticoid steroid with no

866

sitruk-ware

androgenic effect but a partial antiandrogenic effect. the antiovulatory potency of
the different progestins varies. trimegestone and nestorone® are the most potent
progestins synthesised to date, followed by two of the older progestins,  xxxd2067xxx  and levonorgestrel. the new molecules trimegestone,  xxxd1946xxx 
and dienogest also have antiandrogenic activity.
following the publication of the results of the women’s health initiative
study, the role of progestins in hrt became controversial. unfortunately, this
concern has been directed towards progestins as a class, although striking differences exist among the progestins.  xxxd3023xxx  and some of its derivatives, such as the 19-norprogesterone molecules, and the new molecules
 xxxd1946xxx  and dienogest are not androgenic and, therefore, have no negative
effect on the lipid profile. the effects of progestins on breast tissue remain
controversial as well. however, depending on the progestin and the duration of
application, breast cell differentiation and apoptosis may predominate over
proliferation. it is still unclear if the currently available progestins are able to bind
specifically to the pr isoforms pr-a or pr-b and whether this is of clinical
relevance to breast cell proliferation is also unclear. although it is likely that the
new progestins may have neutral effects on the risk of coronary heart disease or
breast cancer in younger postmenopausal women, this hypothesis must be confirmed in large randomised, well controlled clinical trials.

the progestogens include both progesterone, the
hormone secreted by ovary and placenta, and the
synthetic steroids, or progestins, that mimic the actions of endogenous progesterone.[1] the new
progestogens are, by definition, progestins, and this
term will be used throughout the review. several
new progestins have been synthesised in the last
decade for use in both contraceptives and hormonereplacement therapies (hrts). although the north
american menopause society has recommended to
replace the term hrt with hormone therapy (ht),
the terminology of hrt is maintained in several
countries and also in endocrinology meetings as to
refer to the replacement of a deficiency in natural
hormone secretion.
the main action of progesterone or a progestin is
the secretory transformation of an estrogen-primed
endometrium. progesterone or a progestin prevents
the overproliferation of the endometrial tissue, but
the degree to which this effect is achieved depends
upon the antiestrogenic properties of the progestin
and the dose and duration of treatment. in women
with anovulatory cycles or in those treated with
estrogen, administration of a progestin for 12–14
days per month induces secretory transformation of
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

the endometrium. the withdrawal of the progestin
induces regular withdrawal bleeding.
the main indications for which the progestins
have been approved, therefore, are the treatment of
irregular and anovulatory menstrual cycles and,
when combined with estrogen, in postmenopausal
hrt regimens. progestins are used to manage two
conditions in perimenopausal or postmenopausal
women. during perimenopause, women commonly
have irregular menstrual cycles, which are often
anovulatory or are marked by a short or inadequate
luteal phase. in this setting, progestins are used to
prevent endometrial hyperplasia and to induce regular withdrawal bleeding in perimenopausal women
who are still secreting estradiol. progestins have
also been used without estrogen as progestin-only
contraceptive agents during this phase of reproductive life (table i).[2]
when estradiol declines to the postmenopausal
level and a progestin no longer induces withdrawal
bleeding in women with an intact uterus, hrt with
estrogen and a progestin, given sequentially or continuously, has been recommended for the treatment
of menopausal symptoms. the addition of a progestin to an estrogen ensures a secretory (or atrophic)
transformation of the uterine endometrial tissue, dedrugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

table i. indications for progestin use
contraception: pop or coc
hormonal replacement therapy (with estrogen)
anovulation, oligomenorrhoea
premenstrual syndrome
benign breast diseases (some countries)
breast cancer (third-line therapy)
coc = combined oral contraceptive; pop = progestin-only
(contraceptive) pill.

creasing the risk of endometrial hyperplasia attributed to unopposed estrogen therapy.[3-5]
the results of the women’s health initiative
(whi) study, a randomised controlled trial (rct)
enrolling more than 16 000 women who received
either combination hormone therapy (conjugated
estrogen plus  xxxd2554xxx ) or placebo,[6] and those of other large observational
studies[7-9] have raised concern about the risks associated with the use of some older progestins. the
results of these studies, conducted with first- or
second-generation progestins, such as  xxxd2554xxx ,  xxxd2751xxx  acetate or
levonorgestrel, in combination with conjugated estrogen, or oral estradiol, have been generalised to
the entire progestin class although progesterone, and
the other members of this class differ considerably
one from another in structure and small changes in
structure have been demonstrated to lead to large
differences in effects.[10-12]
the effects of progestins are related to interactions not only with  xxxg1737xxx  (pr) but
also with other steroid hormone receptors. some
progestins interact with the  xxxg183xxx  (ar),
the  xxxg730xxx  (er), the  xxxg1601xxx  (gr), or the  xxxg1602xxx  (mr).
these interactions may either induce transactivation
of a steroid receptor or prevent activation. in the
target organ, the balance between the receptor coactivators and corepressors recruited by a progestin
determines whether the overall effect of the molecule will be agonistic or antagonistic.[13] all progestins bind to the pr and have the expected effect on
the uterine endometrium, but each progestin has a
distinctive profile of activity in other target tissues, a
profile not necessarily shared by other members of
the same class.
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

867

secreted by the corpus luteum after ovulation,
progesterone has several biological actions. it maintains pregnancy via its antiestrogenic action,
preventing contractions of the uterus; it transforms
the endometrium into a secretory tissue in order to
permit implantation of a fertilised ovum; and it
prevents further ovulation through its antigonadotropic action. in addition, progesterone has an antiandrogenic effect. progesterone competitively inhibits the action of androgen as it is a preferred
substrate to the enzyme 5alpha-reductase, hence,
preventing the conversion of testosterone into its
active metabolite dihydrotestosterone.[14] progesterone also interacts with the mr; competitive binding
to this receptor by progesterone prevents its transactivation and inhibits the mineralocorticoid effect.
this antagonistic effect prevents sodium retention
and instead induces the excretion of sodium and
water.[15]
the older progestins, synthesised in the 1960s
and 1970s, were designed for use in contraceptives.
for this reason, a major design target was antigonadotropic action.[10]
the new progestins synthesised in the last two
decades were designed with the objective of creating
the ‘ideal’ progestin. it was hypothesised that a
progestin with potent progestational and antiestrogenic actions on the endometrium coupled with a
strong antigonadotropic effect and without any androgenic or glucocorticoid effects would produce
the benefits of progesterone without undesirable
effects, such as acne vulgaris, a decrease in highdensity lipoprotein-cholesterol (hdl-c) or bloating
and water retention. in addition, other beneficial
actions of progesterone, such as its antiandrogenic
and antimineralocorticoid effects, were incorporated
into the design of some new progestins.[16,17] antiandrogenic progestins may have several potentially
beneficial effects, such as reducing endogenous androgen action and decreasing the incidence of acne
vulgaris or hirsutism.
in addition, when given in the presence of naturally secreted estradiol or together with a synthetic
estrogen, the final effect of a progestin on the target
organs depends upon the potency of the estrogen.
the potency differences among the estrogens and
their varying effects on the liver, which are determined by their molecular structure as well as by the
drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

868

sitruk-ware

table ii. classification of new progestins
pregnanes
19-norprogesterones
nestorone®
nomegestrol acetate
trimegestone
estranes

bind to the ar, thus making it difficult to eliminate
completely some unwanted androgenic adverse effects. the new progestins may be defined as a fourth
generation. molecules of this generation have been
designed to bind very specifically to the pr and to
exert no androgenic, estrogenic or glucocorticoid
adverse effects (table iii).[12,18,19]

nonethinylated
dienogest

2. testing the activities of progestins

 xxxd3238xxx  derivative
 xxxd1946xxx 

mode of delivery, may change the way a specific
progestin, given at a certain dose, affects not only
the endometrium but also the lipid profile, the blood
vessels and, possibly breast tissue.
this review discusses the effects of the new
progestins on several organ systems and target tissues and on the steroid receptors within these tissues. the available evidence, as summarised here,
suggests that it is inappropriate to base conclusions
about the effects of a specific progestin on extrapolations from data generated in studies involving
another progestin with a different structure and profile of activity.
1. which progestins are new?
 xxxd1946xxx , dienogest, trimegestone, nestorone® 1 (population council, new york, ny,
usa), and nomegestrol acetate are considered to be
‘new’ progestins, as some have only recently
reached the market and others are still under development (table ii).
by convention the older progestins are divided
into three generations. the first generation included
noretynodrel and the nortestosterone derivatives that
become active after conversion to  xxxd2751xxx 
acetate. it also includes the 17- xxxd2303xxx 
derivatives. the second generation included  xxxd2754xxx  and levonorgestrel and the third generation included the levonorgestrel derivatives such as
 xxxd1849xxx , gestodene and  xxxd2753xxx .[10,11] most
of the progestins in these three generations were
derived from testosterone. their structures were
modified to reduce the incidence of undesirable
androgenic adverse effects but these progestins still
1

very small structural changes may account for
considerable differences in the effects of progestins.
several in vivo bioassays are used to compare the
biological activities of the progestins. although
these tests are rather old, they are still the gold
standards.
2.1 in vivo bioassays

progestational activity is usually evaluated with
the mcphail index, which measures the dose of
progestin required to transform the uterine endometrium to a secretory state in immature, estrogenprimed rabbits. a second assay, the pregnancy
maintenance test, measures the progestin dose required to maintain a pregnancy in ovariectomised
female rats. the third assay, the ovulation inhibition
test, measures the progestin dose required to inhibit
spontaneous ovulation in female rats with normal
estrus cycles; this assay is used to compare antiovulatory potencies of the progestins.[20,21]
the in vivo biological assay of the androgenic
activity of a progestin measures the effect of a given
dose of progestin on the weight of the ventral prostate or other male sex organs in immature male rats.
antiandrogenic activity is assessed in the same in
vivo model by measuring the dose of progestin required to antagonise the androgenic effect of a fixed
table iii. specific characteristics of the new progestinsa
progestin

notable characteristic

dienogest

antiandrogenic

 xxxd1946xxx 

antimineralocorticoid

nestorone®

highly progestational and antigonadotropic

nomegestrol acetate highly antigonadotropic
trimegestone
a

highly progestational

no new progestin is androgenic or estrogenic.

the use of trade names is for product identification purposes only and does not imply endorsement.

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

869

table iv. relative binding affinities of progestins with human steroid receptors in vitro[23,24]
relative binding affinity (%)
trimegestone
progesterone
androgen

558
2.4

glucocorticoid

13

mineralocorticoid

42

estrogen

<0.02

medroxyprogesterone
acetate

 xxxd2751xxx 
acetate

gestodene

levonorgestrel

298

134

864

323

19

36

55

71

58

2

58

1.4

38

3.1

2.7

97

17

<0.02

0.15

<0.02

<0.02

dose of testosterone on the weight of the male sex
organs.[20,22] the estrogenic activity of a progestin is
measured by the increase in uterine weight in
ovariectomised immature female rats.[20]
2.2 binding affinity to steroid receptors

progestins may also be compared by evaluating
their relative binding affinities (rbas) for the various steroid receptors in comparison with that of the
physiological reference hormones (set at 100%).
the rbas of the new progestins for the er, ar,
mr, and gr (as compared with estradiol, testosterone, aldosterone and cortisol) are shown in table iv.
the range of rbas for the new progestins suggests
that there are considerable differences in activity
among these molecules. however, the binding affinity to the steroid receptors does not always correlate
with the in vivo tests of estrogenic or androgenic
potency.
in a study measuring binding to ar derived from
the rat ventral prostate, the rbas for levonorgestrel
and  xxxd2067xxx  were 70% and 40%, respectively as compared with 100% for testosterone,
whereas nestorone® and progesterone did not show
significant binding to the ar (figure 1).[20] although
 xxxd2554xxx  is not derived from
testosterone but from 17alpha- xxxd2303xxx , it
has an rba for the ar of 36%.[23]
2.3 mode of action of the progestins and
transactivation of the receptors

the rba alone does not provide a complete
portrait of steroid hormone activity at the receptor.
in addition to binding to the receptor, the hormone
must induce receptor transactivation in order to produce the hormonal effect. if the hormone binds to
the receptor without allowing the transactivation of
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

7.5

 xxxd1946xxx 

3
500
<0.5

the dna machinery, an antagonistic effect may be
produced.
the progestational action of progesterone, as
well as that of the progestins, is mediated by the pr.
in the target cell, progesterone produces a dramatic
change in pr conformation, which is associated
with transforming the pr to an active form that can
bind to specific dna elements. this transformation
is accompanied by a loss of associated heat-shock
proteins and dimerisation. the activated pr dimer,
comprised of pr-a and pr-b, then binds to specific
dna sequences within the promotor region of progesterone-responsive genes, referred to as progesterone response elements.[25] the agonist-bound pr is
believed to activate transcription by associating with
coactivators, which act as bridging factors between
progesterone
nestorone®
 xxxd2067xxx 
levonorgestrel
testosterone

100
[3h] mibolerone bound (%)

receptor

80
60
40
20
0
1

10

100

concentration (nmol/l)
fig. 1. relative binding affinities to the  xxxg183xxx  for progesterone, nestorone®,  xxxd2067xxx  and levonorgestrel as
compared with testosterone (reproduced from kumar et al.,[20] with
permission).

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

870

sitruk-ware

o
oh
o

ch2cn

ch2

o
o
ch2

dienogest

 xxxd1946xxx 

fig. 2. chemical structures of dienogest and  xxxd1946xxx . dienogest is a nonethinylated estrane derivative with a cyanomethyl group
instead of an ethinyl group at c-17.  xxxd1946xxx  is a derivative of  xxxd3238xxx .

3. specific activities of the
new progestins
3.1 dienogest

dienogest is structurally related to the  xxxd2751xxx  family of testosterone derivatives but acts as
an antiandrogen. like the others in this family,
dienogest has the same 18-carbon nucleus as the
estrane structure (figure 2).[16] dienogest differs in
structure from  xxxd2751xxx  by having a cyanomethyl group instead of an ethinyl group at c-17
and also by the addition of a double-bond between
c-9 and c-10.[11,16] dienogest has a high bioavailability ( 96.2%) and a rather short-terminal half-life
(11.6 hours).[16,26]
the hershberger test evaluating the antiandrogenic effect of various progestins indicates that
dienogest has about 40% of the potency of  xxxd1786xxx  the most potent antiandrogenic progestin
(figure 3).[27]
when dienogest is combined with  xxxd2054xxx  ( xxxd2054xxx  30mug plus dienogest 2mg daily),
the combination is an effective combined oral contraceptive (coc; pearl index ~0.2). this coc has
good bleeding control and improves androgenic
symptoms.[28,29]
in a study in which about 200 postmenopausal
women received continuous combined treatment
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

with estradiol and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate or with
 xxxd2040xxx  and dienogest over 12 cycles,  xxxd2040xxx  plus dienogest appeared to be as
effective as estradiol plus  xxxd2751xxx  acetate in
the correction of menopausal symptoms and in the
prevention of endometrial disorders. however, over
a treatment period of 12 months the number of days
with bleeding was significantly lower with the dienogest combination product than with the  xxxd2751xxx  acetate combination product.[30]
during treatment with the  xxxd2040xxx  plus
dienogest combination, a slight increase in triglycerides (up to 4%) was seen, together with a decrease in
total cholesterol (tc; 6–10%) and in low-density
100

80

percentage

the receptor and the general transcription machinery. this is followed by increases in the rate of
transcription producing agonist effects at the cellular and tissue levels.[13,25]

60

40

20

0

3. antiandrogenicity of dienogest and  xxxd1946xxx  as compared with  xxxd1786xxx  in the hershberger test (reproduced
from teichmann,[27] with permission).

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

lipoprotein-cholesterol (ldl-c; 11–17%). hdl-c
was increased by 18% during treatment with  xxxd2040xxx  plus dienogest in contrast to the 5%
decrease observed with estradiol and  xxxd2751xxx 
acetate.[30] significant differences between estradiol
and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate and  xxxd2040xxx 
plus dienogest combinations were also seen in their
influence on insulin-like growth factor-1, which was
significantly lowered by treatment with estradiol
valerate plus dienogest but was unaffected by estradiol and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate.[30] the vasodilatation mediated by estradiol via  xxxd2738xxx 
and prostaglandin-1 is not antagonised by dienogest,
as shown by determination of the surrogate parameters  xxxd1274xxx  and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.[31]
recent studies conducted in postmenopausal women have shown a specific effect of dienogest on
memory and sleep.[32] estrogen deficiency plays an
important role in memory deficits in postmenopausal women. several mechanisms for the role
of estrogen on the structure and function of brain
areas known to be involved in memory have been
proposed: promotion of neuronal growth, prevention of neuronal atrophy, regulation of synaptic plasticity, influence on neurotransmitter metabolism, increase of cerebral blood flow and expression of
neurotropic factors.
eeg mapping studies in postmenopausal women
with and without depression and normal control
subjects showed that low estradiol levels contributed to decreased vigilance at the neurophysiological
level, which, in turn, was correlated with increased
depressive and climacteric symptoms at the
behavioural level.[33,34]
such deficits in vigilance and cognitive function
can be alleviated by hrt, as was shown in a 2month, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised study in which postmenopausal women
were treated daily with  xxxd2040xxx  (2mg)
alone, a continuous combination hrt consisting of
 xxxd2040xxx  (2mg) plus dienogest (3mg), or
placebo.[34] eeg mapping, performed before and
after treatment, demonstrated improvement at the
neurophysiological level, which was mirrored in
improvement at the behavioural level, as measured
by physician-rated and self-rating scales, by clinical
observation, and by psychometric testing. after 2
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

871

months, the observed eeg changes with this type of
hrt were typical of those seen during the improvement of vigilance.[33,34]
another important finding was an improvement
in the speed and quantity of cognitive resources as
shown by changes in event-related potentials, especially in the latency and amplitude of the p300
wave.[32] the reduction in p300 latency was similar
in the groups treated with  xxxd2040xxx  alone or
with  xxxd2040xxx  plus dienogest, but the amplitude increased in the  xxxd2040xxx  plus dienogest group but not in the  xxxd2040xxx  alone
group, demonstrating that the progestin dienogest
enhanced the positive effects of  xxxd2040xxx .
these results suggest that the combination of
 xxxd2040xxx  and dienogest may have a specific
influence on fundamental aspects of the information
processing.  xxxd2040xxx  appears to be responsible for the reduction in p300 latency, whereas
dienogest seems to contribute to the augmentation of
p300 amplitude, supporting the hypothesis that this
specific hrt combination might contribute to better
attention and memory by modulating the cholinergic
system.[32] further studies with hrt combinations
that include other new progestins would be justified
as this beneficial effect is highly relevant to the
postmenopausal population.
the present findings regarding event-related potentials during treatment with  xxxd2040xxx  plus
dienogest are novel but they are supportive of various other observations of a protective effect of
hrt.[35,36] these findings are especially intriguing
in view of the negative effects of hrt on cognition,
which were suggested by the results of the whi
study in which  xxxd2554xxx , was
combined with conjugated estrogen but in an older
population of women.[37] thus, different estrogenprogestin combinations might produce different effects on cognitive function as well as on other parameters.
3.2  xxxd1946xxx 

 xxxd1946xxx , which is derived from  xxxd3238xxx , is essentially an antimineralocorticoid progestin. the affinity of  xxxd1946xxx  for the mr is
about five times the affinity of aldosterone itself. in
addition,  xxxd1946xxx  has some antiandrogenic acdrugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

872

tion; its potency is about 30% of that of cyproterone
acetate, the most potent antiandrogenic progestin.[24,38]
 xxxd1946xxx  has the basic 19-carbon chemical
structure of its parent compound, androstane. it has
two methylene groups: one is attached to c-6 and
c-7; the other, to c-15 and c-16. in addition, a
carbolactone group is attached to c-17 (see figure
2).[11]  xxxd1946xxx  has a long-terminal half-life
(about 32 hours) and its bioavailability is 66%.[11]
 xxxd1946xxx , which has pharmacodynamic
properties very similar to progesterone,[39,40] has
been used with  xxxd2054xxx  in a coc ( xxxd2054xxx  30mug plus  xxxd1946xxx  3mg; yasmin®,
schering ag, berlin, germany) and also as an hrt
preparation in combination with oral estradiol (estradiol 1mg plus  xxxd1946xxx  2mg;  xxxd1946xxx ®,
schering ag, berlin, germany).
 xxxd1946xxx  has antimineralocorticoid properties not found in most synthetic progestins. its antimineralocorticoid activity is one of its main benefits as it counteracts the effect of the potent oral
estrogen,  xxxd2054xxx , on  xxxg99xxx  synthesis in the liver, which, in turn, increases aldosterone, leading to water and salt retention. because of
its antimineralocorticoid activity,  xxxd1946xxx  has
been associated with weight loss, rather than weight
gain usually observed in women using coc containing 19-nortestosterone progestins.[17,41]
 xxxd1946xxx  and progesterone bind to pr in
uterine and mr in kidney cytosol.[38] with systemic
subcutaneous administration of  xxxd1946xxx  in rats,
full endometrial transformation (mcphail index)
was obtained at 1 mg/day. at higher  xxxd1946xxx 
dosages (1 mg/day to 3 mg/day), antimineralocorticoid activity was seen in rats with reduction in
sodium and water retention caused by suppression
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. the
latter activity indicated that the potency of  xxxd1946xxx  was about 8-fold higher than that of  xxxd3238xxx .[38]
 xxxd1946xxx  also has antiandrogenic activity.
antiandrogenic effects were seen in both gonadintact and testosterone-substituted castrated male
rats. the antiandrogenic potency of  xxxd1946xxx  is
superior to that of chlormadinone but inferior to that
of  xxxd1786xxx  (see figure 3). endometrial
transformation, inhibition of ovulation, and an© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

sitruk-ware

timineralocorticoid (e.g. natriuretic) effects, and
mild antiandrogenic effects were observed in human
subjects at the same range of oral dosages (0.5 mg/
day to 4.0 mg/day).[38]
studies in postmenopausal women have demonstrated that an oral, daily continuous combination
hrt regimen consisting of estradiol (1mg) plus
 xxxd1946xxx  (2mg) significantly decreased the
mean number of hot flushes per week within 2–3
weeks after beginning treatment.[42] during treatment with this combination regimen, >80% of the
women became amenorrheic within 1 year, a finding
related to the induction of endometrial atrophy,
which was observed in >85% of the subjects treated
for up to 2 years and no hyperplasia or carcinoma of
the endometrium was observed during the study
period.[42]
in a small, double-blind, randomised study in
postmenopausal women with hypertension treated
with enalapril, the combination of estradiol plus
 xxxd1946xxx  produced an additive antihypertensive
effect.[43] in this study, 24 women receiving
enalapril 20 mg/day were randomised to treatment
with estradiol plus  xxxd1946xxx  or placebo for 14
days. compared with the group receiving placebo,
the estradiol plus  xxxd1946xxx  group had a significant decrease in 24-hour mean ambulatory blood
pressure from baseline (139/83mm hg) in both systolic blood pressure (–9 ± 5mm hg, p = 0.014) and
diastolic blood pressure (–5 ± 4mm hg, p = 0.007)
whereas no change in blood pressure was observed
in the placebo group.[43]
the investigators concluded that the additive
blood pressure-lowering effect of estradiol plus
 xxxd1946xxx  hrt regimen given with enalapril was
consistent with the antimineralocorticoid effect of
 xxxd1946xxx  and that hrt with estradiol plus  xxxd1946xxx  might offer a novel potential mechanism
for reducing cardiovascular risk in postmenopausal
women.[43]
3.3 19-norprogesterone derivatives

the 19-norprogesterone derivatives of progesterone are referred to as ‘pure’ progestational molecules as they bind more selectively to the pr.[12,22,44]
this category includes nomegestrol acetate, an acetylated compound, as well as four nonacetylated
drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

molecules: demegestone, promegestone (also
known as r 5020), trimegestone (a promegestone
prodrug), and nestorone®.[11,12,20,21,45] the 19-norprogesterones are derived from the pregnane structure but have one less carbon as they do not have a
radical methyl (ch3) at c-19. although these compounds were synthesised in the early 1980s, two of
the three discussed in this review are still in clinical
development and may, therefore, be called ‘new’
progestins.
3.3.1 trimegestone

trimegestone differs from promegestone by the
presence of a hydroxylated carbon on the penultimate carbon of the side chain (c-17) [figure 4].
trimegestone is twice as potent as nestorone® on
the mcphail index. however, on the ovulation inhibition test, trimegestone is closer in activity to
 xxxd2554xxx .[46,47] the activity of
trimegestone on the rat uterine decidualisation and
ovulation assays is similar to medroxyprogesterone
acetate but the antiestrogenic activity of trimegestone evaluated by rat uterine  xxxg282xxx  messenger rna (mrna) expression was five times
greater than that of  xxxd2554xxx .[46]
as shown in table iv, the rba of trimegestone
for the pr is 588, indicating a high affinity for the
pr but only 42 for the mr.[23] trimegestone also
has also been demonstrated to have weak antiandrogenic activity and some antimineralocorticoid
activity.[44,47]
trimegestone binds to the human pr with an
affinity greater than do  xxxd2554xxx ,  xxxd2751xxx , or levonorgestrel. in contrast,
trimegestone binds with low affinity to the ar, the
gr, and the mr and has no measurable affinity for
the er. compared with other progestins, trimegestone demonstrates an improved separation of its
affinity for the pr from its affinities to other classical steroid hormone receptors. in vivo, trimegestone
has potent progestin activity. for example,
trimegestone produces glandular differentiation of
the uterine endometrium in rabbits and is about 30
and 60 times more potent than  xxxd2554xxx  and  xxxd2751xxx , respectively. in the
rat, trimegestone does not have significant androgenic, glucocorticoid, antiglucocorticoid, or mineralocorticoid activity but it does have antiminer© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

873

alocorticoid activity and modest antiandrogenic effects. the overall profile of trimegestone is
qualitatively similar to that of progesterone. when
trimegestone is administered long term, it
antagonises the effect of estradiol on the uterus but
does not antagonise the beneficial bone-sparing activity of estradiol.[47]
in an experimental model of osteoporosis in
ovariectomised rats, estradiol, given alone, prevented further bone loss and reduced bone turnover as
measured by biochemical and histomorphometric
markers. when given with estradiol, trimegestone
enhanced its beneficial effects on bone loss and
bone turnover.[48]
in studies in rats which evaluated cns gabaa
receptor modulatory activity, trimegestone had less
activity on this undesirable endpoint than did progesterone and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate, which may
translate into fewer mood-related adverse effects.[47]
trimegestone has been developed for postmenopausal hrt. it is given in combination with estradiol, either as a continuous combined regimen
consisting of estradiol (1.0mg) plus trimegestone
(0.125mg) or as cyclic combined regimens consisting of estradiol (1.0mg or 2.0mg) plus trimegestone
(0.25mg or 0.5mg). with these three regimens, endometrial safety was good; no endometrial hyperplasia was observed with any of the three combinations.[49]
in a randomised, double-blind, 13-cycle study
comparing daily treatment with a sequential combination formulation of estradiol (2.0mg) plus
trimegestone (0.25mg or 0.5mg) to treatment with
estradiol plus  xxxd2751xxx  acetate in 487 postmeoh
o
h3c

ch3
ch3

h
h
o

trimegestone
fig. 4. chemical structure of trimegestone, a 19-norprogesterone
derivative.

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

874

sitruk-ware

nopausal women of whom 349 completed the study,
all treatments were equally effective in alleviating
hot flushes and in producing significant reductions
in the kupperman index.[50] the formulation with
the higher trimegestone dose (0.5mg) reduced the
duration of expected withdrawal bleeding.
in a dose-ranging study evaluating sequential
combination therapy with estradiol (2mg) plus
trimegestone (0.05mg, 0.1mg, 0.25mg, or 0.5mg),
given daily, to postmenopausal women, 96% of the
endometrial specimens obtained at study termination had secretory changes without hyperplasia.[51]
in addition, the progestin did not negate the beneficial effect of estrogen on the lipid profile during
treatment,[51] a finding related to the lack of androgenic activity of trimegestone. this observation was
supported by the results of another double-blind,
randomised, study in which estradiol plus trimegestone was compared with  xxxd2040xxx  plus
 xxxd2754xxx  in 634 postmenopausal women.[52] in this
o
c

study, the androgenic activity of  xxxd2754xxx  opposed
the estrogen-induced increase in hdl-c, whereas
trimegestone was associated with an increase in
hdl-c.
3.3.2 nestorone®

one of the most potent progestins is nestorone® (16-methylene-17alpha-acetoxy-19-norpregn4-ene-3,20-dione), a 19-norprogesterone derivative.
nestorone®’s 19-methyl substitution and the addition of the 16-methylene substituent, which enhances binding to the  xxxg1737xxx , contribute to the high progestational activity of the
molecule (figure 5).[53]
nestorone® is not active orally but is active at
target tissues when administered continuously via
sustained-release implants, vaginal rings or transdermal systems.
nestorone®, like progesterone, does not bind to
 xxxg2066xxx  (shbg) and has a
o

ch3

c

h3c

h3c

h3c

ch3
o

coch3

h3c
h

o

o

6

ch3

progesterone

 xxxd2554xxx 

o
c
h3c

19

o

c
h3c

coch3

ch3
o

o
c

ch3

ch2

h

10

o

o

ch3

h
6

o

ch3

nomegestrol acetate

nestorone®

nestorone®

fig. 5. chemical structures of
and nomegestrol acetate, two 19-norprogesterone derivatives, compared with the structures of
progesterone and  xxxd2554xxx .

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

shorter half-life and higher clearance rate than
progestins that exhibit shbg binding.[54] the oral
bioavailability of nestorone® is only about 10%,
and its half-life is shorter than that of the progestins
that bind to shbg. however, a much slower elimination rate is observed with the sustained-release
subdermal nestorone® implant.[55] the lack of
shbg binding and the large volume of distribution
is consistent with the high affinity of nestorone® for
pr and its accumulation in extravascular space.[55]
the free fraction of nestorone® and other progestins, such as progesterone,  xxxd1946xxx , and dienogest that do not bind to shbg,[56] should be
greater than most testosterone-derived progestins
that bind to shbg.
according to the standard in vivo bioassays, nestorone® appears to be one of the most potent progestins with respect to progestational and antiovulatory
activities. nestorone® is three to ten times more
potent than levonorgestrel and 100 times more potent than progesterone itself when the molecules are
administered subcutaneously (figure 6).[20] on the
mcphail index, nestorone® exhibited ten times
greater potency than levonorgestrel and was 100
times more potent than progesterone. nestorone®
was 100 times more potent when administered subcutaneously than when given orally. on the pregnancy maintenance test in ovariectomised rats, nestorone® 0.3mg was as effective as levonorgestrel
0.3mg or progesterone 5mg in maintaining pregnancy; nestorone® had the highest potency when the
steroids were administered subcutaneously.
trimegestone appears twice as potent as nestorone® on the mcphail index but is less active in
the antiovulatory model in the rat.[23,47] using the
ovulation inhibition assay in rats with normal estrus
cycles, a dose-dependent inhibition of spontaneous
ovulation was observed for progesterone, levonorgestrel and nestorone® when administered subcutaneously. nestorone® was the most potent of the
three, completely inhibiting ovulation at a dose per
animal of 10 mug/day versus levonorgestrel 20 mug/
day or progesterone 900 mug/day.[20]
using the in vivo models for the androgenicity,
levonorgestrel and  xxxd2067xxx  are androgenic, increasing the weight of the ventral prostate in a
dose-dependent manner, whereas nestorone® and
progesterone do not induce such effects.[20] the
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

875

weights of the ventral prostate and levator ani of
immature castrated male rats after nestorone® treatment were compared with those after treatment either with testosterone, the control, or with  xxxd2067xxx  or levonorgestrel. both levonorgestrel
and  xxxd2067xxx  produced a dose-dependent
weight increase of the ventral prostate. nestorone®
had no androgenic or antiandrogenic activity when
administered at a dosage of 20 mg/kg/day, which far
exceeds the effective dose for contraception in
humans.[20]
estrogenicity, measured by the increase in uterine weight, was significantly increased by levonorgestrel but not by nestorone® at similar doses.[20]
neither progestin was shown to bind to the er.
the glucocorticoid activity of progestins may
account for some of their unwanted effects.  xxxd2554xxx , gestodene, and nestorone®
have been shown to bind to the gr. while  xxxd2554xxx  had glucocorticoid-like effects at high doses,[57] nestorone®, even at high
doses, did not show glucocorticoid activity in the in
vivo assays in which increases in liver glycogen and
 xxxg2250xxx  (tat) were measured. in
contrast,  xxxd2554xxx  stimulated
tat activity.[58]
when given in doses 2000 times that required to
block ovulation in ovariectomised female rats, nestorone® caused thymus regression.[20]
a nestorone®-only vaginal ring is being developed as a contraceptive based on the potent antiovulatory effect of this progestin. in a 6-month study of
continuous use in 180 women, vaginal rings delivermpa
tmg
mcphail
index
ovulation
inhibition

nom

 xxxd1946xxx 

nes 100

>

lng 10

>p 1

nes 100

>

lng 50

>p 1

tmg

 xxxd1946xxx 

dng
fig. 6. progestogenic and antiovulatory potencies of the new
progestins trimegestone (tmg), nestorone® (nes), nomegestrol
acetate (nom), dienogest (dng), and  xxxd1946xxx  ( xxxd1946xxx ) vs the
older progestins levonorgestrel (lng) and medroxyprogesterone
acetate (mpa) and the physiological hormone progesterone (p).

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

876

sitruk-ware

ing 50 mug/day, 75 mug/day, or 100 mug/day were evaluated.[59,60] serum nestorone® levels remained fairly constant throughout the study at 125 pmol/l, 200
pmol/l and 250 pmol/l for the low-, mid-, and highdose groups, respectively.[60] luteal activity was not
dose related and occurred infrequently (in 1.2–2.6%
of sampling periods). with the two higher doses, the
inhibition of follicular maturation was more pronounced; estradiol levels remained in the range of
300–400 pmol/l, which is compatible with a normal
estrogenic response. all three doses effectively inhibited ovulation, and luteal activity was suppressed
when nestorone® serum levels were >100 pmol/l.
these results indicate the excellent antigonadotropic
effect of nestorone®, whereby nestorone® levels as
low as 75 mug/day were sufficient to suppress ovulation effectively and to prevent follicular growth.
because of its high antiestrogenic potency,[61]
nestorone® can also be used for hrt. low doses,
combined with estradiol, would be sufficient to prevent endometrial hyperplasia.[53] preliminary results
indicate that nestorone® administered transdermally at a dose of 1mg leads to plasma levels of 150
pmol/l and prevents the estrogen-induced endometrial stimulation provided by estradiol 1mg delivered transdermally.[53] further studies of this nonandrogenic potent progestin in various transdermal
delivery systems are warranted.
3.3.3 nomegestrol acetate

nomegestrol acetate is formed by adding a double bond between c-6 and c-7 of the  xxxd2303xxx  skeleton and deleting the ch3 radical at
c-19. these structural changes confer a higher progestational potency to nomegestrol acetate than to
 xxxd2554xxx  (see figure 5).[45]
in experiments testing the effects of progestins
on the prostate growth, duc et al.[22] showed no
effect of nomegestrol acetate even when administered at very high doses. nomegestrol acetate has a
partial antiandrogenic effect, which is 20 times lower than that of  xxxd1786xxx . in similar experiments,  xxxd2554xxx  was shown to
be androgenic at high doses,[62] whereas nomegestrol acetate had no androgenic effect.[45] while both
 xxxd2751xxx  and levonorgestrel bind to shbg,
their elimination half-life (t1/2beta) vary, the terminal
half-life being around 7–8 hours for  xxxd2751xxx 
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

and up to 26 hours for levonorgestrel. in contrast,
 xxxd1786xxx  has a t1/2beta of 48 hours[63] and
nomegestrol acetate of about 50 hours.
nomegestrol acetate has been studied as a component of a combination hrt regimen containing
estradiol. in a double-blind, randomised, prospective, three-cycle study of 57 nonhysterectomised
women with natural menopause, the effects of estradiol (1.0mg or 2.5mg) plus nomegestrol acetate
(1.5mg or 3.75mg) or placebo on cardiovascular risk
factors were evaluated.[64] both the high- and lowdose estradiol plus nomegestrol acetate combinations had favourable effects on plasma lipids and
lipoproteins, including significant reductions in,
ldl-c, and lipoprotein(a). both doses also significantly reduced menopausal complaints. no change
was observed on other metabolic factors or clotting
factors, such as  xxxg2056xxx , fibrinogen, plasminogen, prothrombin fragment 1 + 2, protein c and
total and free  xxxg1850xxx .[64]
nomegestrol acetate also has a potent antigonadotropic effect, making it suitable for use in
contraceptive formulations. in a study of ten
postmenopausal women evaluated for the pulsatility
of gonadotropins under treatment with  xxxd2751xxx  acetate 10 mg/day or nomegestrol acetate 5 mg/
day, a significant decrease in mean plasma luteinising hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone
levels and a diminution in response to exogenous
 xxxg930xxx  were observed
with both treatments in comparison to placebo
(p < 0.001).[65] the pulsatile frequency, but not the
amplitude, of luteinising hormone secretion was significantly decreased by both  xxxd2751xxx  acetate
and nomegestrol acetate; this effect was not
antagonised by the antiandrogen  xxxd2143xxx  indicating that it was not mediated through the ar, but,
most likely, through the pr. although the antiovulatory effect of nomegestrol acetate was not marked
in animal studies, this progestin has a large antigonadotropic effect in women. bazin et al.[66]
showed that oral nomegestrol acetate 1.25 mg/day
inhibited ovulation while permitting follicle growth,
whereas dosages of 2.5 mg/day or 5 mg/day suppressed both ovulation and follicle development.
lower doses of nomegestrol acetate were used in
contraceptive implants and were showing efficacy
drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

in preventing pregnancy with one implant used over
1 year.[67,68]
4. benefits and risks of progestins used
in hormone replacement therapy:
state of the controversy and specific
aspects of the new progestins
4.1 progestins and cardiovascular disease

many progestins used in contraceptives, as well
as in hrt formulations, are derived from testosterone, and their main adverse effects are related to
their androgenic properties or their glucocorticoid
effects.
studies have also shown that estrogen has beneficial effects on blood vessel walls; estrogen- and
progesterone-binding sites have been found in the
endothelial cells. estrogen increases the release of
 xxxd2738xxx , causing relaxation of smooth muscle
cells and vasodilation.
in monkeys, neither  xxxd3023xxx  nor
nomegestrol acetate inhibits the beneficial effect of
estrogen on the coronary artery dilator response.
however, when  xxxd2554xxx  was
combined with estrogen, the positive response was
inhibited by 50%.[69,70] another study in monkeys,
showed that estradiol had an antiatherogenic effect
irrespective of hdl-c or tc levels; the addition of
 xxxd3023xxx  did not diminish this effect.[71]
the other new progestins have not yet been tested
in similar animal models. however, all of the newer
progestins lack androgenic activity and are not expected to have negative effects on the lipid profile or
surrogate markers of cardiovascular risk.[12]
the whi study was a large rct that evaluated
the effects of a continuous hrt regimen consisting
of conjugated estrogen (0.625mg) plus  xxxd2554xxx  (2.5mg) versus placebo in
healthy postmenopausal women.[6] the trial was
prematurely halted after an interim analysis showed
an increased risk of breast cancer (hazard ratio 1.26;
95% ci 1.00, 1.59) and a lack of overall benefit.
surprisingly, the expected decrease in coronary
heart disease (chd) was not observed, in fact, an
increase in the chd hazard ratio was found (hazard
ratio 1.29; 95% ci 1.02, 1.63).[6] although it has
been claimed that the increased chd risk observed
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

877

in the whi study should apply to all hrt preparations, the extension of these findings to other hrt
regimens involving different progestins would be
inappropriate as the type of progestin and its dose
influence the pharmacological action of the regimen. other progestins might have a more favourable
effect on chd risk, although this hypothesis has not
yet been tested in a large rct.
in addition, it is not clear if the age of the study
population affects the outcome. in a recently published subanalysis of the whi cardiovascular
data,[72] it was found that women receiving hrt in
whom menopause had begun <10 years previously
had the lowest hazard ratio (0.89) for chd as compared with the placebo group, whereas those in
whom menopause began >20 years ago had a hazard
ratio of 1.71. this finding highlights the contribution of age to the increase in chd risk observed in
the whi study in which the elevation of risk was
related to the older segment of the population. thus,
the increase in chd risk in the whi population may
not be applicable to a population of younger postmenopausal women. in addition, the results of the whi
on the chd risk revised in the 2003 publication no
longer showed any statistically significant difference between hrt and placebo; the hazard ratio
was 1.24 (adjusted ci 0.94, 1.6).[72]
a recent study that explored the effect of hrt on
coronary artery atherosclerosis added to the evidence that hrt may be cardioprotective if initiated
before the onset of atherosclerosis.[73] in this study,
coronary artery calcium, a marker for atherosclerosis, was measured by electron beam tomography in
2213 postmenopausal women of whom 1172 were
current hrt users. hrt reduced the odds of having
a very high coronary artery calcium score by 50%
(odds ratio 0.5, p = 0.02) in women with mean age
59 years and mean duration of hrt of 9 years,[73] a
younger population than the whi study population
whose mean age at screening was 63 years.[6] these
findings suggest that the negative chd findings of
the whi study were essentially related to the older
age of the study population.
4.2 progestins and breast cancer risk

the data related to the effect of progestins used in
hrt on breast tissue have been interpreted differently, and controversies are still ongoing. most
drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

878

sitruk-ware

available data come from studies with older progestins, and few studies have been conducted with the
newer progestins. the recent publications on
postmenopausal hrt and breast cancer risk raised
the concern that some of the older progestins, when
combined with certain doses of estrogen, may enhance the risk of breast cancer as compared with the
risk following estrogen given alone. however, the
type of progestin used, the dose and the duration of
its application may influence the type of effect –
either proliferative or antiproliferative – on human
breast tissue.
4.3 progestins: effects on mammary tissue

in animal experiments, the addition of progesterone to estrogen causes differentiation in mammary
tissue. in rodents and mammals, it has long been
established that estrogen stimulates the growth of
the ductal system. progesterone acts synergistically
to estrogen to transform the terminal end buds into
alveolar buds and differentiated lobules ready for
milk secretion.[74] in several species these findings
were confirmed and the physiological role of progesterone has been established as synergistic to estrogen but geared at the full differentiation of the
tissue. in humans, the data are less clear-cut. some
recent experiments have suggested that exposure to
progesterone is associated with a higher proliferation rate in breast tissue.
animal models, such as mice in which the pr-a
or pr-b has been knocked out, have been used to
study the specific role of each pr isoform on various
target tissues. in mice lacking the pr-a, the presence of the pr-b isoform is sufficient for the normal
proliferative response and differentiation of mammary tissue to progesterone. pr-a has also been
shown to act as a dominant repressor of pr-b function.[75] progestins derived from progesterone or
from testosterone may bind differently to the pr-a
or pr-b, but this issue has not yet been fully studied.
the progestins used in hrt may have different
binding affinities for pr-a or pr-b and, hence,
exert different effects on estrogen-induced proliferative action.[76] however these different activities
have not been studied for all the new progestins.
when the expression of pr-a and pr-b in breast
tissue of castrated female monkeys was evaluated, it
was found that treatment with conjugated estrogen
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

alone stimulated the total amount of pr, while conjugated estrogen plus  xxxd2554xxx 
decreased pr-a and increased pr-b;  xxxd2554xxx  alone did not affect the levels
of either pr-a or pr-b.[77] the ratio of pr-a to prb was lowest with combined treatment. these findings may suggest that  xxxd2554xxx 
would activate the isoform b of the pr, which is
responsible for both proliferation and differentiation
of the mammary tissue.
as the human breast tissue cannot be shed
monthly, apoptosis is an important regulatory mechanism for cells in breast tissue. it has been shown
that during the luteal phase, both mitosis and
apoptosis were high.[78,79] the ultimate effect of the
steroid hormones on breast tissue should be viewed
as the creation of a balance between the cumulative
mitotic rate and the apoptotic rate of breast cells.[76]
the effects of nomegestrol acetate on breast cell
proliferation and apoptosis have been studied.[80]
the withdrawal of nomegestrol acetate, but not continuous treatment, induced apoptosis of normal
human breast epithelial cells in vitro and in women
who applied nomegestrol acetate gel to their breasts.
furthermore, this apoptotic response was specific to
normal breast cells and was not observed in vitro in
t47d breast cells.[80]
4.4 proliferative versus antiproliferative
effects with different progestins

it has been demonstrated that breast cells in the
late phase of cell cycle activity are initially driven to
the s phase of dna synthesis by progestins.[81] this
effect is transient and further application of progestins suppresses the cyclins, halting breast cell division in early g1 phase. in addition, the normal cell
cycle in breast cells can be shifted from cell division
to cell differentiation under the action of progesterone as has been shown in a study with mcf-7
human breast cells in which progestin-induced
growth inhibition was a result of cell differentiation
rather than to apoptosis.[82]
in breast tissue in monkeys[83] and later in women,[84] cellular proliferation, measured by ki67
immunohistochemical staining, and the percentage
area of breast occupied by epithelial and glandular
tissue were examined after treatment with conjugatdrugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

ed estrogen or with conjugated estrogen plus
 xxxd2554xxx . in both studies, the
investigators showed that long-term conjugated estrogen therapy increased cellular proliferation as
well as the percentage of breast composed of glandular tissue.[83,84] an increase in the number of terminal duct lobular units was observed when
 xxxd2554xxx  was added to conjugated estrogen. the investigators in both studies
concluded that  xxxd2554xxx  acted
as a proliferative agent. in combination with the
animal data described earlier, these findings can be
interpreted as demonstrating a physiological synergy between estrogen and progesterone, which transforms the ducts into lobular units. the increase in
the volume of epithelial and glandular tissue observed with combined conjugated estrogen and
 xxxd2554xxx  may well account for
the increased mammographic density observed in
women receiving hormone therapy.[76] in a recent
study conducted in surgically postmenopausal cynomolgus monkeys conjugated estrogen plus
 xxxd2554xxx  induced a diffuse epithelial proliferation in the mammary glands but
 xxxd2054xxx  plus  xxxd2751xxx  acetate did
not.[85] in another study using fine needle biopsy
specimens from mammary glands of women using
estradiol (2mg) plus  xxxd2751xxx  acetate (1mg) or
 xxxd2040xxx  (2mg) plus dienogest (2mg),[86]
ki67 immunohistochemical staining, used as a
proliferation marker, did not differ significantly between  xxxd2751xxx  acetate or dienogest group,
although the dienogest group showed a tendency for
a weaker proliferation.
in addition, previous in vitro studies in mcf-7 or
t47d breast cell lines have compared the effects of
several progestins on cell proliferation.[87,88] in these
studies, nomegestrol acetate, as well as  xxxd2554xxx , did not induce proliferation
whereas gestodene and levonorgestrel did promote
proliferation. whether the in vitro data can be extrapolated to a clinical setting has long been debated.
only a long-term rct could provide definite
proof that various progestins act differently on the
risk of breast cancer. however, using the available
tools, under the same experimental conditions, all
progestins do not have the same effects on breast
cells. these findings highlight the difference be© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

879

tween the effects of different hrt regimens on
breast tissue and preclude the extrapolation of results obtained with one combination to the others.
4.5 epidemiological data in
postmenopausal women

the benefits of hrt in postmenopausal women
have been long recognised but recently challenged
after the publication of two large studies suggesting
that the risks of therapy may outweigh the benefits.
the decision to halt the whi study was based
upon the observations that the weighted risks outweighed the benefits and that there was an increase
in the risk of invasive breast cancer. however, a
careful analysis of the whi study data indicates that
women reporting prior hrt use before study entry
had a higher risk of breast cancer than women who
were first users of hrt. women who had not previously used hrt had a breast cancer hazard ratio of
1.06 (95% ci 0.81, 1.38), which was not significantly different from that in the group receiving placebo[6] and was far lower than the overall breast cancer
hazard ratio of 1.26 (95% ci 1.00, 1.59), which was
highlighted in most press releases. therefore, 5.2
years of therapy without any prior use of hrt did
not give an increased breast cancer risk in users of
conjugated estrogen and  xxxd2554xxx  as compared with placebo users.
in all previous epidemiological studies,[7,9,89]
hrt use of >5 years increased the risk of breast
cancer, and the risk appeared to be higher in women
using combined hrt. the results of the whi study,
the only large rct, have highlighted the weaknesses of the observational studies. the inherent biases
in the populations or in other factors in the cohort
studies make their results sometimes questionable.
the results of a most recent observational study,
the million women study,[8] created another wave
of worry about the risks of hrt. in this study,
women using any type of hrt for >1 year had a
relative risk of breast cancer of 1.45 when compared
with nonusers. in addition, no difference was found
in the breast cancer risk for different hrt regimens
including those using the progestins levonorgestrel,
 xxxd2554xxx  and  xxxd2751xxx  acetate.
drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

880

sitruk-ware

the early increase in breast cancer risk suggests
that hrt revealed existing breast cancers rather
than inducing new tumours. this interpretation is
further supported by the finding that past users of
hrt had no increase in breast cancer risk and that
the increase in risk disappeared after stopping treatment. there is an impressive agreement in data from
all observational studies that past users of hrt are
not at increased risk for the development of breast
cancer. these findings support the hypothesis that
postmenopausal hrt is not causing but promoting
the diagnosis of pre-existing tumours.[90] this diagnosis may well be delayed due to the increase in
mammographic density induced by the combined
hormonal therapy.[91] given these biases in the observational study data, the interpretation of the million women study data on the effects of different
hrt regimens has been challenged.
5. conclusion
in conclusion, the progestins available for the
treatment of perimenopausal and postmenopausal
women are not all the same. there may be profound
differences among these molecules according to
their structure, metabolites, and pharmacodynamic
actions. therefore, it is inappropriate to consider the
various effects of the older and newer progestins as
class effects.
the new progestins developed for contraceptives
and hrt regimens have been designed to be closer
in structure and function to the natural hormone
progesterone. the design of the new progestins suggests that their use should not be accompanied by
adverse effects on the surrogate markers of cardiovascular risk. however, no long-term clinical data
from trials comparable to the whi study are available for the new hrt combinations. such studies are
definitely warranted to provide clinical data that will
document the effects of these combinations on the
cardiovascular outcomes and breast cancer risk. preliminary data on the new progestins from pharmacological studies support the potential of these agents
to be beneficial when used in hrt combination
regimens, thus offering new options in the treatment
of postmenopausal women.
© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

acknowledgements
no sources of funding were used to assist in the preparation of this manuscript. the author thanks barbara tokay for
editorial assistance. nestorone® (population council, new
york, ny, usa), a progestin mentioned in this review, was
developed by the population council; development of nestorone® for contraceptive use was funded by grants from the
united states agency for international development and the
national institute of child health and development. the
views of the author do not necessarily reflect those of the
population council or the funding agencies.
the author has no conflicts of interest that are directly
relevant to the content of this review.

references
1. north american menopause society. role of progestogen in
hormone therapy for postmenopausal women: position statement of the north american menopause society. menopause
2003 mar-apr; 10 (2): 113-32
2. sitruk-ware r. therapeutic uses of progestins: practical recommendations. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell jr dr, editors. progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m
dekker, 2000: 341-53
3. sturdee dw, barlow dh, ulrich lg, et al. is the timing of
withdrawal bleeding a guide to endometrial safety during
sequential oestrogens/progestagen replacement therapy? uk
continuous combined hrt study investigators. lancet 1994
oct 8; 344 (8928): 979-82
4. gambrell rd, massey fm, castaneda ta, et al. the use of the
progestogen challenge test to reduce the risk of endometrial
cancer. obstet gynecol 1980; 55 (6): 732-8
5. sitruk-ware r. progestins in hormonal replacement therapy and
prevention of endometrial disease. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell
jr dr, editors. progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000: 269-77
6. writing group for the women’s health initiative investigators.
risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy
postmenopausal women: principal results from the women’s
health initiative randomized controlled trial. jama 2002 jul
17; 288 (3): 321-33
7. schairer c, lubin j, troisi r, et al. menopausal estrogen and
estrogen-progestin replacement therapy and breast cancer risk.
jama 2000; 283 (4): 485-91
8. beral v, million women study collaborators. breast cancer
and hormone-replacement therapy in the million women
study. lancet 2003 aug 9; 362 (9382): 419-27
9. magnusson c, baron ja, correira n, et al. breast cancer risk
following long term oestrogen- and oestrogen-progestin replacement therapy. int j cancer 1999 may 5; 81 (3): 339-44
10. henzl mr, edwards ja. pharmacology of progestins: 17alphahydroxyprogesterone derivatives and progestins of the first
and second generation. in: sitruk-ware r, mishell jr dr,
editors. progestins and antiprogestins in clinical practice. new
york: m dekker, 2000: 101-32
11. stanczyk fz. pharmacokinetics and potency of progestins used
for hormone replacement therapy and contraception. rev endocr metab disord 2002 sep; 3 (3): 211-24
12. sitruk-ware r. progestogens in hormonal replacement therapy:
new molecules, risks, and benefits. menopause 2002; 9 (1):
6-15
13. liu z, auboeuf d, wong j, et al. coactivator/corepressor ratios
modulate pr-mediated transcription by the selective receptor

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

modulator ru486. proc natl acad sci u s a 2002 jun 11; 99
(12): 7940-4
wright f, giacomini m, riahi m, et al. antihormone activity of
progesterone and progestins. in: bardin cw, milgröm e, mauvais-jarvis p, editors. progesterone and progestins. new york:
raven press books, 1983: 121-34
corvol p, elkik f, feneant m, et al. effect of progesterone and
progestins on water and salt metabolism. in: bardin cw,
milgröm e, mauvais-jarvis p, editors. progesterone and
progestins. new york: raven press books, 1983: 179-86
oettel m, holz c. hybrid progestins: the example of dienogest.
in: sitruk-ware r, mishell jr dr, editors. progestins and
antiprogestins in clinical practice. new york: m dekker, 2000:
163-78
oelkers w, foidart jm, dombrovicz n, et al. effects of a new
oral contraceptive containing an antimineralocorticoid progestogen,  xxxd1946xxx , on the renin-aldosterone system, body
weight, blood pressure, glucose tolerance, and lipid metabolism. j clin endocrinol metab 1995 jun; 80 (6): 1816-21
kuhl h. comparative pharmacology of newer progestogens.
drugs 1996 feb; 51 (2): 188-215
schindler ae, campagnoli c, druckmann r, et al. classification and pharmacology of progestins. maturitas 2003; 46s1:
s7-s16
kumar n, koide ss, tsong yy, et al. nestorone®: a progestin
with a unique pharmacological profile. steroids 2000; 65:
629-36
tuba z, bardin cw, dancsi a, et al. synthesis and biological
activity of a new progestogen, 16-methylene-17alpha-hydroxy-18-methyl-10-norpregn-4-ene-3,20-dione acetate. steroids
2000; 65: 266-74
duc i, botella j, bonnet p, et al. antiandrogenic properties of
nomegestrol acetate. arzneimittel forschung 1995 jan; 45 (1):
70-4
philibert d, bouchoux f, degryse m, et al. the pharmacological profile of a novel norpregnane progestin (trimegestone).
gynecol endocrinol 1999 oct; 13 (5): 316-26
krattenmacher r.  xxxd1946xxx : pharmacology and
pharmacokinetics of a unique progestogen. contraception
2000 jul; 62 (1): 29-38
giangrande ph, mcdonnell dp. the a and b isoforms of the
human  xxxg1737xxx : two functionally different transcription factors encoded by a single gene. recent prog horm
res 1999; 54: 291-313
zimmermann h, thebault jj, durauchelle t, et al.
pharmacokinetics of  xxxd2040xxx  2mg + dienogest 2mg
(climodien® 2/2) after single and repeated oral administration
in healthy postmenopausal women. clin drug invest 2000; 20:
123-34
teichmann a. pharmacology of  xxxd2040xxx /dienogest.
climacteric 2003; 6 suppl. 2: 17-23
wiegratz i, lee jh, kutschera e, et al. effect of dienogestcontaining oral contraceptives on lipid metabolism. contraception 2002; 65 (3): 223-9
foster rh, wilde mi. dienogest. drugs 1998; 56 (5): 825-33
gräser t, koytchev r. müller a, et al. comparison of the
efficacy and endometrial safety of two  xxxd2040xxx /dienogest combinations and kliogest for continuous combined
hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women. climacteric 2000 jun; 3 (2): 109-18
mueck ao, seeger h, ludtke r, et al. effect on biochemical
vasoactive markers during postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy: estradiol versus estradiol/dienogest. maturitas
2001; 38 (3): 305-13
anderer p, semlitsch hv, saletu b, et al. effects of hormone
replacement therapy on perceptual and cognitive event-related
potentials in menopausal insomnia. psychoneuroendocrinology 2003 apr; 28 (3): 419-45

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

881

33. saletu b, brandstatter n, metka m, et al. hormonal, syndromal
and eeg mapping studies in menopausal syndrome patients
with and without depression as compared with controls. maturitas 1996; 23 (1): 91-105
34. saletu b, anderer p, gruber d, et al. hormone replacement
therapy and vigilance double-blind, placebo-controlled eegmapping studies with an estrogen-progestogen combination
(climodien, lafamme) versus estrogen alone in menopausal
syndrome patients. maturitas 2002 nov 20; 43 (3): 165-81
35. smith yr, giordani b, lajiness-o’neil r, et al. long-term
estrogen replacement is associated with improved nonverbal
memory and attentional measures in postmenopausal women.
fertil steril 2001; 76 (6): 1101-7
36. carlson mc, zandi pp, plassman bl, et al. hormone replacement therapy and reduced cognitive decline in older women:
the cache county study. neurology 2001; 57 (12): 2210-6
37. shumaker sa, legault c, rapp sr, et al. estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: the women’s health initiative memory study: a randomized controlled trial. jama
2003; 289 (20): 2651-62
38. elger w, beier s, pollow k, et al. conception and pharmacodynamic profile of  xxxd1946xxx . steroids 2003; 68 (10-13):
891-905
39. fuhrmann u, krattenmacher r, slater ep, et al. the novel
progestin  xxxd1946xxx  and its natural counterpart progesterone: biochemical profile and antiandrogenic potential. contraception 1996; 54 (4): 243-51
40. pollow k, juchem m, elger w, et al.  xxxd1946xxx 
( xxxd1946xxx ): a novel synthetic progestagen: characterization of
binding to different receptor proteins. contraception 1992; 46
(6): 561-74
41. oelkers w, berger v, bolik a, et al.  xxxd1946xxx , a new
progestogen with antimineralocorticoid activity: effects on
ovulation, electrolyte excretion, and the rennin-aldosterone
system in normal women. j clin endocrinol metab 1991 oct;
73 (4): 837-42
42. rübig a.  xxxd1946xxx : a new cardiovascular-active progestin
with antialdosterone and antiandrogenic properties. climacteric 2003; 6 suppl. 3: 49-54
43. preston ra, alonso a, panzitta d, et al. additive effect of
 xxxd1946xxx /17- xxxd2037xxx  in hypertensive postmenopausal women receiving enalapril. am j hypertens 2002; 15
(9): 816-22
44. zhang z, lundeen sg, zhu y, et al. in vitro characterization of
trimegestone: a new potent and selective progestin. steroids
2000; 65 (10-13): 637-43
45. paris j, thevenot r, bonnet p, et al. the pharmacological
profile of tx 066 (17alpha-acetoxy-6-methyl-19-nor-4,6pregna-diene-3,20-dione) a new oral progestative. arzneimittel forschung 1983; 33 (5): 710-5
46. lundeen sb, zhang z, zhu y, et al. rat uterine  xxxg282xxx 
expression as a model for  xxxg1737xxx  modulators:
characterization of the new progestin trimegestone. j steroid
biochem mol biol 2001; 78 (2): 137-43
47. winneker rc, bitran d, zhang z. the preclinical biology of a
new potent and selective progestin: trimegestone. steroids
2003; 68 (10-13): 915-20
48. bouali y, gaillard-kelly m, marie pj. effect of trimegestone
alone or in combination with estradiol on bone mass and bone
turnover in an adult rat model of osteopenia. gynecol endocrinol 2001; 15 (1): 48-55
49. gaspard u.  xxxd2037xxx /trimegestone: expanding low dose
ht options with trimegestone [abstract]. symposium on the
new direction in hrt. xvii figo world congress of gynecology and obstetrics; 2003 nov 2-7; santiago
50. al azzawi f, wahab m, thompson j, et al. acceptability and
patterns of endometrial bleeding in estradiol-based hrt regi-

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

882

51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.
68.

69.

sitruk-ware

mens: a comparative study of cyclical sequential combinations
of trimegestone or  xxxd2751xxx  acetate. climacteric 2001; 4
(4): 343-54
wahab m, al azzawi f. trimegestone: expanding therapeutic
choices for the treatment of the menopause. expert opin
investig drugs 2001; 10 (9): 1737-44
meuwissen jh, beijers-de bie l, vihtamaki t, et al. assessment of the metabolic tolerance in postmenopausal women
over a 1-year period of two hormone replacement therapies
containing estradiol in combination with either  xxxd2754xxx  or
trimegestone. gynecol endocrinol 2002; 16 (2): 155-62
sitruk-ware r, small m, kumar n, et al. nestorone®: clinical
applications for contraception and hrt. steroids 2003; 68
(10-13): 907-13
fotherby k. potency and pharmacokinetics of gestagens. contraception 1990; 41 (5): 533-50
noe g, salvatierra a, heikinheimo o, et al. pharmacokinetics
and bioavailability of st 1435 administered by different
routes. contraception 1993; 48 (6): 548-56
oettel m, graser t, hoffman h. why dienogest as a progestogenic component of postmenopausal nonandrogenic hormone replacement therapy? drugs today 2001; 37 suppl. g:
3-15
hellman l, yoshida k, zumoff b, et al. the effect of  xxxd2554xxx  on the pituitary-adrenal axis. j clin
endocrinol metab 1976; 42 (5): 912-7
guthrie gp, john wj. the in vivo glucocorticoid and antiglucocorticoid actions of  xxxd2554xxx . endocrinology 1980 nov; 107 (5): 1393-6
brache v, mishell dr, lahteenmaki p, et al. ovarian function
during use of vaginal rings delivering three different doses of
nestorone. contraception 2001; 63 (5): 257-61
sitruk-ware r, small m. new methods of progestin delivery.
contemp clin gynecol obstet 2002; 2: 287-98
kumar s, menard j, kumar n, et al. antiestrogenic effects of
nestorone as compared to other progestins [abstract no. p314]. 85th annual endocrine society meeting; 2003 jun 19-22;
philadelphia, 478
bullock lp, bardin cw. androgenic, synandrogenic, and antiandrogenic actions of progestins. ann n y acad sci 1977;
286: 321-30
dusterberg b, humpel m, speck u. terminal half-lives in
plasma and bioavailability of  xxxd2751xxx , levonorgestrel,
 xxxd1786xxx  and gestodene in rats, beagles and rhesus
monkeys. contraception 1981; 24 (6): 673-83
conard j, basdevant a, thomas jl, et al. cardiovascular risk
factors and combined estrogen-progestin replacement therapy:
a placebo-controlled study with nomegestrol acetate and estradiol. fertil steril 1995 nov; 64 (5): 957-62
couzinet b, young j, brailly s, et al. the antigonadotropic
activity of progestins (19-nortestosterone and 19-norprogesterone derivatives) is not mediated through the  xxxg183xxx . j clin endocrinol metab 1996 dec; 81 (12): 4218-23
bazin b, thevenot r, bursaux c, et al. effect of nomegestrol
acetate, a new 19-nor-progesterone derivative, on pituitaryovarian function in women. br j obstet gynaecol 1987 dec;
94 (12): 1199-204
coutinho em. one year contraception with a single subdermal
implant containing nomegestrol acetate (uniplant). contraception 1993 jan; 47 (1): 97-105
devoto l, kohen p, barnhart k, et al. hormonal profile, endometrial histology and ovarian ultrasound assessment during
1 year of nomegestrol acetate implant (uniplant). hum reprod
1997 apr; 12 (4): 708-13
williams jk, honore ek, washburn sa, et al. effects of
hormone replacement therapy on reactivity of atherosclerotic
coronary arteries in cynomolgus monkeys. j am coll cardiol
1994; 24 (7): 1757-61

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

70. williams jk, cline jm, honore ek, et al. coadministration of
nomegestrol acetate does not diminish the beneficial effects of
estradiol on coronary artery dilator responses in nonhuman
primates (macaca fascicularis). am j obstet gynecol 1998;
179 (5): 1288-94
71. adams mr, kaplan jr, manuck sb, et al. inhibition of coronary artery atherosclerosis by  xxxd2037xxx  in ovariectomized
monkeys: lack of an effect of added progesterone. arteriosclerosis 1990; 10 (6): 1051-7
72. manson je, hsia j, johnson kc, et al. estrogen plus progestin
and the risk of coronary heart disease. n engl j med 2003 aug
7; 349 (6): 523-34
73. akhrass f, evans at, wang y, et al. hormone replacement
therapy is associated with less coronary atherosclerosis. j clin
endocrinol metab 2003; 88: 5611-4
74. russo j, tay lk, russo ih. differentiation of the mammary
gland and susceptibility to carcinogenesis. breast cancer res
treat 1982; 2 (1): 5-73
75. conneely om, lydon jp. progesterone receptors in reproduction: functional impact of the a and b isoforms. steroids 2000;
65 (10-11): 571-7
76. kenemans p, bosman a. breast cancer and post-menopausal
hormone therapy. best pract res clin endocrinol metab 2003;
17 (1): 123-37
77. isaksson e, wang h, sahlin l, et al. effects of long-term hrt
and tamoxifen on the expression of progesterone receptors a
and b in breast tissue from surgically postmenopausal cynomolgus macaques. breast cancer res treat 2003; 79 (2):
233-9
78. thijssen jh. oestrogens, progestins and breast proliferation.
zentralbl gynakol 1997; 119 suppl. 2: 43-7
79. gompel a, somai s, chaouat m, et al. hormonal regulation of
apoptosis in breast cells and tissues. steroids 2000; 65 (10-11):
593-8
80. desreux j, kebers f, noel a, et al. effects of a progestogen on
normal human breast epithelial cell apoptosis in vitro and in
vivo. breast 2003; 12 (2): 142-9
81. musgrove ea, lee cs, sutherland rl. progestins both stimulate and inhibit breast cancer cell cycle progression while
increasing expression of transforming growth factor alpha,
 xxxg682xxx , c-fos, and c-myc genes. mol
cell biol 1991; 11 (10): 5032-43
82. alkhalaf m, el mowafy a, karam s. growth inhibition of
mcf-7 human breast cancer cells by progesterone is associated with cell differentiation and phosphorylation of akt protein.
eur j cancer prev 2002; 11 (5): 481-8
83. cline jm, soderqvist g, von schoultz e, et al. effects of
hormone replacement therapy on the mammary gland of surgically postmenopausal cynomolgus macaques. am j obstet
gynecol 1996; 174 (1 pt 1): 93-100
84. hofseth lj, raafat am, osuch jr, et al. hormone replacement
therapy with estrogen or estrogen plus medroxyprogesterone
acetate is associated with increased epithelial proliferation in
the normal postmenopausal breast. j clin endocrinol metab
1999; 84 (12): 4559-65
85. suparto ih, williams jk, cline jm, et al. contrasting effects of
two hormone replacement therapies on the cardiovascular and
mammary gland outcomes in surgically postmenopausal
monkeys. am j obstet gynecol 2003; 188 (5): 1132-40
86. conner p, soderqvist g, skoog l, et al. breast cell proliferation
in postmenopausal women during hrt evaluated through fine
needle aspiration cytology. breast cancer res treat 2003; 78
(2): 159-65
87. catherino wh, jeng mh, jordan vc.  xxxd2754xxx  and gestodene
stimulate breast cancer cell growth through an  xxxg730xxx  mediated mechanism. br j cancer 1993; 67 (5): 945-52

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

new progestogens for menopause

88. catherino wh, jordan vc. nomegestrol acetate, a clinically
useful 19-norprogesterone derivative which lacks estrogenic
activity. j steroid biochem mol biol 1995; 55 (2): 239-46
89. breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative
reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 52,705
women with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast
cancer. collaborative group on hormonal factors in breast
cancer. lancet 1997; 350 (9084): 1047-59
90. speroff l. the million women study and breast cancer. maturitas 2003; 46 (1): 1-6

© 2004 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

883

91. greendale ga, reboussin ba, slone s, et al. postmenopausal
hormone therapy and change in mammographic density. j natl
cancer inst 2003 jan 1; 95 (1): 30-7

correspondence and offprints: dr régine sitruk-ware,
center for biomedical research, population council, 1230
york ave, new york, ny 10021, usa.
e-mail: regine@popcbr.rockefeller.edu

drugs aging 2004; 21 (13)

