original article

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy:
toward an optimal treatment
berten ceulemans, md, phd; marc boel, md; lieve claes, msc, phd; lina dom, md; herman willekens, md;
paul thiry, md; lieven lagae, md, phd

abstract
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy, or dravet syndrome, is one of the catastrophic epilepsy syndromes. in the past, treatment was mainly based on valproate and phenobarbital. recently, some of the new antiepilepsy drugs, such as topiramate
and stiripentol, have been shown to be promising in the treatment of this epilepsy syndrome. the treatment regimen of
12 children with dravet syndrome and proven mutations in the  xxxg216xxx  of the sodium channel  xxxg2020xxx  is reported
here. five patients on the “traditional” treatment regimen are compared with seven children on an “optimal” treatment
regimen based on a combination of valproate and topiramate. with respect to the literature and our own experience, we
propose guidelines for “optimal” treatment of children with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. this includes prevention of hyperthermia, rigorous treatment of fever, avoiding stressful situations, maintenance treatment based on a combination
of only two antiepilepsy drugs (ie, valproate and topiramate), and a strict acute seizure treatment based on benzodiazepines.
to prevent long-lasting periods of status epilepticus, this acute seizure treatment must be taught to parents and caregivers.
(j child  xxxd122xxx  2004;19:516–521).

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy, or dravet syndrome,
is a catastrophic epilepsy syndrome, which was described
25 years ago by charlotte dravet et al.1,2 it was recognized
as an epilepsy syndrome with both generalized and focal
seizures by the international league against epilepsy in
1989.3 because myoclonic seizures are not a pathognomonic
sign of this syndrome, the term “dravet syndrome” was
proposed at the last review of epilepsy syndromes.4 the frequency of severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy is estimated
at 1 in 40,000 children5 and represents about 7% of all severe
epilepsies starting before the age of 3 years.6 the major

received july 11, 2003. received revised dec 1, 2003. accepted for publication dec 2, 2003.
from the epilepsy center for children and youth (drs ceulemans, boel
and lagae), pulderbos, belgium; department of neurology-child neurology
(dr ceulemans), university hospital antwerp, edegem, belgium; department
of molecular genetics (drs ceulemans and claes), flanders interuniversity
institute for biotechnology (vib8), university of antwerp (drie eiken),
antwerp, belgium; department of child neurology (drs boel and lagae),
university hospital gasthuisberg, leuven, belgium; queen paola children’s
hospital (dr dom), antwerp, belgium; a.z. st-lucas (dr willekens), ghent,
belgium; st-oda institute (dr thiry), overpelt, belgium.
address correspondence to dr berten ceulemans, epilepsy center for
children and youth, reebergenlaan 4, b-2242 pulderbos, belgium. tel:
0032/3/466 06 10; fax: 0032/3/466 06 38; e-mail: berten.ceulemans@revapulderbos.be.

first clinical sign is a prolonged febrile seizure, starting in
infancy. later, (a)febrile secondary generalized tonic-clonic
or hemiclonic seizures occur. recurrent status epilepticus,
certainly in infancy and provoked by fever, is a frequent and
typical sign in this syndrome. other types of generalized
seizures, including myoclonic seizures, as well as simple or
complex partial seizures and secondary generalized seizures,
do occur, and sudden death is not uncommon.6 early psychomotor development is normal, but stagnation occurs
during the second year of life. later in life, severe mental
retardation is the rule. ataxia and pyramidal signs can be
observed but are, according to dravet et al, not necessary
for the diagnosis.6 at the beginning of the disease, electroencephalograms are usually normal. photosensitivity
occurs even before 1 year of age. later, epileptic abnormalities such as multifocal spikes, spike waves and polyspike
waves develop. at that point, there is always a slowing
down of background activity.
recently, we demonstrated that de novo mutations in
the neuronal sodium channel  xxxg216xxx   xxxg2020xxx  are a
major cause of severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy.7–9 most
frequent are truncating mutations or missense mutations in
the pore-forming parts of this ion channel.
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy is known to be
very therapy resistant,6 and, in general, conventional treat-

516
downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy / ceulemans et al

ment is disappointing. valproate, phenobarbital, and benzodiazepines can decrease the frequency and duration of the
seizures, whereas  xxxd2056xxx  and high doses of piracetam
can improve myoclonic seizures.6 anecdotal case reports of
improvement with bromide, phenytoin, corticosteroids,
immunoglobulins, and a ketogenic diet have been presented
in the literature.6 epilepsy surgery is not indicated because
of the absence of focal cortical lesions. aggravation of
myoclonic seizures often occurs with carbamazepine,10,11
vigabatrin, and lamotrigine,12 whereas phenytoin can induce
choreoathetosis more easily in these patients.13
in contrast to conventional antiepilepsy drugs, some of
the newer ones show promising results. stiripentol, an
inhibitor of several cytochromes p-450 and probably a
- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba) reuptake blocker, seems to be
effective in children with severe epilepsy.14 a french randomized, placebo-controlled, stiripentol add-on trial in
patients with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy using valproate and benzodiazepines as baseline anticonvulsants
showed  xxxd2051xxx % responders’ rate (> 50% seizure reduction),15
with 9 of 21 patients becoming seizure free. a second similar study from an italian group seems to confirm these
results.16 recently, a follow-up report from the french group
demonstrated the long-term efficacy of stiripentol when
added on to valproate and benzodiazepines in patients with
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy.17  xxxd3564xxx , used only
in japan for severe epilepsy syndromes in infants, is possibly another useful drug.18 in one article, the authors suggest
that it could even prevent the appearance of myoclonic
seizures.19 topiramate, in combination therapy with valproate, is the most studied new antiepilepsy drug in patients
with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. it is a drug with
multiple mechanisms of action and a broad therapeutic
spectrum. beside a mild blocking effect on voltage-dependent sodium channels, it enhances gaba-induced influx of
chloride and inhibits kainate/ampa glutamate receptors. 20
nieto-barrera et al, coppola et al, villeneuve et al, burkart
et al, and yeung et al (one patient) have reported promising results.20–24 a greater than 50% reduction in seizure frequency was reported in 55 to 72% of patients and seizure
freedom in 10 to 16%. it is interesting to note that in all series,
the most frequent association was with valproate and benzodiazepines. the side effects were mostly mild and transient, that is, they were more frequent in a weekly increase
scheme and rather exceptional when the dose was increased
every fortnight. the most frequently reported side effects
were anorexia, weight loss, and somnolence. they did not
differ in frequency from side effects with topiramate in
patients with other types of epilepsy and nearly never led
to withdrawal of the drug.
methods
this study presents the results of two treatment regimens in 12
patients with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy with proven
mutations in  xxxg2020xxx . a clinical description of the patients and
specific mutations has been published elsewhere.7–9 all patients

517

could be classified as having the classic type of severe myoclonic
epilepsy in infancy, as we recently described.9 all patients were seen
at the time of the genetic diagnosis and were re-examined after a
stable period of 6 months without change in their baseline
antiepilepsy medication. during that period, a structured individual patient diary, made by parents or caregivers, containing seizure
history, current treatment, and side effects, was kept. for the
patient who died (patient 1), clinical information is taken retrospectively from the history of the parents. according to their
response, on treatment, patients were divided into three categories: seizure free, occasional induced seizures, and multiple
spontaneous seizures. occasional induced seizures were defined
as seizures occurring only in specific situations, such as periods
of fever, hyperthermia after a bath or during warm days, and
“stressful” situations such as a birthday party.
until 5 years ago, the strategy in treating children with severe
myoclonic epilepsy in infancy was based on trial and error and was
mainly directed at the most prominent seizure type. five patients
were treated with this “traditional” treatment regimen, but after the
introduction of topiramate, we switched to a planned “optimal” treatment regimen, based on prevention of seizure provocative situations,
a maintenance treatment of valproate and topiramate (with or without benzodiazepines), and a fairly aggressive acute seizure treatment
schedule with benzodiazepines. four older patients, still followed
at the epilepsy center, and three newly diagnosed patients were
treated with this regimen. to find out which treatment was best, we
compared those patients treated with the traditional regimen with
those treated with the newer optimal regimen.
results
traditional treatment regimen

one patient (patient 1) died of a nocturnal status epilepticus at the age of 4 years. he was on a triple anticonvulsive
medication and still had many spontaneous generalized
seizures at least several times a week (table 1).
four patients received what we call the “traditional”
treatment regimen, which was based on a combination of
older antiepilepsy drugs. they all received valproate, in
combination with other antiepilepsy drugs. all medications
were used in normal doses according to common practice.
one patient (patient 4) was on a combination of three drugs
and three patients were on four drugs. two patients (patients
2 and 5) received topiramate as add-on therapy with three
other anticonvulsive drugs and benzodiazepines. in both
patients, topiramate was administered in low doses
(±5 mg/kg). a standardized strategy for acute seizure treatment was not recommended in those patients, apart from
being prudent during periods of fever. all four patients suffered from multiple spontaneous seizures, mostly tonicclonic and myoclonic seizures. somnolence occurred as a
side effect in two patients, of whom one also had gingival
hyperplasia and drooling.
optimal treatment regimen

seven patients were on the optimal treatment regimen at the
time of inclusion in the study. this regimen combines a

downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

518

journal of child neurology / volume 19, number 7, july 2004

table 1. patient overview

patient

gender

age at
genetic
diagnosis (yr)

side
effects

maintenance
treatment

acute
seizure
treatment

seizure
free

occasional
induced
seizures

multiple
spontaneous
seizures

postmortem

somnolence

vpa, ltg, clb

—

—

—

+ (+1–5/w:
tc + m)
sudden death
at 4 yr
+
(+ 3/w: tc + m)
+
(+ 4/m: sgtc)
+
(+ daily: cps + m
+ obt st)
+
(+ 2–5/w:
sgtc+ m)

traditional regimen
1

m

2

m

13

somnolence

vpa, cbz, tpm, clb

—

—

—

3

f

10

—

vpa, vgb, dph, clb

czp po

—

—

4

f

8

—

vpa, cbz, clb

—

—

5

f

16

somnolence,
drooling, gingival
hyperplasia

vpa, ltg,
tpm, czp

choral
hydrate ir
diazepam ir
not known

—

—

optimal regimen
6

m

8

—

vpa, tpm

czp po

—

—

7

m

7

drooling

vpa, tpm, czp

—

+ tc(fever)

8

f

12.5

—

vpa, tpm, czp

czp po
(port-a-cath
2→5y)
diazepam ir

—

9

f

26

vpa, tpm, czp

czp po

—

10

f

4

drooling, gingival
hyperplasia
—

11

f

6

—

vpa, tpm

+ obs st
(fever, stress)
+ tc
(fever)
+ tc (fever,
warm days)
—

12

f

2

—

vpa, tpm

vpa, tpm

czp po
—
(port-a-cath)
czp po
+
(port-a-cath) (> 6 mo)
czp p.o.
—

+ tc
(fever, bath)

+
(clusters: tc – m)
—

—
—
—
—
—

cbz = carbamazepine; clb =  xxxd1718xxx ; cps = complex partial seizures; czp = clonazepam; dph = phenytoin; ltg = lamotrigine; m = myoclonic seizures; obt st =
obtundational status; sgtc = secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures; tc = tonic-clonic seizures; tpm = topiramate; vgb = vigabatrin; vpa = valproate.

maintenance treatment of valproate and topiramate. valproate was used in a dose of 30 to 50 mg/kg/day, reaching
a blood level of around 100 mg/l. topiramate was an addon drug at a starting dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg/day and was
titrated in a fortnightly regimen to a final dose between 7.5
and 15 mg/kg/day. the higher doses were used in the
youngest children. benzodiazepines, like  xxxd1718xxx  and
clonazepam, were avoided as maintenance treatment when
possible. this maintenance treatment was completed with
a well-structured acute seizure treatment, based on benzodiazepines. as a first step and as soon as a major seizure
started, parents and caregivers were instructed to administer oral clonazepam 0.5 to 1 mg. this corresponds to 5 to
10 drops of clonazepam, which were put into the cheek or
under the tongue of the convulsing child. if the seizure was
not arrested, the procedure was repeated 5 minutes later.
if children were in the epilepsy center, the third step, intravenous clonazepam 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg, (maximum 3 mg), was
started after 15 minutes of convulsions. in ambulatory
patients, this procedure was started in the nearest emergency
unit and as soon as possible. because in infants it is sometimes difficult to find an intravenous pathway, a port-acath (sims benelux) system was used in three children. for
these children, a box with emergency medication, special

syringes, instructions for acute treatment, and a copy of the
agreement with the emergency unit was prepared. in one
patient (patient 8), the parents preferred to continue using
rectal diazepam. with this new optimal treatment regimen,
one child became seizure free for more than 6 months and
five had only occasional induced seizures. only one patient
(patient 6) still showed multiple unpredictable seizures.
the side effects were rather mild. one 26-year-old woman
(patient 9) had severe gingival hyperplasia and facial coarsening because of long-lasting therapy with phenytoin in the
past. somnolence was not reported in this group, and five
of seven parents found their children more alert with this
drug regimen. drooling was a problem in the two children
who still needed benzodiazepines as maintenance therapy.
discussion

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy, or dravet syndrome,
is known as an intractable epilepsy syndrome. frequent
seizures and the risk of status epilepticus with probable secondary brain damage and even sudden death are major
problems. developmental stagnation and even regression at
an early age, evolving into a moderate or severe mental
retardation, characterize this syndrome as a catastrophic

downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy / ceulemans et al

table 2. proposed guidelines for “optimal” treatment
of children with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy
1. prevention:
•
treat fever rigorously
•
prevent hyperthermia
•
avoid stressful situations
2. aggressive seizure treatment:
•
first step: when a major seizure starts, parents or caregivers
administer: orally clonazepam drops: 0.5–1 mg (5–10 drops)
•
second step: 5 minutes later, parents or caregivers
administer: orally clonazepam drops: 0.5–1 mg ( 5–10 drops)
•
third step: 15 minutes later or as soon as possible, given in an
emergency unit, intravenously, clonazepam: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg (if
required via port-a-cath system) maximum 3 mg.
3. maintenance treatment:
•
two broad-spectrum antiepilepsy drugs:
valproate: 30–50 mg/kg/d (serum concentration  100 mg/l)
topiramate: 5–15 mg/kg/d
•
if necessary, low dose of benzodiazepines:
clonazepam: 0.03–0.1 mg/kg/d
 xxxd1718xxx : 0.2–1 mg/kg/d

epileptic encephalopathy. until recently, therapy for severe
myoclonic epilepsy in infancy was mainly based on conventional antiepilepsy medication and was rather disappointing. for quite a long time, phenobarbital and valproate
were found to be the only, at least partly, effective medications.6,25,26 benzodiazepines are helpful in controlling major
seizures, but resistance and side effects are frequent. other
drugs, such as carbamazepine, diphenytoin, and lamotrigine, are not effective and can even aggravate, mainly
myoclonic seizures.27 two of the newer ones, topiramate and
stiripentol, have shown more promising results.14-17,20-24 even
now, when the genetic cause is known,7–9 a causal therapy
still remains impossible.
optimal treatment guidelines

for a long time, treatment of the catastrophic epilepsies has
been based on a trial and error procedure with all possible
antiepilepsy drugs, and strategy was based on the most
prominent seizure type and possible adverse events. only
rarely, the epilepsy syndrome was a guideline in deciding
which medication to use.26,28 because at least 15 different
antiepilepsy drugs are currently available, the strategy of
using each available product or combination of products no
longer seems justifiable.
optimal treatment guidelines for those severe epilepsy
syndromes will be necessary in the future.15 major determining factors are clinical experience in combination with
the (genetic) etiology of epilepsies on the one hand and
working mechanisms, drug interactions, and possible side
effects on the other hand. the principal goal of this syndrome-specific approach is seizure (and epilepsy) control
so that every child has the opportunity to develop to its
maximal potential.28 seizure freedom is, however, rarely
possible in catastrophic epilepsies. finding an equilibrium
among seizure control, mild or absent side effects, maximal developmental potentials, and fast control of acute
major seizures is important in quality of life evaluations for
this group of patients.

519

proposed optimal treatment guidelines
for severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy

based on the literature and on our experience reported
here, we propose the following guidelines to obtain an “optimal” treatment of children with severe myoclonic epilepsy
in infancy (table 2):
maintenance treatment and prevention

it seems no longer justifiable to use drugs such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, and lamotrigine, which are mainly
sodium channel blockers. because severe myoclonic
epilepsy in infancy is caused by a loss (owing to haploinsufficiency) or gain of function of a sodium channel,29
namely  xxxg2020xxx , this might be an explanation as to why
these drugs are ineffective. however, functional studies
have to be carried out to prove this hypothesis. the aggravation of myoclonic seizures frequently seen with these
medications is another interesting phenomenon, which can
help us understand the pathophysiology of this seizure type.
as maintenance treatment in the optimal treatment regimen, we propose a combination of only two broad-spectrum
drugs, valproate and topiramate. both are used in high but
tolerable doses. an alternative seems to be the combination
of valproate and stiripentol,14-17 but, until now, stiripentol has
been available only in a very limited number of countries. it
seems a disadvantage to use more than two drugs, which
could be part of the explanation for the poor results of two
of our patients with the traditional treatment regimen, who
were administered valproate and topiramate in combination
with other medications (patients 2 and 5). benzodiazepines
should best be avoided but are sometimes necessary, certainly
in toddlers, to avoid the tendency of developing a status
epilepticus. according to the literature, and in view of our
results presented here, seizure freedom can be expected in
about 10% of patients.20–23 but more important is that seizures
can be greatly limited to specific provocative situations in
at least half of the patients. periods of hyperthermia owing
to fever or warming up and stressful situations are such
provocative situations for children with severe myoclonic
epilepsy in infancy. parents and caregivers must avoid such
occurrences as much as possible. infections, certainly in
young children, are inevitable, but fast and adequate treatment of fever (ie, keeping body temperature below 38°c) is
possible. taking a long and hot bath, playing in a swimming
pool for hours on a sunny day, or taking a long drive in a warm
bus are illustrations of hyperthermia periods that can be
avoided. busy parties are not the best ways of entertainment
for these children. special attention should be paid on holidays such as christmas and new year’s eve and birthdays.
side effects

although valproate and topiramate are drugs with known
possible side effects, patients with severe myoclonic epilepsy
in infancy tolerate them well. somnolence, a very frequent
side effect of polypharmacy in epileptic patients, is, according to our experience, a problem only if benzodiazepines
have to be added to the maintenance treatment of valproate

downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

520

journal of child neurology / volume 19, number 7, july 2004

and topiramate. most other transient side effects can be
avoided when using a low starting dose and a fortnightly uptitration scheme adding topiramate to the valproate treatment, which is frequently the order of starting treatment in
these patients.

can be easily administered to a convulsing child. for those
children who still have a high tendency to develop status
epilepticus, intravenous benzodiazepines via a port-a-cath
system are the fastest treatment.
acknowledgments

acute seizure treatment

when a seizure occurs, a strict acute treatment scheme is
an important factor in the management of patients with
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. it is surprising to note
that in the literature, very little attention is paid to this
topic. in our experience, parents and caregivers can be
taught to use medication in acute seizure treatment in an adequate and safe way. this will give them the opportunity to
stop major seizures and to prevent status epilepticus. we prefer, mainly for practical reasons, to use clonazepam. it is
available in drops, has a rapid absorption, and can be put
easily into the cheek of a convulsing child. alternatives
could be intranasal midazolam or sublingual lorazepam.30
rectal diazepam, commonly used for febrile seizure, is not
the best choice for this purpose because adequate plasma
levels are reached only after at least 5 minutes.30 in those
children who still have a high tendency of status epilepticus, intravenous medication (benzodiazepines) is often
required. we are accustomed to using clonazepam, but others use midazolam and lorazepam with the same efficacy.
a port-a-cath system, together with an instruction kit and
an agreement with an emergency unit, can save a lot of
time in those children in whom it is difficult to find an intravenous pathway. this is most necessary in infants between
6 months and 2.5 years old.
conclusion

treatment of children with severe myoclonic epilepsy in
infancy becomes more hopeful. the ultimate goal to cure
these children cannot be reached as yet. it is unlikely that
even in case of complete seizure control, children with
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy and important mutations in  xxxg2020xxx  will ever have normal development.
in our opinion, optimal treatment of children with
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy is based on a few
straightforward principles: prevention of hyperthermia,
adequate treatment of fever, avoiding stressful occurrences, and the use of a simple maintenance treatment,
together with a strict acute seizure treatment. maintenance treatment is based on a combination of two broadspectrum antiepilepsy drugs: valproate and topiramate.
medication, which only blocks sodium channels, should not
be used anymore. benzodiazepines should, if possible, be
avoided as maintenance therapy but are frequently necessary and effective, mainly in young children for a limited
period of time. a strict acute seizure treatment must be
taught to parents and caregivers. we prefer clonazepam as
a first choice because it is available as drops in europe and

we are grateful to karin bellon and sabrina embrechts for typing the manuscript
and to patrick cras md, phd, and kris van de poel for editing this article. lieven
lagae md, phd, holds the ucb chair in developmental cognitive dysfunctions
in children at the university of leuven.

references
1.

dravet c: les épilepsies graves de l’enfant. vie méd 1978;8:543–548.

2.

dravet c, bureau m, roger j: severe myoclonic epilepsy in infants,
in roger j, dravet c, bureau m, et al (eds): epileptic syndromes
in infancy, childhood and adolescence. london, john libbey,
1985, 58–67.

3.

commission on classification and terminology of the ilae.
epilepsia 1989;22:489–501.

4. engel j: ilae commission report. epilepsia 2001;42:796–803.
5. hurst dl: epidemiology of severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy.
epilepsia 1990;31:397–400.
6. dravet c, bureau m, oguni h, et al: severe myoclonic epilepsy in
infancy (dravet syndrome), in roger j, bureau m, dravet c, et al
(eds): epileptic syndromes in infancy, childhood and adolescence, 3rd ed, eastligh, john libbey, 2002, 81–103.
7. claes l, del-favero j, ceulemans b, et al: de novo mutations in
the sodium-channel gene  xxxg2020xxx  cause severe myoclonic epilepsy
of infancy. am j hum genet 2001;68:1327–1332.
8. claes l, ceulemans b, audenaert d, et al: de novo  xxxg2020xxx  mutations are a major cause of severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy.
hum mutat 2003;21:615–621.
9.

ceulemans b, claes l, lagae l, de jonghe p: clinical correlations
of mutations in the  xxxg2020xxx  gene: from febrile seizures tot  xxxg2020xxx .
pediatr  xxxd122xxx  2004;30:236–243.

10.

horn cs, ater sb, hurst dl: carbamazepine-exacerbated epilepsy
in children and adolescents. pediatr  xxxd122xxx  1986;2:340–345.

11. wakai s, ito n, sueoka h, et al: severe myoclonic epilepsy in
infancy and carbamazepine. eur j pediatr 1996;155:724.
12.

guerrini r, dravet c, genton p, et al: lamotrigine and seizure aggravation in severe myoclonic epilepsy. epilepsia 1998;39:508–512.

13.

saito y, oguni h, awaya y, et al: phenytoin-induced choreoathetosis in patients with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. neuropediatrics 2001;32:231–235.

14. perez j, chiron c, musial c, et al: stiripentol: efficacy and tolerability in children with epilepsy. epilepsia 1999;40:1618–1626.
15.

chiron c, marchand mc, tran a, et al: stiripentol in severe
myoclonic epilepsy in infancy: a randomised placebo-controlled
syndrome-dedicated trial. sticlo study group. lancet
2000;356:1638–1642.

16.

guerrini r, tonnelier s, d’athis p, et al: stiripentol in severe
myoclonic epilepsy in infancy ( xxxg2020xxx ): a placebo-controlled italian trial, abstract. epilepsia 2002;43(suppl 8):155.

17. thanh tn, chiron c, dellatolas g, et al: long-term efficacy and
tolerance of stiripentol in severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy
(dravet syndrome). arch pediatr 2002;9:1120–1127.
18. kanazawa o: can early  xxxd3564xxx  medication improve the prognosis in the core and peripheral types of severe myoclonic epilepsy
in infants? brain dev 1999;21:503.
19. kanazawa o: refractory grand mal seizures with onset during
infancy including severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. brain dev
2001;23:749–756.

downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy / ceulemans et al

20. nieto-barrera m, candau r, nieto-jimenez m, et al: topiramate
in the treatment of severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy. seizure
2000;9:590–594.

521

25. wallace sj: newer anti-epileptic drugs: advantages and disadvantages. brain dev 2001;23:277–283.
26.

campos castello j: therapeutic strategy in severe encephalopathies. rev  xxxd122xxx  2001;32:860–866.

27.

22. villeneuve n, portilla p, ferrari ar, et al: topiramate (tpm) in
severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy ( xxxg2020xxx ): study of 27 patients,
abstract. epilepsia 2002;43(suppl 8):155.

genton p: when antiepileptic drugs aggravate epilepsy. brain dev
2000;22:75–80.

28.

shields wd: catastrophic epilepsy in childhood. epilepsia
2000;41(suppl 2):s2–s6.

23.

burkart p, schneble h, ziegler g: topiramate in severe myoclonic/convulsive epilepsy of infancy. epilepsia 1999;40(suppl 2)179.

29. lossin c, wang dw, rhodes th, et al: molecular basis of an inherited epilepsy. neuron 2002;34:877–884.

24. yeung s, ferrie cd, murdoch-eaton dg, livingston jh: topiramate for drug-resistant epilepsies. eur j paediatr  xxxd122xxx  2000;
4:31–33.

30. fişgin t, gurer y, tezic t, et al: effects of intranasal midazolam
and rectal diazepam on acute convulsions in children: prospective randomized study. j child  xxxd122xxx  2002;17:123–126.

21. coppola g, capovilla g, montagnini a, et al: topiramate as addon drug in severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy: an italian multicenter open trial. epilepsy res 2002;49:45–48.

downloaded from jcn.sagepub.com at ucsf library & ckm on april 9, 2015

