phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  inhibitors of phosphodiesterase type 4 (pde4) act by increasing intracellular concentrations of  xxxd1773xxx , which has a broad range of anti-inflammatory effects on various key effector cells involved in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd). the therapeutic ratio for pde4 inhibitors is thought to be determined by selectivity on receptor subtypes for relative effects on  xxxg1698xxx  (anti-inflammatory) and  xxxg1700xxx  (emesis). the two main orally active pde4 inhibitors in the late phase iii of clinical development are  xxxd1697xxx  and  xxxd3140xxx ; the latter (and its active metabolite n-oxide) is more selective and potent with a superior therapeutic ratio. studies on  xxxd1697xxx  in copd based on bronchial biopsy material have shown a broad range of anti-inflammatory activity, and the available evidence on clinical outcomes for up to 6 months with  xxxd1697xxx  15 mg twice daily and  xxxd3140xxx  500 mug once daily have shown variable but significant effects on exacerbations and quality of life, with small improvements in measures of pulmonary function.  xxxd3140xxx  has a better safety and tolerability profile than  xxxd1697xxx , with the main adverse effects being nausea, diarrhoea, and abdominal pain.  xxxd3140xxx  also has activity in asthma as assessed by its attenuation of allergen and exercise challenges, and it shows clinical efficacy equivalent to that of  xxxd294xxx  400 mug daily. the emerging results of clinical trials on pde4 inhibitors in asthma and copd should be interpreted with cautious optimism since much of the evidence has been published only in abstract form to date. the next few years should resolve important issues about the potential role of these drugs as oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory therapy for asthma and copd and their place in management guidelines. ultimately, clinicians will want to know whether pde4 inhibitors are anything more than expensive "designer"  xxxd3344xxx , the archetypal non-selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor.