journal of ocular pharmacology and therapeutics
volume 20, number 6, 2004
© mary ann liebert, inc.

comparison of topical steroids for acute
anterior uveitis
s.s. samudre, f.a. lattanzio, jr., p.b. williams,
and j.d. sheppard, jr.
thomas r. lee center for ocular pharmacology, eastern virginia medical school, norfolk, va 23501

abstract
this study objectively compares efficacy of dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1%,  xxxd2132xxx  0.1% (fml),  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate 0.5% ( xxxd2509xxx ™ [le]; bausch & lomb
pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl), prednisolone acetate 1% (pred forte® [pred f]; allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca), and generic prednisolone acetate 1% (pred a).
these steroids were administered for 24 hours or 72 hours to new zealand white rabbits
with endotoxin-induced uveitis. intraocular pressure (iop), slit-lamp examination, and
confocal microscopy were performed daily. internalization of the  xxxg1601xxx 
(gc) was assayed in iris tissue by western blot, and protein in aqueous humor by bradford assay. only le and pred f treatments significantly internalized gc receptor after
72 hours of treatment. only le and pred a reduced protein concentration between 24
hours and 72 hours of treatment. all drugs improved clinical signs after 24 hours of treatment. none of the steroids promoted return of the inflammation-induced corneal thickness to baseline. while none returned iop to baseline, le was most effective. confocal
microscopy indicated that only treatment with le reverted the abnormal endothelial-cell
shape to normal. in conclusion, all steroid treatments reduced uveitis to some degree but
le was consistently effective. a longer observation period may be required to document
the return of iop and corneal thickness to baseline values.

introduction
uveitis encompasses a variety of intraocular inflammatory disorders. anterior uveitis involves
primarily the iris, ciliary body, and choroid, classical symptoms of which include pain, conjunctival
congestion (redness), and photophobia (1,2). these prominent symptoms can be used to benchmark
uveitic inflammation and monitor the progression of the disease. if left untreated, acute or chronic inflammation can lead to temporary or permanent vision loss through cataract, glaucoma, permanent
breakdown of the blood aqueous barrier, synechiae formation, vitritis, and cystoid macular edema.
even when the underlying cause is unknown, topical steroids are the mainstay of uveitis therapy. synthetic steroids mitigate the ocular immune response and exert their anti-inflammatory effects
in a variety of ways. at the cellular level, the glucocorticoid (gc) receptor is activated by corticosteroid binding, thereafter migrating to the nucleus and attenuating the inflammatory response (3).
beyond the cellular response, steroids reduce recruitment of circulating monocytes at the site of in533

flammation, constrict blood vessels, decrease vascular permeability, and downregulate arachidonic
acid metabolism through inhibition of  xxxg1759xxx  (4).
topical steroids are less likely to cause serious side-effects than systemic steroids, and topical
application promotes maximal ocular drug delivery. the relative efficacy of newer topical steroid
preparations had not been directly compared in vivo. objective clinical and experimental studies can
provide a basis for evidence-based therapeutic choices. such comparisons facilitate appropriate therapeutic choices and avoid the pitfalls of overmedication and secondary complications of prolonged
steroid therapy, such as steroid-induced glaucoma (5). using several independent indicators of efficacy, we compared dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1% (dex),  xxxd2132xxx  0.1% (fml),
 xxxd2509xxx  etabonate 0.5% ( xxxd2509xxx ™ [le]; bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, tampa, fl), prednisolone acetate 1% (pred forte® [pred f]; allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca), and generic prednisolone acetate 1% (pred a).

materials and methods
uveitis model
prior to the induction of uveitis, new zealand white male rabbits (1–3 kg) were anesthetized
with  xxxd60xxx  (5 mg/kg), ketamine (50 mg/kg), and topical proparacaine (0.5%). acute anterior uveitis was induced by perilimbal pars plana injection of 1 g/10 l of purified eschericia
coli bacterial lipopolysaccharide endotoxin (list biological laboratories, campbell, ca) in 0.9%
nacl (6). to minimize intersubject variability only the right eye (od) was injected; the contralateral eye (os) served as a normal control. significant inflammation developed within 24 hours following the injection; however, only rabbits with a cumulative clinical score of 6 or more for fibrin, conjunctival congestion, and inflammatory cells were randomly assigned to one of six treatment
groups.
all animal studies were conducted in accordance with the arvo statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research, and were approved by the eastern virginia medical school
institutional animal care and use committee.

treatment groups
rabbits meeting the inclusion criteria were randomly assigned to saline (0.9% nacl),  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate 0.5% ( xxxd2509xxx ™), prednisolone acetate 1% (pred forte®) generic prednisolone acetate
1% (falcon pharmaceuticals, ltd., fort worth, tx), dexamethasone 0.1% (ak-dex®, akorn pharmaceuticals canada ltd., markham, canada), or  xxxd2132xxx  0.1% ( xxxd2132xxx  ophthalmic
solution, falcon pharmaceuticals, ltd.) treatment groups.
each drug (0.05 ml) was administered 4 times per day. the first dose was administered 24 hours
after induction of uveitis. within each treatment group, some rabbits were terminated for gc receptor internalization studies on day 2 and others on day 4 (table 1).

table 1.
day
day
day
day

0
1
2
4

experimental design
normal baseline examination
acute uveitis—24 hours after injection.
24 hours of treatment
72 hours of treatment

534

clinical evaluation
inflammation in the anterior chamber was documented by slit lamp biomicroscopy and digitally photographed (dvs, lombart instruments, norfolk, va). slit-lamp, intraoccular pressure (iop), and confocal examinations were performed on sedated animals ( xxxd60xxx  2.5 mg/kg and ketamine 25 mg/kg).
both eyes were evaluated daily for photophobia/light reflex, aqueous cells, aqueous flare, keratic precipitates, fibrin, discharge, conjunctival congestion, iris injection, and capsular precipitates. throughout the
study, the same group of masked, knowledgable observers scored these criteria using a semiquantitative
measure based on the macdonald-shadduck toxicity scale (7). iop measurements were obtained daily
by applanation pneumotonometry (mentor, santa barbara, ca), averaging three readings per eye.

confocal microscopy
repeated noninvasive in vivo visualization of cornea and anterior segments for the presence, location and number of inflammatory cells, as well as fibrin, hyperrefractile bodies, and changes in stromal and endothelial cell morphology was performed via confocal microscopy (asl 1000, advanced
scanning limited, new orleans, la), documented using a ccd camera (kappa optoelectronics inc.,
monrovia, ca), and recorded with a svo-9500md vcr (sony corporation, tokyo, japan). prior to
applanation, rabbits were sedated with  xxxd60xxx  (2.5 mg/kg) and ketamine (25 mg/kg) plus topical administration of proparacaine (0.5%). following a surface scan to verify proper applanation, the
corneal epithelium, stroma, endothelium, and aqueous chamber were optically sectioned in at least 3
representative areas. endothelial-cell shape changes and infiltration of inflammatory cells into the
corneal stroma and anterior chamber were documented. at least 4–6 transcorneal scans were collected
for analysis, using the metamorph imaging system (universal imaging, downingtown, pa). three
readings were averaged to calculate corneal thickness.

tissue preparation
on either day 2 or day 4, animals were euthanized (pentobarbital [86 mg/kg], vortech pharmaceuticals, dearborn, mi). aqueous humor was immediately aspirated and frozen at 20°c pending
analysis. followng enucleation, both eyes were immersed in 0.9% saline (4°c). it was imperative to
maintain tissue at 4°c at all times to retard protein degradation. iris was dissected on a frozen plate
and manually homogenized in tris-buffer (10 mm tris hcl, 150 mm nacl, and 2 mm ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) at ph 7.2. a protease inhibitor cocktail iii, containing leupeptin, pepstatin,
aprotinin, e-64,  xxxd3463xxx , and  xxxd502xxx  (calbiochem, la jolla, ca), was added to all samples for protein preservation. following centrifugation at 30,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°c, the cytosolic supernatant was decanted and frozen at 20°c.

 xxxg1601xxx  measurements
the cytosolic supernatant was used for measurement of gc receptor migration via western blot
analysis (8). proteins were separated on 8% sds-polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (bio-rad laboratories, hercules, ca). two lanes (5 l each) of kaleidoscope prestained molecular weight markers were run on each gel (bio-rad laboratories, hercules,
ca). primary antibody, fi-gr (santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz, ca) was used to select for
the n-terminal region of the  xxxg1601xxx . this signal was augmented by horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary sa1-100 antibody (affinity bioreagents, golden, co) and further amplified by a bio-rad amplification module (bio-rad laboratories, hercules, ca). immunodetection
535

was performed colorimetrically using tmb (pierce, rockford, il). blots were digitally scanned along
with an optical density step tablet (helena laboratories, beaumont, tx). densitometry measurements
were calibrated against the scanned density step tablet and processed, using scion image software
(national institutes of health, bethesda, md).
protein analysis
protein analysis was performed on aqueous humor and iris using a standard bradford assay (biorad laboratories, hercules, ca), which is linear from 1 g/l to 10 g/l at 595 nm.
particle size
steroid particle size in suspension was determined microscopically. individual steroid suspensions were placed on glass slides and representative areas were digitally photographed at 100 magnification. measurements were calibrated against a 10-m calibration slide (edmund scientific, barrington, nj).
statistical analysis
a student’s t-test was used to analyze data from protein and western blot analyses. other statistical tests are specified in the results section. a difference of p  0.05 was considered statistically
significant. all values reported as mean  standard deviation (sd) unless otherwise noted.
results
development of uveitis
this endotoxin-induced uveitis model produced consistent uveitis (figure 1). within 24 hours
following intravitreal endotoxin injection, the resultant uveitic inflammation was characterized by fibrin deposition and severe conjunctival congestion with a high density of inflammatory cells. notable

figure 1. progression of uveitic inflammatory response.
536

table 2.

number of rabbits selected for protein and  xxxg1601xxx  analysis

treatment group
le
pred a
pred f
dex
fml
saline

24-hour treatment

72-hour treatment

4
4
5
4
3
2

6
5
5
8
3
8

le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl); pred a  generic prednisolone acetate 1%; pred f  pred forte® (allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca); dex  dexamethasone na phosphate
0.1%; fml  flurometholone 0.1%.

signs of inflammation included aqueous flare, aqueous cells, keratic precipitates, and photophobia,
while lacrimation and discharge were minimal.
inclusion criteria for acute anterior uveitis were met by 57 of the 73 rabbits. the mean score was
8.7  1.6 of a maximum score of 12 for fibrin, conjunctival congestion, and inflammatory cells. rabbits,
meeting these inclusion criteria, also had an overall cumulative score of 21.5  5.2, when 36 was the
maximum score, for conjunctival congestion, lacrimation, discharge, aqueous flare, aqueous cells, photophobia, keratitis punctate, keratic precipitates, fibrin, capsular precipitates, and iris injection. rabbits
were euthanized after 24 hours of treatment and others at 72 hours of treatment (table 2).
uveitis is evident 24 hours after intravitral endotoxin injection. of particular note is the bright
red color of the conjunctiva, accumulation of keratic precipitates, and fibrin resulting in a clinical
score of 3 in each of these categories for a total score of 9. this score exceeds the minimum score
of 6 required to meet the inclusion criteria (magnification  16).
migration of glucocorticoid receptors by western blot analysis
gc receptor migration was used as a marker to compare drug efficacy (fig. 2). internalization
was expressed as the percent difference between the amount of cytosolic receptor of the normal con-

a

b

figure 2. (a)  xxxg1601xxx  internalization (gcr). *  significantly different from 24hour values, p  0.05, ‡significantly different from saline (p  0.04) at 72 hours. (b) gcr western
blot assay. le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl); dex  dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1%; pred a  generic prednisolone acetate 1%; pred f  pred forte®
(allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca); fml   xxxd2132xxx  0.1%.
537

tralateral eye and the treated eye. a consistent pattern of receptor expression was observed in iris tissue. blots incubated in secondary antibody alone did not show any bands. the number of receptors
in the normal contralateral eye remained constant between treatment groups and did not change over
the course of the study (data not shown).
the extent of gc receptor internalization after 24 hours and 72 hours was compared for each
steroid. following treatment for 24 hours (day 2), there were no significant differences in the extent
of gc receptor internalization between the drug treatment groups. compared to the amount of gc
receptor internalization after 24 hours, there was significantly more migration of gc receptor protein
following 72 hours of treatment (day 4) for both the le (p  0.05) and the pred f (p  0.05) treatment groups. notably, after 72 hours of treatment (day 4), the le-treated group showed significantly
more internalization of the gc receptor than did the saline group (p  0.04).
drug efficacy is characterized by an increase in gc receptor migration from cytosol to nucleus
(internalization). only le and pred f significantly increased in gc receptor internalization between
24 hours and 72 hours. the endogenous response (saline-treated uveitis) was not significant. le also
significantly internalization increased compared to the saline-treated group.
drug treatment accelerated gc receptor internalization from the cytosol to the nucleus. saline
treatment, shown in lanes 2 and 3 (5 g and 10 g protein, respectively) retained more gc receptor
in cytosol than drug treatment, shown in lanes 5 and 6 (5 g and 10 g protein, respectively). lanes
1 and 4 show molecular-weight markers.
concentration of protein in aqueous humor
uveitic inflammation increased the aqueous humor protein concentration 15-fold compared to
the normal, baseline protein concentration of 0.99  1.3 g/l. after 24 hours of treatment (day 2),
protein concentration remained elevated in all treatment groups. between 24-hour and 72-hour treatment (day 4), only le (p  0.05) and pred a (p  0.04) significantly reduced protein concentration within their own treatment regimens (fig. 3). in contrast, protein concentration in the salinetreated group continued to increase. after treatment of 72 hours, there was significantly less protein
in the le (p  0.03), dex (p  0.03), pred a (p  0.02), and fml (p  0.05)–treated groups compared to the saline-treated group.
after 24 hours (day 2), more than a 15-fold increase in aqueous humor protein concentration
was observed as a result of uveitic inflammation. in the contralateral eye, protein concentration remained normal (0.99  1.3 g/l). between 24-hour and 72-hour steroid treatment, only le (p 
0.05) and pred a (p  0.04) reduced protein concentration significantly within their own treatment
groups.

figure 3. aqueous humor protein concentration. ‡  significantly reduced from saline (untreated control), p  0.05; *significantly reduced
after 72 hours of treatment (day 2). fml   xxxd2132xxx  0.1%; pred f  pred forte® (allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca); pred a 
generic prednisolone acetate 1%; dex  dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1%; le   xxxd2509xxx ™
(bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa,
fl).

538

table 3.

increase in corneal thickness, difference from baseline
24-hour treatment
(m)

le
dex
pred a
pred f
fml
saline

15.8
18.2
22.3
32.8
22.0
31.2








28.6
28.7
24.7
42.6
33.6
22.1

72-hour treatment
(m)
27.3
21.8
24.6
51.3
63.6
33.0








31.2
11.5
24.6
77.5
14.0
39.6

le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl); dex  dexamethasone na phosphate
0.1%; pred a  generic prednisolone acetate 1%; pred f  pred forte® (allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine,
ca); fml  flurometholone 0.1%.

changes in corneal thickness
inflammation-induced edema increases corneal thickness, which affects visual acuity. corneal thickness was measured by confocal microscopy as the distance between the apical surfaces of the epithelium
and endothelium (table 3). at baseline, corneal thickness (day 0) was 321.8  29.4 m. by 24 hours after induction of the uveitis (day 1), corneal thickness increased to 344.6  39.2 m for all rabbits reaching inclusion criteria (p  0.001). to ascertain whether or not treatment attenuated this increase, results
following treatment with topical steroids were compared to the baseline (day 0) measurement for each
rabbit. for all treatment groups, after 24 hours of treatment (day 2), corneal thickness was unchanged
(p  0.86) and remained elevated at the end of the 72-hour (day 4) treatment period (p  0.53). thus,
none of the topical steroids significantly attenuated the uveitis induced increase in corneal thickness.
anterior segment analysis
images of anterior chamber, endothelium, and stroma obtained by confocal microscopy were examined for morphologic change as well as cellular debris. although, there were no significant changes
in the corneal epithelium, changes were observed in the anterior chamber, corneal endothelium, and
corneal stroma. as all steroid treatments reduced the cellular debris over the 72-hour treatment period, le was selected as a representative sample unless otherwise noted.
anterior chamber
normally, the anterior chamber is clear with no apparent cellular debris (fig. 4a). however, 24
hours after endotoxin injection (fig. 4b), accumulation of fibrin, inflammatory cells, and other cellular debris was apparent. the overall appearance was cloudy, which is indicative of protein infiltration. steroid treatment reduced the inflammatory response (fig. 4c) in the anterior chamber with no
resurgence after 72 hours of treatment (figure 4d).
corneal endothelium
changes in endothelial morphology are often pathognomic for uveitis. normal endothelium cells
are generally uniform, hexagonal, flat, and confluent (fig. 5a). during the inflammatory response,
the endothelial cells thicken and assume a kidney shape. in the le-treated group, after 72 hours of
treatment endothelial cells reverted to their normal hexagonal shape (figure 5b). among the other
539

a

b

c

d

figure 4. anterior chamber. confocal microscopy documented inflammatory changes in anterior
chamber and tracked the progression of uveitis and effects of steroid treatment. (a) normal baseline
at day 0; (b) cellular debris within 24 hours after induction of uveitis (day 1). arrows indicate fibrin, inflammatory cells and other cellular debris; (c) after 24 hours of treatment with le (day 2) anterior chamber is clear; (d) after 72 hours of treatment with le (day 4) anterior chamber remains
clear. le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl).
steroids, morphologic changes toward normal endothelium were less apparent. even after 72 hours of
treatment with dex, pred a, pred f, or fml, abnormal morphology remained. for example, in
the dex-treatment group, the kidney shape of the endothelial cells was easily discerned (figure 5c).
corneal stroma
in normal stroma, visualized by confocal microscopy, refractive collagen bundles arranged in
angles predominate (fig. 6a). after induction of uveitis, there is an infiltration of inflammatory cells
(fig. 6b). the inflammatory cells are distinct, hyperrefractile bodies, easily distinguished from the
background collagen bundles. steroid treatment reduced the number of inflammatory cells at 24 hour
(fig. 6c), with a further reduction after 72 hours of treatment (fig. 6d).
effect of endotoxin injection on intraocular pressure
uveitic inflammation was associated with a significant 40%–50% decrease in iop. in the contralateral eye, iop was normal (17.3  3.6 mmhg) with no significant changes throughout the ob540

a

b

c

figure 5. corneal endothelium. inflammation is associated with changes in endothelial morphology. (a) normal endothelial cells are generally uniform, hexagonal in shape, flat, and confluent; (b)
in a subset of animals, much of the endothelium has resumed normal hexagonal shape after 72 hours
of treatment with le (day 4) indicated by arrow; (c) a large portion of the endothelium exhibits an
abnormal kidney shape after 72 hours of treatment with dex (day 4) indicated by arrow. le 
 xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl); dex  dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1%.

servation period. after 72 hours (day 4), in all steroid-treated and the saline-treated (control) groups
the iop remained significantly less than baseline (p  0.001, table 4). between 24-hour and 72-hour
treatment, there was no improvement in iop, except for the le-treated group, in which iop returned
to 71% of baseline.

particle size
solubility of suspensions is inversely related to particle size. there were significant differences
in particle sizes between steroids tested. using the mann-whitney rank sum test, the particle size of
individual steroid suspensions differed by 40%. the rank order was pred a (4.52  0.59 m)
pred f (4.80  0.77 m) le (5.41  0.90 m) dex (5.70  0.83 m) fml (6.31 
0.59 m). however, there was no correlation between particle size and aqueous humor protein concentration, gc receptor internalization, corneal thickness, or clinical signs of uveitis (r2 values 0.5;
p  0.05).
541

a

b

c

d

figure 6. corneal stroma, le treatment profile. (a) normal stromal layer. (b) 24 hours (day 1)
after induction of uveitis, inflammatory cells indicated by arrows. (c) the number of inflammatory
cells decreased after 48 hours of treatment with le (day 3). (d) there is a further decrease in the
number of inflammatory cells after 72 hours of treatment with le (day 4). le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch
& lomb pharmaceuticals, inc., tampa, fl).

discussion
the current study provides a direct, objective comparison of commercially available topical
steroids under controlled conditions. during the 72-hour treatment period, all steroids reduced symptoms of uveitis, but to varying degrees. although sle was able to discern overall improvement among
the drug-treated groups, the lack of reproducibility, inconsistent interpretation, and limitations upon
high-quality digital image storage limited its sensitivity and accuracy. thus, other noninvasive methods to document response to treatment were compared to aqueous humor protein concentration and
gc receptor migration. of the noninvasive methods, including sle and pneumotonometry, confocal
biomicroscopy proved to be the most sensitive noninvasive measure of response to treatment.
although no drug was judged to be superior to the others on all measures, treatment with le
was associated with the most gc receptor migration. this effect of le correlated with the return of
iop toward normal, disappearance of inflammatory cells from the corneal stroma (9) and return
of corneal endothelium to normal. conversely, the amount of protein in aqueous humor and corneal thickness did not correlate with gc receptor internalization measurements for any of the drugs
studied.
for 40 years, topical steroids have been widely used to treat ocular inflammation (10). all available topical steroids reduce ocular inflammation, but few direct comparisons are available. typically,
542

table 4.

le
dex
pred a
pred f
fml
saline

decrease in iop, difference from baseline
24-hour treatment (mmhg)

72-hour treatment (mmhg)

8.3  2.8
8.5  3.8
10.4  3.8
12.5  5.3
10.1  2.9
9.0  3.3

5.1  3.8
8.3  3.8
10.4  3.5
13.1  3.4
12.2  4.5
8.2  2.3

le   xxxd2509xxx ™ (bausch & lomb pharmaceutical, inc., tampa, fl; dex  dexamethasone na phosphate 0.1%; pred a  generic prednisolone acetate 1%; pred
f  pred forte® (allergan pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca); fml  fluromethalone 0.1%.

the steroid of interest is compared to placebo, vehicle, or to only a few select steroids. for example,
compared to placebo, pred a 1.0% was judged to be therapeutically effective using magnetic resonance imaging to assess uveal inflammation in rabbits (11). compared to the vehicle, fml 0.25%
effectively attenuated inflammation in patients who underwent argon laser trabeculoplasty (12). in a
multidrug comparison, the then newly developed fml was reported to have greater anti-inflammatory activity than either dex or indomethacin (13).
drug comparison studies may be influenced by the species or the uveitis model selected. in addition, there is a lack of unanimity regarding which methods document the effect of steroid treatment
best. in an attempt to place the most recently developed topical steroid, le, among those already
available, howes and associates compared le with two standards, dex and fml (6). two animal
models of uveitis were used. in the endotoxin-induced model, only le effectively reduced inflammation, but both le and dex were effective in the freund’s adjuvant chronic uveitis model. even
though this study compared three steroids directly, using two models of intraocular inflammation, the
results were based on only limited parameters, sle, and protein concentration, and the results were
not consistent between the two models of uveitis.
perilimbal injection of bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide posterior to the lens produces consistent inflammation localized to the anterior chamber without systemic involvement (6). inflammatory signs seen in patients, such as accumulation of aqueous cells, fibrin clots in the anterior chamber, significant conjunctival congestion associated with photophobia, increased protein and decreased
iop, are all characteristic of this model. inflammation develops within 24 hours of injection with a
duration of 1 week, shorter than the lengthy human disease but sufficient for evaluation of drug efficacy. this model is particularly suitable for drug comparison studies because the only target of drug
action is the localized inflammation without the confounding variable of a systemic response.
irrespective of the stimulus, during inflammation, the gc receptor is activated and mitigates the
inflammatory response (14). after the activated receptor is internalized and migrates to the nucleus,
it binds to and inactivates the region of dna that produces proinflammatory proteins, thus attenuating the inflammatory response (15,16). corticosteroids also activate the gc receptor (3). as additional receptors are activated and internalized, their anti-inflammatory effect is amplified. therefore,
measurement of gc receptor migration can be used to compare drugs’ anti-inflammatory effects. receptor migration noted during treatment with saline represents the innate inflammatory response.
as low–molecular-weight lipophilic substances, gcs pass easily through the plasma membrane
and bind to the cytosolic gc receptor. when gcs bind to and activate the gr receptor, it translocates to the nucleus, where it binds to gc response elements on the dna, inhibiting protein synthesis (15). thus, measuring the removal of the gc receptor from the cytoplasm is a more direct measure of drug effect than more subjective evaluation of the inflammatory response via sle. under the
conditions studied here, only le and pred f promoted significant gc-receptor internalization, suggesting greater efficacy.
543

protein concentration in aqueous humor is another sensitive, albeit invasive, measure of steroid
activity. protein infiltration of the aqueous humor in the presence of severe inflammation is attributed to the breakdown of the blood–aqueous-barrier (5,17,18). protein concentration in aqueous humor is normally less than 1% of that in plasma but, in the presence of inflammation aqueous humor
protein levels may be comparable to systemic plasma levels (19). as part of the inflammatory response, proinflammatory proteins leak through the blood–ocular barrier and are sequestered in aqueous humor. when the duration of therapy increased from 24 to 72 hours, only le and pred a reduced ah protein concentration significantly. even so, protein concentration in aqueous humor did
not correlate closely with gc receptor internalization.
visual acuity is affected by changes in corneal thickness, which is primarily associated with compromised corneal endothelial function and inflammation-induced corneal edema. inflammation, specifically enhanced release of interleukin (il)–6 and il-8 in response to endotoxin, leads to endothelial cell
death (20). gap junctions between cells are not severely affected and remain intact. confluency of this
layer is maintained as the remaining cells stretch to fill the gaps. however, other cellular structures, such
as na/k channels, are affected permitting movement of fluid into the cornea, increasing corneal thickness (21). unlike sle, cfm can quantitatively measure corneal thickness. within 24 hours after induction of the uveitis, corneal thickness increased to 344.6  39.2 m for those rabbits meeting inclusion criteria (p  0.001). however, as a result of inflammatory damage to the endothelium, reversion
of the corneal thickness to baseline requires a longer observation period than was permitted by this study.
thus, corneal thickness measurements were not able to predict efficacy of treatments consistently.
the convenience, practicality, and the noninvasive nature of sle render it a diagnostic “gold
standard” and optimal for many clinical applications. however, interpretation of sle results is highly
subjective and dependent on a well-trained observer. no single sign of inflammation observed by sle
correlated closely with drug effects, rendering sle an imprecise method to measure differences between drugs.
decreased iop, when associated with the inflammatory response, may be attributed to decreased
production of aqueous humor, resulting from inflammatory damage in the ciliary body (22). steroid
therapy can mitigate this effect, but after 72 hours of treatment, none of the steroids restored iop to
normal. le restored iop to 71% of preuveitis value compared to less than 50% restoration with the
other drugs. iop recovery trends between the drugs may prove to be more predictive with a longer
observation period, allowing for the restoration of normal ciliary body function.
it is well-documented that prolonged steroid therapy is not without risk (23). although all topical steroids may eventually cause cataracts and steroid-induced glaucoma, there are reported differences in their incidence between steroids. le and fml are least likely to increase iop pharmacologically (22). in the case of le, this is likely to be the result of its rapid inactivation by endogenous
tissue esterases (6,22).
the active ingredient in both pred f and pred a is prednisolone acetate 1%. differences between them have been attributed to particle size and dissolution (24). drugs with smaller particle sizes
would, theoretically, have greater bioavailability because of more rapid dissolution and penetration
into the anterior chamber. compared to pred f, fiscella and associates reported that the generic
product, pred a is not therapeutically equivalent, because of the difficulty involved in resuspending the preparation before administration and because of precipitation problems (25). although the
difference in particle size among the topical steroids is greater than 40%, each preparation was relatively uniform. there were no significant particle size differences between pred a and pred f.
for all drugs, particle size did not correlate with any measure of inflammation and, therefore, was
not predictive of drug efficacy.
in summary, during the 72-hour treatment period, all steroids reduced the signs of uveitis but to
varying degrees. although le and pred a significantly attenuated the increase in protein concentration, only le and pred f caused significant gc receptor internalization. none of the steroids tested
returned iop to normal during the study period. however, iop ranged from 71% of baseline (le) to
36% (fml). screening of clinical signs of uveitis by sle showed le, dex, pred f, and fml to be
544

effective after 24 hours of treatment but all treatments produced similar improvements in clinical signs
after 72 hours of treatment. cfm demonstrated le-mediated recovery of endothelial-cell shape changes
and its association with changes in iop. cfm also paralleled gcr activity and protein analysis demonstrating sensitivity as a noninvasive technique (26). extrapolation of these findings may aid clinicians
in the selection of a topical steroid to treat uveitis (27). the disconnect between clinical signs and laboratory findings may be relevant to patient care as well, suggesting that frequent examinations may be
helpful for treating the acute phase of a uveitis attack. cfm may become a useful and sensitive adjunctive diagnostic tool for patients with seemingly quiescent uveitis (28,29).

acknowledgments
this study was supported, in part, by a grant from bausch & lomb pharmaceuticals, inc. authors samudre, lattanzio, and williams have no proprietary interests in bausch & lomb b&l. dr.
sheppard is a member of the bausch and lomb speakers bureau and advisory panel and also a recipient of clinical research funds. the t.r. lee center for ocular pharmacology thanks patty loosethurman for her superb technical support and justin holder for measurement of steroid particle size.

references
1.

tabbara, k.f. infectious uveitis: a review. archivos de la sociedad espanola de oftalmologia
75:239–260, 2000.

2.

magone, m.t., and whitcup, s.m. mechanisms of intraocular inflammation. chem. immunol.
73:90–119, 1999.

3.

almawi, w.y., and melemedjian, o. molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid antiproliferative
effects: antagonism of transcription factor activity by  xxxg1601xxx . j. leukocyte biol.
71:9–15, 2002.

4.

smith, r.e., and nozik, r.a. the nonspecific treatment of uveitis. in: brown, c.l., ed. uveitis:
a clinical approach to diagnosis and management, 2nd ed. baltimore: williams & wilkins,
1986:51–72.

5.

smith, j.r., hart, p.h., and williams, k.a. basic pathogenic mechanisms operating in experimental models of acute anterior uveitis. immunol. cell. biol. 76:497–512, 1998.

6.

howes, j.f., baru, h., vered, m., and neumann, r.  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate: comparison with
other steroids in two models of intraocular inflammation. j. ocul. pharmacol. 10:289–293, 1994.

7.

hogan, m.j., kimura, s.j., and thygeson, p. signs and symptoms of uveitis; anterior uveitis.
am. j. ophthalmol. 47:155–170, 1959.

8.

eickelberg, o., roth, m., lorx, r., bruce, v., rudiger, j., johnson, m., and block, l.h. ligand-independent activation of the  xxxg1601xxx  by beta2-adrenergic receptor agonists
in primary human lung fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells. j. biol. chem.
274:1005–1010, 1999.

9.

furrer, p., mayer, j.m., and gurney, r. confocal microscopy as a tool for the investigation of
the anterior part of the eye. j. ocular pharmacol. ther. 13:559–578, 1997.
545

10.

jones, n.p. anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive treatment. in: jones, n.p., ed. uveitis:
an illustrated manual. butterworth-heinemann, woburn, 1998:73–95.

11.

kolodny, n.h., goode, s.t., ryan, w., and freddo, t.f. evaluation of therapeutic effectiveness using mr imaging in a rabbit model of anterior uveitis. exp. eye res. 74:483–491, 2002.

12.

shin, d.h., frenkel, r.e., david, r., and cheetham, j.k. effect of topical anti-inflammatory
treatment on the outcome of laser trabeculoplasty: the  xxxd2132xxx -laser trabeculoplasty
study group. am. j. ophthalmol. 122:349–354, 1996.

13.

yamauchi, h., iso, t., and iwata, h. ocular anti-inflammatory and systemic immunosuppressive effects of topically applied  xxxd2132xxx . jpn. j. pharmacol. 29:87–92, 1979.

14.

bohen, s.p., kralli, a., and yamamoto, k.r. hold ‘em and fold ‘em: chaperones and signal
transduction. science 268:1303–1304, 1995.

15.

reichardt, h.m., tuckermann, j.p., gottlicher, m., vujic, m., weih, f., angel, p., herrlich, p.,
and schutz, g. repression of inflammatory responses in the absence of dna binding by the
 xxxg1601xxx . embo j. 20:7168–7173, 2001.

16.

southren, a.l., gordon, g.g., yeh, h.s., dunn, m.w., and weinstein, b.i. nuclear translocation of the cytoplasmic  xxxg1601xxx  in the iris-ciliary body of the rabbit. invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. 18:517–521, 1979.

17.

metrikin, d.c., wilson, c.a., berkowitz, b.a., lam, m.k., wood, g.k., and peshock, r.m.
measurement of blood–retinal barrier breakdown in endotoxin-induced entophthalmitis. invest.
ophthalmol. vis. sci. 36:1361–1370, 1995.

18.

sonsino, j., gong, h., wu, p., and freddo, t.f. co-localization of junction-associated proteins
of the human blood–aqueous barrier:  xxxg1625xxx ,  xxxg2286xxx  and f-actin. exp. eye res. 74:123–129,
2002.

19.

caprioli, j. the ciliary epithelia and aqueous humor. in: hart, w.m., ed. adler’s physiology of
the eye: clinical application, 9th ed. st. louis: mosby-year book, 1992:228–247.

20.

sobottka ventura, a.c., engelmann, k., dahinden, c., and bohnke, m. endotoxins modulate
the autocrine function of organ cultured donor corneas and increase incidence of endothelial cell
death. br. j. ophthalmol. 81:1093–1098, 1997.

21.

waring, g.o., bourne, w.m., edelhauser, h.f., and kenyon, k.r. the corneal endothelium:
normal and pathologic structure and function. ophthalmology 89:531–590, 1982.

22.

novack, g.d., howes, j., crockett, r.s., and sherwood, m.b. change in intraocular pressure
during long-term use of  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate. j. glaucoma 7:266–269, 1998.

23.

kadom, a.h., j.v. forrester, and t.h. williamson. comparison of the anti-inflammatory activity and effect on intraocular pressure of  xxxd2132xxx , clobetasone butyrate and betamethasone phosphate eye drops. ophthalmic physiol. opt. 6:313–315, 1986.

24.

howard, s.a., mauger, j.w., and phusanti, l. dissolution profiles for multisized prednisolone
acetate suspensions. j. pharm. sci. 66:557–559, 1977.

546

25.

fiscella, r.g., jensen, m., and van dyck, g. generic prednisolone suspension substitution.
arch. ophthalmol. 116:703, 1998.

26.

samudre, s.s., lattanzio, f.a., loose-thurman, p.g., and sheppard, j.d. does confocal microscopy effectively predict cellular effects of steroid-treated acute uveitis? invest. ophthalmol.
vis. sci. 44: e-abstract 727, 2003.

27.

samudre, s.s., lattanzio, f.a., loose-thurman, p.g., and sheppard, j.d. comparison of topical steroids for uveitis. invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. 43: e-abstract 4284, 2002.

28.

lattanzio, f.a., sheppard, j.d., loose-thurman, p.g., and williams, p.b. uveitis detection by
confocal microscopy permits earlier institution of therapy following cataract surgery. invest.
ophthalmol. vis. sci. 43:e-abstract 4270, 2002.

29.

mcdonald, k.w., sheppard, j.d., lattanzio, f.a., and williams, p.b. predicting perioperative
inflammation with confocal microscopy versus standard slit lamp exam. invest. ophthalmol. vis.
sci. 44:e-abstract 3629, 2003.

received: march 29, 2004
accepted for publication: july 19, 2004
reprint requests:

frank a. lattanzio, jr.
thomas r. lee center for ocular pharmacology
eastern virginia medical school
box 1980
norfolk, va 23501
e-mail: lattanfa@evms.edu

547

