original article

annals of oncology 16: 1253– 1267, 2005
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdi239
published online 3 may 2005

antitumoral actions of the anti-obesity drug orlistat (xenicale)
in breast cancer cells: blockade of cell cycle progression,
promotion of apoptotic cell death and  xxxg735xxx -mediated
transcriptional repression of her2/neu (erb b-2) oncogene
j. a. menendez1,2*, l. vellon1,2 & r. lupu1,2*
1

department of medicine, breast cancer translational research program, evanston northwestern healthcare research institute, evanston, illinois;
department of medicine, northwestern university feinberg school of medicine, the lurie comprehensive cancer center, chicago, illinois, usa

2

received 26 december 2004; accepted 6 march 2005

*correspondence to: dr j. a. menendez or dr r. lupu, department of medicine, northwestern university feinberg school of medicine, the lurie
comprehensive cancer center, chicago, illinois, usa. tel: +1-2243647672; fax: +1-847-570-8022; e-mail: jmenendez@enh.org; r.lupu@northwestern.edu
q 2005 european society for medical oncology

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

background: orlistat (xenicale), a us food and drug administration (fda)-approved drug for
bodyweight loss, has recently been demonstrated to exhibit antitumor properties towards prostate
cancer cells by virtue of its ability to block the lipogenic activity of  xxxg765xxx  (fas). fas
(oncogenic antigen-519) is up-regulated in about 50% of breast cancers, is an indicator of poor prognosis, and has recently been functionally associated with the her2/neu (erb b-2) oncogene.
materials and methods: we assessed the antitumoral effects of orlistat against the human breast
cancer cell line sk-br3, an in vitro paradigm of fas and her2/neu overexpression in breast cancer.
results: cell cycle analyses revealed that micromolar concentrations of orlistat induced, in a timeand dose-dependent manner, significant changes in the distribution of cell populations including a
complete loss of g2-m phase, s-phase accumulation and a concomitant increase in the emerging
sub-g1 (apoptotic) cells. poly (adp-ribose) polymerase (parp) cleavage, an early event required
for cells committed to apoptosis, was more predominant in orlistat-treated g1 phase cells. when we
characterized signaling molecules participating in the cellular events following orlistat-induced inhibition of fas activity and preceded inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation, a dramatic downregulation of her2/neu-coded p185her2/neu oncoprotein was found in orlistat-treated sk-br3 cells
(>90% reduction). interestingly, a significant accumulation of the dna-binding  xxxg735xxx , a
member of the ets transcription factor family that specifically targets a  xxxg735xxx -binding motif present
on the her2/neu gene promoter and down-regulates its activity, was observed in orlistat-treated skbr3 cells. when a luciferase reporter gene driven by the her2/neu promoter was transiently transfected in sk-br3 cells, orlistat exposure was found to dramatically repress the promoter activity of
her2/neu gene, whereas a her2/neu promoter bearing a mutated binding dna sequence was not
subject to negative regulation by orlistat, thus demonstrating that the intact  xxxg735xxx  binding site on the
her2/neu promoter is required for the orlistat-induced transcriptional repression of her2/neu overexpression. rna interference (rnai)-mediated silencing of fas gene expression similarly
repressed her2/neu gene expression in a  xxxg735xxx -dependent manner, thus ruling out a role for
non-fas orlistat-mediated effects. when the combination of orlistat and the anti-her2/neu antibody
trastuzumab (herceptine) in either concurrent (orlistat + trastuzumab) or sequential (orlistat !
trastuzumab; trastuzumab ! orlistat) schedules was tested for synergism, addition or antagonism
using the combination index (ci) method of chou– talalay, co-exposure of orlistat and trastuzumab
demonstrated strong synergistic effects (ci10 – 90 = 0.110– 0.847), whereas sequential exposure to
orlistat followed by trastuzumab (ci10 – 90 = 0.380 – 1.210) and trastuzumab followed by orlistat
(ci10 – 90 = 0.605 – 1.278) mainly showed additive or antagonistic interactions. indeed, orlistatinduced fas inhibition synergistically promoted apoptotic cell death when concurrently combined
with trastuzumab as determined by an elisa for histone-associated dna fragments. importantly,
the degree of fas expression in a panel of human breast cancer cell lines was predictive of sensitivity to orlistat-induced anti-proliferative effects as determined by a mtt-based characterization of

1254
metabolically viable breast cancer cells. moreover, hypersensitivity to orlistat-induced cytotoxicity
was observed in mcf-7 breast cancer cells engineered to overexpress her2/neu (mcf-7/her2-18
cells), which exhibit a significant up-regulation of fas expression and activity.
conclusions: these findings reveal that the development of more potent and/or bioavailable
orlistat’s variants targeting the lipogenic activity of fas may open a novel therapeutic avenue for
treating her2/neu-overexpressing breast carcinomas.
key words: orlistat,  xxxg765xxx , her2/neu,  xxxg735xxx , trastuzumab, breast cancer

introduction

materials and methods
cell lines and culture conditions
the human breast cancer cell lines sk-br3, bt-474, mda-mb-453,
mda-mb-435, mda-mb-231, t47d and mcf-7 were obtained from the
american type culture collection (atcc). her2/neu-overexpressing
mcf-7/her2 (clone 18) cells and their matched control (empty vectortransfected) mcf-7/neo cells were provided by mien-chie hung (the
university of texas md anderson cancer center, houston, tx, usa).
breast cancer cell lines were routinely grown in phenol-red containing
improved mem (imem; biosource international, camarillo, ca, usa)

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

an intense public interest has been generated by the characterization of the us food and drug administration (fda)approved anti-obesity drug, orlistat ( xxxd2792xxx ;
marketed by roche as xenicale), an irreversible inhibitor of
pancreatic and gastric lipases [1, 2], as a potent inhibitor of
prostate tumor growth by virtue of its ability to block fatty
acid synthase (fas) activity [3]. fas is a critical enzyme
involved in the anabolic conversion of dietary carbohydrates
to  xxxd2154xxx  in mammals [4 –7]. up-regulation of fas
activity and expression, a minor anabolic-energy-storage fasdependent pathway in normal cells, is a very early and nearly
universal up-regulation of fas in many human cancers and
their pre-neoplastic lesions. its association with poor clinical
outcome strengthens the hypothesis that fas is involved in
the development, maintenance, and enhancement of the malignant phenotype [8– 14]. in this regard, pharmacological inhibitors of fas are increasingly receiving more attention along
with the recent reports suggesting that fas may represent a
molecular bridge connecting obesity and cancer [15–17].
thus, while overweight and obesity are associated with an
increased risk of cancer development and death from all cancers [18, 19], high levels of fas correlate with aggressive
behaviors and poor prognosis in many human malignancies,
including breast cancer [8–16]. moreover, chemical fas
blockers, formerly characterized as antitumor cytotoxic agents
(i.e.  xxxd463xxx , c75), may provide therapeutic moieties for the
treatment of obesity as they robustly induce rapid and profound weight loss and loss of adipose mass by affecting both
food intake and energy expenditure [20–22]. the reverse is
also true because natural hypolipidemic agents such as the
green tea component  xxxd2006xxx  can induce
significant anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in cancer
cells by suppressing fas [23 –25].
as a part of our efforts to assess the role of fas signaling
on the survival and proliferation of breast cancer cells, we
recently identified a novel bi-directional molecular linkage
between breast cancer-associated fas activity and her2/neu
(erb b-2), a well-characterized oncogene that is overexpressed
in about 30% of breast carcinomas [26– 28]. first, when fas
protein expression was characterized in a wide panel of
human breast cancer cell lines, a positive correlation was
found between high levels of fas [29]. secondly, her2/neu
overexpression stimulates the fas gene promoter and ultimately mediates increased endogenous fatty acid biosynthesis,
and this her2/neu-induced fas up-regulation is inhibitable by

her2/neu inhibitors such as trastuzumab [30–32]. thirdly,
pharmacological and rna interference (rnai)-induced inhibition of fas activity and expression, respectively, negatively
regulates her2/neu oncogene expression at the transcriptional
level [33]. fourth, the degree of her2/neu oncogene
expression in a panel of breast cancer cell lines did predict
sensitivity to chemical fas inhibitors-induced cytotoxicity
[34]. these findings, altogether, strongly suggest that a previously unrecognized bi-directional cross-talk between fas
and her2/neu is taking place in human breast cancer cells.
the objective of the present study was four-fold. first, we
sought to characterize the antitumoral effects of the b-lactone
orlistat towards sk-br3 breast cancer cells, which naturally
overexpress orlistat target (i.e. fas). secondly, the ability of
orlistat to block the thioesterase function of fas was
employed as an independent strategy to confirm that pharmacological inhibition of breast cancer-associated fas activity,
regardless of the mechanism of action of the chemical
fas blocker, is accompanied by the specific suppression of
her2/neu oncogene overexpression. thirdly, we sought to elucidate the ultimate molecular mechanism through which fas
blockade leads to the suppression of her2/neu oncogene overexpression in breast cancer cells. fourthly, we evaluated the
therapeutic value of combining orlistat and the monoclonal
antibody against her2/neu trastuzumab (herceptine). finally,
we explored the correlation of orlistat-induced cytotoxicity
with the status of fas and her2/neu expression in a wide
panel of human breast cancer cell lines.
although orlistat possesses extremely low oral bioavailability and it is obvious that a novel formulation will be required
for treating tumors such as breast carcinomas, the findings
of this study may open a new avenue for the development of
more potent and/or bioavailable orlistat’s variants targeting
fas as suitable drug candidates for the management of
her2/neu-overexpressing breast carcinomas.

1255
containing 5% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (fbs) and 2 mm
l -glutamine. cells were maintained at 378c in a humidified atmosphere of
95% air/5% co2. cells were screened periodically for mycoplasma
contamination.

materials
trastuzumab (herceptine) and orlistat (xenicale) were kindly provided
by the evanston northwestern healthcare hospital pharmacy (evanston,
il, usa). trastuzumab was solubilized in bacteriostatic water for injection containing 1.1% benzyl alcohol (stock solution 21 mg/ml), stored at
48c and used within 1 month. orlistat was extracted from xenicale capsules (roche applied sciences) by solubilizing each pill in 1 ml of ethanol. insoluble product was removed by centrifugation (14 000  g for
5 min). the supernatant yielded a solution of orlistat (250 mm), which
was aliquoted and stored at 808c until use.

after being washed twice with pbs, cells were fixed in an ice-cold 1%
solution of methanol-free formaldehyde in pbs for 15 min and postfixed
in 80% ethanol for at least 2 h or stored at 208c. fixed cells were centrifugated at 300  g for 3 min and ethanol was removed. the cells were
then washed twice in pbs and suspended in 0.25% triton x-100 in pbs
for 10 min at room temperature to permeabilize plasma membrane. after
centrifugation (300  g, 5 min) the cell pellet was resuspended in 1%
(w/v) solution of bovine serum album (bsa; sigma-chemicals, st. louis,
mo, usa) in pbs (pbs/bsa solution) for 10 min to suppress the nonspecific component of the subsequent binding of antibody. the cells were
centrifugated again (300  g, 5 min) and the cell pellet (<106 cells) was
suspended in 100 ml of pbs/bsa containing 1:200 diluted anti-parp p89
antibody (rabbit polyclonal antibody; cat. no. g7341, reported by the
vendor to detect parp-p89 fragment; promega corp., madison, wi,
usa). the cells were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature, washed
twice with 1% pbs/bsa solution, resuspended in 100 ml of fitc-conjugated anti-rabbit igg secondary antibody (jackson immunoresearch labs,
west grove, pa, usa), and incubated for 30 min at room temperature
(rt) in the dark. for subsequent analysis by flow cytometry cells were
counterstained with 5 mg/ml of pi in the presence of 100 mg/ml of dnasefree  xxxg1963xxx  in pbs.

immunoblotting analyses of her2/neu,  xxxg735xxx  and fas
cell cycle analysis
adherent and detached cells were collected after trypsin detachment,
washed in phosphate-buffered salt solution (pbs) and centrifugated at
1500 rpm. cells were resuspended at 2 106 cells/ml in pbs and fixed in
ice-cold 80% ethanol for, at least, 24 h. fixed cells were centrifugated at
300  g and each sample resuspended in  xxxd3027xxx  (pi) stain buffer
(0.1% triton x-100, 200 mg of dnase-free  xxxg1963xxx , 20 mg of pi) in pbs
for 30 min. after staining, samples were analysed using a facscalibur
(becton dickinson; san diego, ca, usa) and modfit lt (verity software).

flow cytometric analysis of her2/neu expression
cells were seeded on 100-mm plates and cultured in complete growth
medium. upon reaching 75% confluence, the cells were washed twice
with pre-warmed pbs and cultured in serum-free medium overnight. orlistat was added to the culture as specified, and incubation was carried out
at 378c up to 48 h in low-serum (0.1% fbs). then, the specific cell surface expression of her2/neu-coded p185her2/neu oncoprotein was determined by measuring the binding of a mouse anti-her2/neu antibody
directed against the extracellular domain of p185her2/neu (clones ab-5).
briefly, following treatments for 48 h, cells were washed once with cold
pbs and harvested by scrapping in cold pbs. the cells were pelleted and
resuspended in cold pbs containing 1% fbs and then incubated with
5 mg/ml ab-5 antibody for 1 h at 48c. after this, the cells were washed
twice with cold pbs, resuspended in cold pbs containing 1% fbs, and
then incubated with a fluorescein isothiocyanate (fitc)-conjugated antimouse igg secondary antibody (jackson immunoresearch labs, west
grove, pa, usa) diluted 1:200 in cold pbs containing 1% fbs for
45 min at 48c. finally, the cells were washed once in cold pbs, and the
flow cytometric analysis was performed with a facscalibur flow cytometer (becton dickinson) equipped with cell quest software (becton
dickinson). the mean fluorescence signal associated with cells for labeled
p185her2/neu was quantified using the geo mean (gm) fluorescence parameter provided with the software. all observations were confirmed by at
least three, independent experiments. the data are presented as
means ± s.d.

experimental cells were washed twice with pbs and then lysed in buffer
[20 mm tris (ph 7.5), 150 mm nacl, 1 mm edta, 1 mm egta, 1%
triton x-100, 2.5 mm sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mm b-glycerolphosphate,
1 mm na3vo4, 1 mg/ml leupeptin, 1 mm phenylmethylsufonylfluoride] for
30 min on ice. the lysates were cleared by centrifugation in an eppendorff
tube (15 min at 14 000  g, 48c). protein content was determined against a
standardized control using the pierce protein kit (rockford, il, usa).
equal amounts of protein were resuspended in 5 laemmli sample buffer
for 10 min at 708c, subjected to electrophoresis on either 3%–8%
nupage tris-acetate (fas, p185her2/neu) or 10% sds-page ( xxxg735xxx )
and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. non-specific binding on the
nitrocellulose filter paper was minimized by blocking for 1 h at room
temperature (rt) with tbs-t [25 mm tris-hcl, 150 mm nacl (ph 7.5)
and 0.05% tween-20] containing 5% (w/v) non-fat dry milk. the treated
filters were washed in tbs-t and then incubated with primary antibodies
for 2 h at rt in tbs-t containing 5% (w/v) non-fat dry milk. the membranes were washed in tbs-t, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies in tbs-t were added for 45 min, and immunoreactive
bands were detected by enhanced chemiluminiscence reagent (pierce,
rockford, il, usa). blots were re-probed with an antibody for b-actin to
control for protein loading and transfer. densitometric values of
protein bands were quantified using scion imaging software (scion corp.,
frederick, md, usa).

in situ immunofluorescent staining
cells were seeded at a density of 1  104 cells/well in a four-well chamber
slide (nalge nunc international, rochester, ny, usa). after 48 h incubation with orlistat, cells were washed with pbs, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in pbs for 10 min, permeabilized with 0.2% triton x-100/pbs for
15 min, and stored overnight at 48c with 10% horse serum in pbs. the
cells were washed and then incubated for 2 h with anti-p185her2/neu ab-3
mouse monoclonal antibody diluted 1:200 in 0.05% triton x-100/pbs.
after extensive washes, the cells were incubated for 45 min with tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (tritc)-conjugated anti-mouse igg secondary antibody (jackson immunoresearch labs) diluted 1:200 in 0.05%
triton x-100/pbs. the cells were washed five times with pbs

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

the mouse monoclonal antibodies for p185her2/neu (ab-3 and ab-5
clones) were from oncogene research products (san diego, ca, usa).
anti-b-actin goat polyclonal and anti- xxxg735xxx  (sc-113) mouse monoclonal
antibodies were from santa cruz biotechnology (santa cruz, ca, usa).
the anti-parp p85 fragment antibody was from promega corp.
(madison, wi, usa). the primary antibody for fas immunoblotting was
a mouse igg1 fas monoclonal antibody (clone 23) from bd biosciences
pharmingen (san diego, ca, usa).

flow cytometric characterization of parp cleavage

1256
and mounted with vectashield + dapi (vector laboratories, burlingame, ca, usa). as controls, cells were stained with primary or secondary antibody alone. control experiments did not display significant fluorescence in any case (data not shown). indirect immunofluorescence was
recorded on a zeiss microscope. images were noise-filtered, corrected for
background, and prepared using adobe photoshop.

her2/neu promoter activity

cell viability
cell viability was determined using a modified mtt reduction assay (cell
tieter 96 aqueous non-radioactive cell proliferation assay, promega
inc., madison, wi, usa). briefly, cells in exponential growth were harvested by trypsinization and seeded at a concentration of 3  103
cells/200 ml/well into 96-well plates, and allowed an overnight period for
attachment. then the medium was removed and fresh medium along with
graded concentrations of orlistat in the absence or presence of trastuzumab
was added to the cultures. compounds were not renewed during the entire
period of cell exposure. following treatments (4–5 days), 96-well plates
were centrifuged at 200  g for 10 min and mts/pms solutions was
added to each well at 1/5 volume. after incubation for 3 h at 378c in the
dark, absorbances were measured at 490 nm using a multiwell plate
reader. control cells without agents were cultured using the same conditions with comparable media changes. compounds were not renewed
during the entire period of cell exposure. the cell viability effects from
exposure of cells to each compound were analysed, generating concentration–effect curves as a plot of the fraction of unaffected (surviving)
cells versus drug concentration. dose–response curves were plotted as
percentages of the control cell absorbances, which were obtained from
control cells treated with appropriate concentrations of the compounds
vehicles that were processed simultaneously. for each treatment, cell viability was evaluated as a percentage using the following equation:
ða490nm oftreatedsample=a490nm ofuntreatedsamplesþ £ 100

rna interference-mediated silencing of the fas gene
synthetic sense and antisense oligonucleotides targeting fas gene were
purchased from dharmacon rna technologies (lafayette, co, usa).
this double-stranded sirna was as follows: sense sequence, cccugagaucccagcgcugdtdt; antisense sequence, cagcgcugggaucucagggdtdt. the design of these sirna oligos targeting fas gene was
based on a dna sequence of the type aa(n19) corresponding to the
nucleotides 1210–1231 located 30 to the first nucleotide of the start codon
of the human fas cdna (aaccctgagatcccagcgctg). searches
of the human genome database (blast) were carried out to ensure the
sequences would not target other gene transcripts. the final concentration
of sirna fas in the 24-well plates was 200 nm. as a non-specific
sirna control, cells were transfected with equimolar concentrations
(200 nm) of a non-specific control pool (sirna negative control) containing four pooled non-specific sirna duplexes (upstate cell signaling
solutions-dharmacon rna technologies; catalong no. d-001206 –13).

cell death elisa
the induction of cell death was assessed using the cell death detection
elisaplus kit obtained from roche molecular biochemicals usa
(indianapolis, in, usa). this kit uses a photometric enzyme immunoassay that quantitatively determines the formation of cytoplasmic histoneassociated dna fragments (mono- and oligonucleosomes) after apoptotic
cell death. briefly, cells (7.5  103/well) were grown in 96-well plates and
treated, in duplicates, with trastuzumab, orlistat or trastuzumab plus orlistat as specified. the induction of apoptotic cell death was evaluated
using cytosolic fractions obtained from pooled adherent and floating cells

orlistat sensitivity was expressed in terms of the concentration of the
drug required for 50% decrease in cell viability (ic50). since the percentage of control absorbance was considered to be the surviving fraction of
cells, the ic50 value was defined as the concentration of orlistat that produced 50% reduction in control absorbance (by interpolation). data presented summarize the mean (± sd) of three independent experiments
made in triplicate.

synergy studies: median-effect (chou– talalay) analyses
synergism, addition or antagonism for orlistat and trastuzumab was determined by the multiple drug analysis of chou and talalay, which is based
on the median-effect principle. details of this methodology have been
published [35–37]. briefly, this method involves plotting dose– effect
curves for each agent and for multiply diluted, fixed ratio combinations of
agents using the median-effect equation:
f a =f u ¼ ðd=dm þm

ð1þ

in this equation, d is dose, dm is the dose required for 50% effect (e.g.
50% inhibition of cell viability, ic50), fa is the fraction affected by dose d
(e.g. 0.9 if cell viability is decreased by 90%), fu is the unaffected fraction
(therefore, f u ¼ 1 2 f a ), and m is a coefficient of sigmoidicity of the
dose–effect curve; m = 1, >1 and <1 indicate hyperbolic, sigmoidal and
negative sigmoidal dose– effect curves, respectively, for an inhibitory
drug. equation (1) may be rearranged as follows:
dx ¼ dm ½f a =ð1 2 f a þ1=m

ð2þ

the parameters m and dm are easily determined by the medianeffect plot x ¼ logðdþ versus y ¼ log½f a =ð1 2 f a þ; which is based on

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

using fugene 6 transfection reagent (roche biochemicals, indianapolis,
in) as directed by the manufacturer, overnight serum-starved cells seeded
into 24-well plates ( 5  104 cells/well) were transfected in low-serum
(0.1% fbs) media with 300 ng/well of the pgl2-luciferase (promega,
madison, wi) construct containing a luciferase reporter gene driven by
either an intact her2/neu promoter fragment (her2/neu wild-type pea3binding site-luciferase) or by a mutated her2/neu mutated  xxxg735xxx -binding
site-luciferase along with 30 ng/well of the internal control plasmid prlcmv, which was used to correct for transfection efficiency. after 18 h,
the transfected cells were washed and then incubated with either ethanol
(v/v) or orlistat in 0.1% fbs. alternatively, cells were transiently transfected with double-stranded sirna targeting fas gene (see below).
approximately 48 h after treatments, luciferase activity from cell extracts
was detected with a luciferase assay system (promega, madison, wi,
usa) using a victor2e 1420 multilabel counter (perkin elmer life
sciences). the magnitude of activation in her2/neu promoter-luciferasetransfected cells was determined after normalization of the luciferase
activity in cells co-transfected with equivalent amounts of the empty
pgl2-luciferase vector lacking the her2/neu promoter (b-luciferase) and
the internal control plasmid prl-cmv. this control value was used to
calculate the relative change in the transcriptional activities of her2/neu
promoter-luciferase-transfected cells in response to treatments after normalization to prl-cmv. the activity of the wild-type promoter in
untreated control cells was defined as 100%.

(obtained by centrifugation at 200  g for 10 min) by assessing the enrichment of nucleosomes in the cytoplasm using anti-histone biotin and antidna peroxidase antibodies (rt for 2 h), and determined exactly as
described in the manufacturer’s protocol. after three washes, the peroxidase substrate was added to each well, and the plates were read at 405 nm
at multiple time intervals. the enrichment of histone-dna fragments in
treated cells was expressed as a fold increase in absorbance compared
with control (vehicle-treated) cells.

1257
the logarithmic form of equation (1) and yields a straight line where m is
the slope and (dm) is the x intercept. ic50 values (by interpolation) and
dm values (by the median-effect plot) were usually similar. equation (1)
may thus be solved, providing the issoeffective dose (dx) for any effect
level (e.g. ic10 for fa=0.1; ic30 for fa=0.3; ic50 for fa=0.5, and so on). for
each level of cell growth inhibition, a parameter called the combination
index (ci) was calculated according to the equation:
ci ¼ ðdþtrastuzumab =ðdx þtrastuzumab þ ðdþorlistat =ðdx þorlistat
þ a½ðdþtrastuzumab ðdþorlistat =ðdx þtrastuzumab ðdx þorlistat 

ð3þ

statistical analysis
all observations were confirmed by at least three independent experiments. the data are presented as means ± sd. the student’s t-test (paired
and unpaired) was used to evaluate the statistical significance of mean
values. statistical significance levels were p <0.05 and p <0.005. all p
values are two-tailed.

results
 xxxd2792xxx , which is also known as orlistat and is
marketed as xenicale, is a derivative of a natural product
containing a b-lactone moiety (figure 1a). the b-lactone can
undergo nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the
lactone ring by the active site serine of the esterase in the
 xxxg1789xxx , yielding a covalent adduct between enzyme
and inhibitor [2]. recently, orlistat was found to inhibit the
thioesterase function of fas in a selective manner for tumorassociated fas [3]. fas enzymatic complex, which contains
seven separate enzymatic pockets, is situated as a head-to-tail
dimer with the ketoacyl synthase (ks) and malonyl (mt)/
acetyl transferase (at) domains of one monomer working
together with the dehydratase (de), enoyl reductase (er),
ketoacyl reductase (kr), acyl carrier protein (acp), and
thioesterase (te) domains on the adjacent monomer (figure
1b). these enzymatic domains act sequentially to condense
acetyl-coa with malonyl-coa to form a four-carbon intermediate [5 –7]. six additional turns of the enzyme’s cycle convert this intermediate to palmitate, which is then liberated
from fas by the action of the thioesterase domain [38].
because fas functions as a head-to-tail dimer, targeted inhibition of one of the enzymatic domains of fas can ablate
the activity of one or both fas subunits [5, 7].  xxxd463xxx , a
natural mycotoxin, is an antagonist of the b-ketoacyl synthase

figure 1. (a) structure of the b-lactone  xxxd2792xxx  (orlistat). (b) schematic representation of fas enzymatic complex and target sites of chemical
fas blockers  xxxd463xxx , c75, and orlistat.

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

where (dx)trastuzumab was the dose of trastuzumab required to produce x%
effect alone, and (d)trastuzumab was the dose of trastuzumab required
to produce the same x% effect in combination with (d)orlistat. similarly,
(dx)orlistat was the dose of orlistat required to produce x% effect alone,
and (d)orlistat was the dose required to produce the same effect in combination with (d)trastuzumab. if the agents are mutually exclusive (e.g. similar
mode of action), then a is 0 (i.e. ci is the sum of two terms); if the agents
are mutually non-exclusive (e.g. independent mode of action), a is 1 (i.e.
ci is the sum of two terms). if it is uncertain whether the agents act in a
similar or an independent manner, the formula may be solved both ways.
for simplicity, however, the third term of the chou and talalay equation
is usually omitted and, thus, the mutually exclusive assumption (or classic
isobologram) is indicated. only the ci values obtained from the classic
(mutually exclusive) calculation are therefore given in the results section.
similar results were obtained when the complete equation was used for
combination studies with trastuzumab and orlistat (data not shown).
different values of ci may be obtained by solving the equation (3) for
different values of fa (e.g. different degrees of cell toxicity). in this
method, ci values <1 indicate synergy (the smaller the value, the greater
the degree of synergy), values >1 indicate antagonism and values equal to
1 indicate additive effects. in our current studies, ci profiles were compared to a preset ‘null’ interval of 0.95–1.05 (addition), so that mean ci
values >1.05 or <0.95 were interpreted as being suggestive of antagonism
and synergism, respectively. each experiment was carried out with triplicate cultures for each data and was repeated independently at least three
times. the conformity of the experimental data to the median-effect
principle of the mass-action law was automatically provided by the computer printout in terms of the linear correlation coefficient (r-value) of the

median-effect plots. in our studies, the r-values for orlistat, trastuzumab
and their combinations were all >0.95.

1258

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

figure 2. effects of orlistat on cell cycle progression in sk-br3 breast cancer cells. (a) after an overnight period of serum starvation and refeeding with
imem-0.1% fbs at time 0, sk-br3 breast cancer cells were exposed to 40 mm orlistat and analyzed at various time points. the distribution of cells in
different phases of the cell cycle was monitored as a function of time using flow cytometry. the panels show representative flow cytometry profiles
obtained from three independent experiments. (b) distribution of sk-br3 cells in the different cell cycle compartments was analysed by flow cytometry

1259
domain (the condensing enzyme) of fas and functions by
covalently modifying the active site cysteine, resulting in
dead-end inhibition [39]. c75, a synthetic analog of  xxxd463xxx ,
also targets the condensing enzyme and inhibits fatty acid synthesis [40]. these two chemical fas inhibitors suppress
tumor cell proliferation, induce tumor cell apoptosis, and slow
the growth of xenograft tumors, thus supporting the notion
that fas is a relevant drug target in oncology [40–45]. orlistat has recently been characterized as a potent and selective
inhibitor of fas in prostate carcinomas cells and, unlike  xxxd463xxx  and c75, orlistat elicits its effects by inhibiting the
thioesterase domain of fas, which is responsible for releasing
palmitate from the enzyme’s acyl carrier protein [3, 46].

orlistat induces blockade of cell cycle progression

orlistat promotes apoptotic cell death of sk-br3 breast
cancer cells
poly(adp-ribose) polymerase (parp), a nuclear enzyme
involved in dna repair and activated in response to dnadamage, is an early target of caspases during apoptosis [50–
52]. the specific cleavage of this protein by caspase-3 onto
89- and 24 kda fragments is considered to be a hallmark of
the apoptotic mode of cell death [50–53]. here, parp cleavage was detected immunocytochemically using an antibody
that recognizes its 89-kda fragment (parp p89). the frequency and extent of parp cleavage in its cell-cycle position
was measured by multiparameter flow cytometry [54]. figure
2d presents bivariate distributions (scatter-plots) representing
immunufluorescence of parp p89 versus dna content of
sk-br3 cells treated with 20 mm orlistat for 72 h. although
cells from all phases of the cycle showed evidence of
increased parp cleavage in orlistat-treated cells, it was quite
evident that parp cleavage was more selective to cells progressing to the g1 phase. thus, this analysis revealed that the
percentage of g1 phase cells exhibiting parp cleavage was
about six-fold higher compared with g1-associated parp
cleavage in the untreated population. these findings, together
with the above results demonstrating a decline in the g1 population of orlistat-treated cells, reveal that orlistat-induced fas
blockade does not promote arrest in g0-g1 as breast cancer
cells are prompted to apoptosis as revealed by the degradation
of parp.

orlistat down-regulates p185her2/neu expression
since we previously demonstrated that chemical fas inhibitors  xxxd463xxx  and c75 strongly repressed her2/neu oncogene
overexpression in cancer cells [33], we here evaluated whether
orlistat-induced fas blockade similarly promoted down-regulation of her2/neu expression in sk-br3 breast cancer cells.
flow cytometric analyses using a monoclonal antibody
directed against the extracellular domain of her2/neu (ab-5;
figure 3a) established the ability of orlistat to dramatically
decrease the expression levels of cell surface-associated
her2/neu in sk-br3 (up to 90% reduction; figure 3b).
although p185her2/neu is a transmembrane oncoprotein, its
cytoplasmic domain can also function as a nuclear transcriptional activator [55, 56]. therefore, we analyzed the impact of

r
after 72 h in the presence of graded concentrations of orlistat (0, 5, 10 and 20 mm). the distribution of cells in different phases of the cell cycle was monitored as a function of time using the modfit lt software. representative cell cycle profiles (n=3) are shown for each treatment. (c) cell cycle percentages for sk-br3 cells treated with 20 mm orlistat for 72 h. (d) left panels: bivariate parp p89 immunofluoresence versus dna content distributions
(scatterplots) of sk-br3 cells which were untreated (top panel) as well as treated with 20 mm orlistat (bottom panel) for 72 h. right panels: percentages of
parp p89 in each cell cycle phase. standard deviation in each experimental condition was less than 2% after three independent experiments.

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

to determine the effects of orlistat on breast cancer cell-cycle
progression, sk-br3 cells, after an overnight starvation period
in media without serum, were exposed to a saturating concentration of orlistat (40 mm) in low-serum (0.1% fbs) conditions. the distribution of cells in different phases of the cell
cycle was assessed at 6, 24, 48 and 72 h using flow cytometry.
the time-dependent response of sk-br3 breast cancer cells to
orlistat was characterized by a loss of the g2-m population, as
well as an accumulation of cells in the s-phase of cell cycle.
importantly, orlistat exposure substantially promoted apoptosis
as evidenced by a time-dependent accumulation of sub-g1
populations that has <2n dna and represents dead cells
(figure 2a).
a more detailed analysis of cell-cycle distribution was performed in sk-br3 cells incubated for 72 h with increasing
concentrations of orlistat (0 –20 mm) using the modfit lt
software (figure 2b, c). orlistat-induced inhibition of fas
activity produced, in a dose-dependent manner, a dramatic
reduction in the proportion of g2-m cells (from 10% in
untreated control cells to 2.5% in the presence of 20 mm orlistat), while it significantly increased the proportion of s-phase
cells by five-fold (from 11% in untreated control cells to 53%
in the presence of 20 mm orlistat). moreover, a dramatic dosedependent increase in sub-g1 (apoptotic) cells was observed
following exposure to increasing concentrations of orlistat (up
to 54% compared with 3% in untreated control cells).
most of the  xxxd2154xxx  produced by tumor cells are incorporated into membrane phospholipids, and phospholipid synthesis is inhibited when fatty acid synthesis is inhibited [47,
48]. phospholipid biosynthesis is greatest during the g1 and s
phases, with doubling of the membrane mass occurring during
s phase in preparation for cell division [49]. indeed, most of
the phospholipid accumulation in preparation for mitosis takes
place during the s phase [49]. our current results demonstrat-

ing the ability of orlistat to arrest the cell cycle at the g1-s
transition in breast cancer cells strongly indicates that orlistat
and other orlistat-related b-lactones, through its ability to disrupt the endogenous fatty acid metabolism, should be considered to be a promising class of novel chemotherapeutics
that could be exploited for anti-breast cancer therapy.

1260

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

figure 3. orlistat suppresses her2/neu overexpression in sk-br3 breast cancer cells. (a) c-erb b-2 map showing the epitopes for ab-3 and ab-5 monoclonal antibodies. (b) overnight serum-starved sk-br3 breast cancer cells were cultured in imem-0.1% fbs supplemented with 20 mm orlistat for 48 h.
the amount of cell surface-associated p185her2/neu was quantified by flow cytometric analyses using a specific antibody against the extracellular domain
of her2/neu (ab-5) as described in materials and methods. the mean fluorescence signal ± sd (n = 3) was quantified using the geo mean (gm) fluorescence parameter provided with the cell quest software (becton dickinson). (c) impact of orlistat-induced inhibition of fas activity on p185her2/neu
cellular localization. untreated (panel i) and orlistat-treated (panel ii) sk-br3 cells were fixed, permeabilized, and labeled with the p185her2/neu ab-3
monoclonal antibody. cellular localization of p185her2/neu was detected by indirect immunofluorescence by incubating with tritc-conjugated anti-mouse
igg. after counterstaining with dapi, cells were examined and photographed by using a zeiss fluorescent microscope. a representative immunostaining
analysis (n = 3) is shown. (d) overnight-serum starved sk-br3 cells were cultured in imem-0.1% fbs supplemented with increasing concentrations of
orlistat for 48 h, and the harvested and lysed as described in materials and methods. equal amounts of protein were subjected to western blot analyses
with a specific antibody against either p185her2/neu (ab-3) or  xxxg735xxx , and then re-probed with a b-actin antibody. the figure shows a representative immunoblotting analysis (n = 3). (e) orlistat represses her2/neu promoter activity through a positive regulatory  xxxg735xxx -binding dna motif. luciferase reporter
gene driven by either wild-type (left panel) or the  xxxg735xxx  site-mutated (right panel) her2/neu promoter was measured after treatment with either 10 mm

1261

orlistat inhibits her2/neu promoter activity through
the ets transcription factor  xxxg735xxx 
to characterize the specific mechanism through which orlistat-induced inhibition of fas activity molecularly modulated
her2/neu oncogene expression, we performed transient transfection experiments with a luciferase reporter gene driven by
the her2/neu promoter (pnulit). remarkably, orlistat treatment was found to profoundly repress the activity of her2/neu
gene promoter (up to 60% inhibition) in sk-br3 breast cancer
cells (figure 3e, left panel). we sought an independent means
of inhibiting fas to solidify the role of this enzyme in regulating her2/neu promoter activity. therefore, we compared
orlistat and sirna-targeting fas for the ability to knock
down the transcriptional activation of her2/neu gene in skbr3 breast cancer cells. rnai-mediated silencing of fas
reduced the level of fas protein [33] and likewise downregulated her2/neu promoter activity by about 50% (figure
3e, left panel). together, these findings provide strong support
for the idea that a fas blockade in breast cancer cells acts
upon her2/neu oncogene expression, at least in part, via
regulation of her2/neu promoter activity.
to gain additional insight into the molecular mechanisms
underlying the repression of her2/neu promoter activity
induced by orlistat, we examined the expression of her2/neu

regulator  xxxg735xxx  following orlistat-induced blockade of fas
activity in sk-br3 cells. the dna-binding  xxxg735xxx , a
member of the ets transcription factor family, specifically
targets a dna sequence on the her2/neu promoter and downregulates its promoter activity thus suppressing her2/neu overexpression and inhibiting tumorigenesis [52, 58]. interestingly,
a significant accumulation of the dna-binding  xxxg735xxx 
was observed following orlistat exposure (figure 3d). moreover, when orlistat’s effects on the transcriptional activation
of her2/neu gene were characterized on a her2/neu promoter
bearing a mutated  xxxg735xxx  binding sequence (50 -aggaag-30 to
50 -agctcg-30 ), the luciferase reporter gene driven by the
 xxxg735xxx  site-mutated sequence was not subject to negative regulation by either orlistat or sirna fas (figure 3e, right
panel). as previously demonstrated by xing et al. in skov-3
and mda-mb-453 cells [57], when the levels of wild-type
and mutant her2/neu promoter activities were compared in
untreated control cells, the mutant promoter was significantly
less active than the wild-type in sk-br3 cells. these results,
altogether, strongly suggest that orlistat, through its fas target, represses her2/neu promoter activity through a positive
regulatory  xxxg735xxx -binding dna motif. equivalent results were
found in her2/neu-overexpressing bt-474 breast cancer cells
(data not shown).

orlistat co-exposure synergistically enhances
trastuzumab efficacy in her2/neu-overexpressing
breast cancer cells
we explored whether the down-regulatory effects of orlistat
on her2/neu gene expression could modulate the growth
inhibitory effects of trastuzumab (herceptine), a humanized
monoclonal antibody binding with high affinity to the ectodomain of p185her2/neu oncoprotein and showing encouraging
therapeutic effects in patients with her2/neu-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer [59– 62]. although there remains controversy over which method is best for detecting true in vitro
synergy between drug combinations, the combined cytotoxic
effect of orlistat and trastuzumab was assessed using the
median-effect plot analysis of chou and talalay [35– 37].
this procedure allows the characterization of drug interactions
with a single number, the combination index (ci). the ci
parameter indicates whether the doses of the two agents
required to produce a given degree of cytotoxicity are greater
than (ci >1 or antagonism) equal to (ci = 1 or addition) or
less than (ci <1 or synergism) the doses that would be
required if the two agents were strictly additive. for this type
of analysis and for each drug separately (i.e. orlistat and trastuzumab), we measured how the fraction affected (i.e. the
fractional cell toxicity) varied with differing doses. for two
drugs in combination (i.e. orlistat + trastuzumab, orlistat !
trastuzumab or trastuzumab ! orlistat) we varied the doses

r
orlistat or 200 nm sirna-targeting fas for 48 h. the activity of the wild-type promoter in the absence of treatments was defined as 100%. values shown
are means (columns) ± sd (bars) from triplicate wells, and are representative of repeated experiments. student’s t-test was used to evaluate the statistical
significance of mean values. statistical significance level was p <0.005 (denoted as **).

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

orlistat-induced inhibition of fas activity in the subcellular
localization of p185her2/neu. to address this question, orlistattreated sk-br3 cells were permeabilized with triton x-100
for the intracellular delivery of antibodies directed against the
extracellular domain and the carboxy terminal 14 cytoplasmic
amino acids of p185her2/neu (ab-5 and ab-3, respectively;
figure 3a). untreated cells showed a prominent cell-surface
staining of p185her2/neu (figure 3c, panel i). upon orlistat
treatment, the membrane staining of p185her2/neu was clearly
diminished when the subcellular localization of p185her2/neu
was assessed with wither ab-5 (data not shown) or ab-3
(figure 3c, panel ii). although p185her2/neu was somewhat
distributed through the cytoplasm in orlistat-treated sk-br3
cells, we failed to observe a prominent nuclear accumulation
of p185her2/neu as we previously reported in her2/neu-overexpressing cancer cells treated with the fas blocker c75 [33].
a significant decrease in the expression of her2/neu-coded
p185her2/neu oncoprotein was also observed in western blotting analyses of cell lysates from orlistat-treated sk-br3 cells
using the ab-3 monoclonal antibody recognizing the carboxyl
terminal 14 amino acids of p185her2/neu (figure 3d). equivalent results were found in her2/neu-overexpressing bt-474
breast cancer cells (data not shown). these findings support
the notion that her2/neu oncogene may act as the key molecular sensor of energy imbalance after the perturbation of fas
activity in cancer cells [33].

1262
to determine whether the synergy between orlistat and trastuzumab was accompanied with an increase in the extent of
apoptosis, sk-br3 cells were exposed to trastuzumab in
the absence or presence of increasing concentrations of orlistat, cell death was measured by an elisa that detected
dna-histone fragmentation, and the x-fold increase in apoptotis-related cell death was calculated by comparing the elisa
optical density reading of treated samples with the values of
untreated cells as 1.0. sk-br3 cells co-treated with trastuzumab and orlistat exhibited a higher degree of cell death compared with that observed when trastuzumab and orlistat were
used as single agents (figure 4b). therefore, the increased
sensitivity to trastuzumab seen in orlistat-treated sk-br3 cells
is not simply the result of changes in cell proliferation, but
might actually be due to increases in apoptotic cell death
following orlistat-induced cell damage.

high levels of fas determine breast cancer cell
hypersensitivity to orlistat
we finally characterized the relationship between the cytotoxic effects of orlistat and the expression of fas in a panel
of human breast cancer cell lines. cells were seeded in microtiter plates and then cultured in the absence or presence of
increasing concentrations of orlistat until untreated cells
reached confluence. then, the metabolic status of breast
cancer cells was judged by the mitochondrial conversion of
the tetrazolium salt, mtt, to its formazan product (mtt
assay). concentration –effect curves were generated by

figure 4. (a) synergy analysis of the interaction between orlistat and trastuzumab against sk-br3 cells according to the median-effect plot analysis of
chou and talalay. shown in the figure are plots of the combination index (ci) at various effect levels (fraction affected) for the combination of orlistat
and trastuzumab in sk-br3 cells using different schedules of administration. the cis were calculated using assumptions for the drug both mutually exclusive. the shaded area indicates the addition area based on a null interval of 0.95–1.05. cis above and below indicate antagonism and synergism, respectively. results are means (dots) ± sd (bars) of three independent experiments made in triplicate. (b) concurrent exposure to orlistat and trastuzumab
(herceptine) synergistically induces apoptotic breast cancer cell death. the induction of apoptosis by exposure of sk-br3 cells for 72 h with the indicated
doses of orlistat, trastuzumab, and/or orlistat plus trastuzumab was assessed using the cell death detection elisaplus kit obtained from roche molecular
biochemicals usa (indianapolis, in, usa) exactly as described in the manufacturer’s protocol. the student’s t-test was used to evaluate the statistical
significance of mean values. statistical significance levels were p <0.05 (denoted as *) and p <0.005 (denoted as **).

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

of the two agents while monitoring the fraction affected; however, the doses were varied such that a constant ratio of agent
1 (orlistat) to agent 2 (trastuzumab) was maintained. specifically, 1.5, 2.0- and 3.0-fold serial dilutions of orlistat and trastuzumab were prepared and combined with each other from
the lowest to the highest concentration while assessing the cell
fraction affected. the combination ratio was designed to
approximate the ic50 ratio of the drugs determined in preliminary experiments, so that the contribution of the effect for
orlistat and trastuzumab in the mixture would be the same (i.e.
equipotency ratio). figure 4a shows the ci plots at various
effect levels (fraction affected) for the combination of orlistat
and trastuzumab in sk-br3 cells using different schedules of
administration. the synergy observed with concurrent orlistat
and trastuzumab exposure for 96 h was apparent at all the
levels of cell kill (10%, 30%, 50%, 70% and 90%), with ci
values ranging from 0.110 (strong synergism) to 0.847 (moderate synergism). although the ci values obtained in sk-br3
cells exposed for 48 h to orlistat before exposure to trastuzumab for 48 h also suggested a synergistic effect under this
sequential schedule (ci = 0.380 at the ic10, ci = 0.514 at the
ic30), this regimen became additive and slightly antagonist at
levels exceeding the 50% cell kill boundary (ci = 1.210 at the
ic90). these findings suggest that co-exposure of her2/neuoverexpressing sk-br3 cells to fas inhibitor orlistat and antiher2/neu antibody trastruzumab is necessary for maximal
augmentation of cytotoxicity, whereas sequential administration of trastuzumab followed by orlistat significantly
reduces the synergism between the two agents.

1263
correlate, indeed, with constitutive fas expression levels in
breast cancer cells.
to conclusively confirm the selectivity of orlistat toward
fas and her2/neu overexpressors, we analyzed the cytotoxic
effects of orlistat following the forced expression of her2/neu
oncogene in mcf-7 breast cancer cells, which naturally
express moderate levels of both fas and her2/neu [29]. in
this scenario, we recently demonstrated that transfection with
the full-length cdna of the human her2/neu oncogene results
in a significant enhancement of activation of a fas promoter –reporter construct up to three-fold higher than that found
in wild-type mcf-7 cells [32] which, in turn, induces a significant accumulation of fas protein compared with matched
control mcf-7/neo cells (figure 5b, top panel). interestingly,
mcf-7/her2-18 cells were noticeably more sensitive to orlistat-induced cytotoxicity compared with control cells, and the
magnitude of this sensitization (up to 2.5-fold) did correlate
with the level of her2/neu-promoted up-regulation of fas
expression (figure 5b, bottom panel). these studies support
the argument that her2/neu overexpression, through its ability
to stimulate fas expression may be sufficient to induce a
greater sensitivity of breast cancer cells to orlistat.

figure 5. breast cancer cell sensitivity to orlistat positively correlates with fas (orlistat’s target) protein expression. top panels: fas protein expression
in a panel of human breast cancer cell lines. mda-mb-453, bt-474, mda-mb-435, sk-br3, mda-mb-231, t47d, mcf-7/neo and mcf-7/her2-18
cells were grown in imem-5% fbs until reaching 75% confluence. cells were then washed with pbs and solubilized in lysis buffer as described in
materials and methods. aliquots (10 mg) of 14 000  g supernatants were fractioned by nupage, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, probed with an
anti-fas monoclonal antibody, and then re-probed with a b-actin antibody. figure shows a representative immunoblotting analysis (n = 3). bottom panels:
for each cell line, cell viability curves following exposure to orlistat were constructed as described in materials and methods. breast cancer cell sensitivity
to orlistat was expressed in terms of the concentration of orlistat required for 50% (ic50) reduction of cell viability. values shown are means
(columns) ± sd (bars) of repeated experiments (n = 4).

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

plotting the fraction of unaffected (surviving) cells versus orlistat concentration, and ic50 values (the doses of orlistat producing a 50% reduction in cell viability) were calculated as
described in material and methods. breast cancer cell lines
exhibiting ic50 values >20 mm for orlistat were arbitrarily
defined as ‘low-sensitive’, whereas those exhibiting ic50
values <5 mm were defined as ‘high-sensitive’ (figure 5a,
bottom panel). when the status of fas expression (as
assessed by western blotting using a monoclonal antibody
against fas (figure 5a, top panel) was correlated to the sensitivity profile of breast cancer cells to orlistat-induced cytotoxicity, we found that her2/neu- and fas-overexpressing
sk-br3 and bt-474 cells were significantly more sensitive to
orlistat than others, with ic50s of 7.5 ± 3 and 10 ± 1 mm,
respectively. moderately fas-expressing mda-mb-453 and
t47d cells, which exhibit high and moderate levels of her2/neu, respectively, demonstrated an intermediate profile of sensitivity to orlistat, with ic50s of 13 ± 2 and 12 ± 2 mm.
her2/neu-negative and low-fas-expressing mda-mb-435
and mda-mb-231 exhibited the highest ic50 values for orlistat (23 ± 3 and 21.5 ± 4 mm, respectively). this analysis
clearly established that the cytotoxic effects of orlistat

1264

discussion

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

the lipogenic enzyme fas, also called oncogenic antigen519, is selectively and highly expressed in virulent breast cancers [8, 9, 63, 64]. in two separated studies that examined
stage i (<2 cm, negative axillary lymph nodes) breast carcinoma patients, high fas expression was associated with a
four-fold increase in risk of death [8, 9]. remarkably, the
differential expression of fas between cancer and normal
cells may provide a useful drug target for the development of
novel therapeutic anti-metabolites [41]. previous studies of
intratumoral injection of the natural fas blocker  xxxd463xxx 
demonstrated local efficacy of fas inhibition against a human
cancer xenograft but were limited to the failure of  xxxd463xxx  to
act systemically [65]. recently, kuhajda and co-workers
described the de novo synthesis of a synthetic, chemically
stable inhibitor of mammalian fas, c75, based on the known
mechanism of action of  xxxd463xxx  [40]. c75 treatment of
mcf-7 human breast cancer xenografts showed significant
antitumor activity with concomitant inhibition of fatty acid
synthesis in tumor tissue and normal liver [66]. importantly,
histopathological analysis of normal tissues after c75 treatment showed no adverse effects on proliferating cellular compartments, such as bone marrow, gastrointestinal tract, skin or
lymphoid tissues. moreover, the primary mechanism of the
antitumor activity of c75 was mediated through its interaction, and inhibition of, fas. thus, increasing bodies of
in vitro and in vivo evidence strongly suggest that pharmacological inhibition of fas represents a novel therapeutic
approach in human breast cancer. unfortunately,  xxxd463xxx 
and c75 are now known to have other molecular targets [67–
69], so searches for additional antagonists of fas with better
selectivity and distinct mechanisms of action are warranted.
our study confirms that micromolar concentrations of orlistat, a drug approved for treating obesity and recently characterized as a potent and selective inhibitor of fas in prostate
carcinoma cells [3], induce potent anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in breast cancer cells through its ability to block
the lipogenic activity of fas. these results not only reinforce
the notion that breast cancer-associated fas activity is a relevant molecular target for drug development in oncology, but
further demonstrate a close involvement of her2/neu (erb b-2)
oncogene, the overexpression and/or activation of which is
known to play an important role in the etiology, aggressive
progression and poor clinical outcome of breast carcinomas.
thus, when we characterized signaling molecules participating
in the cellular events that followed orlistat-induced inhibition
of fas activity and preceded inhibition of breast cancer cell
proliferation, orlistat treatment was found to dramatically suppress her2/neu expression in sk-br3 and bt-474 cell lines,
two in vitro models of fas and her2/neu-overexpressing
breast cancer [29]. this observation supports our prior work
in which pharmacological and rnai-mediated blockade of
fas signaling was found to suppress her2/neu overexpression
in cancer cells [33]. indeed, the ability of orlistat to deplete
her2/neu oncoprotein in breast cancer cells constitutes an
independent strategy to confirm that fas inhibition, regardless

of the mechanism of action of the chemical fas blocker, is
accompanied by the specific suppression of her2/neu oncogene. these findings strongly support the idea that breast
cancer-associated fas is not a mere manifestation of early
and common cancer-associated epigenetic changes but
rather actively contributes to the breast cancer phenotype by
regulating the expression, activity and cellular localization of
her2/neu oncogene [16, 33, 34].
the present study also provides new insight into the
mechanisms underlying the connection between breast cancerassociated fas and her2/neu oncogene. unlike the humanized anti-her2/neu monoclonal antibody trastuzumab
(herceptine), which targets the ectodomain of her2/neu
receptor and promote its degradation, fas blockade appears
to mitigate her2/neu overexpression, at least in part, via
 xxxg735xxx  binding to the her2/neu promoter, thus suppressing its
transcriptional activity. therefore, this distinct mechanism of
action should not be affected by the mechanisms of resistance
described for trastuzumab-based anti-her2/neu immunotherapy [70 –73]. moreover, orlistat-induced inhibition of fas
activity significantly enhanced the anti-proliferative effects of
trastuzumab. to evaluate the nature of the interaction following three different schedules of administration (orlistat
+ trastuzumab, orlistat ! trastuzumab and trastuzumab !
orlistat), which might be synergistic, additive or antagonistic,
we used the chou and talalay analysis, a mathematical
method employed for assessing the combined effect of antitumor drugs in vitro as a preclinical screening test [35–37]. our
studies demonstrated that the greatest number of synergistic
combinations as well as the greatest magnitude of synergy
was observed when her2/neu- and fas-overexpressing skbr3 breast cancer cells were exposed to the two agents simultaneously, whereas additive or even antagonistic interactions
were observed when either fas blocker orlistat preceded trastuzumab or trastuzumab preceded orlistat, respectively.
indeed, orlistat-induced transcriptional repression of her2/neu
gene, when concurrently combined with sub-optimal concentrations of trastuzumab, was able to promote high levels of
apoptotic cell death in her2/neu-overexpressing breast cancer
models. from a clinical perspective, these findings suggest
that the simultaneous administration of orlistat-related antifas compounds and trastuzumab may be the optimal schedule for the combination in terms of cytotoxic effects.
although the ultimate molecular mechanisms of interaction
operating with these schedules were not conclusively
addressed by our experiments, these events may be related to
the relative output of her2/neu-driven signaling in breast cancer cells. we recently demonstrated that the synergistic inhibition of breast cancer cell viability following the concomitant
targeting of her2/neu and fas using sub-optimal doses of
trastuzumab and chemical fas blockers  xxxd463xxx  and c75
was accompanied by a dramatic reduction on her2/neu
expression levels [33]. this strongly suggests a novel role of
her2/neu as a key molecular sensor of the energy imbalance
that follows perturbation of cancer-associated endogenous fatty
acid metabolism. our current approach further demonstrates

1265
highly-metastatic nci-n87 stomach carcinoma cell line [82],
thus suggesting that this selective lipase inhibitor used for
treating obesity may represent a suitable drug candidate for
treating her2/neu-overexpressing gi carcinomas through its
ability to block cancer-associated fas hyperactivity. moreover, future analyses of the incidence and clinical outcome of
gastrointestinal carcinomas in a representative obese population earlier receiving orlistat treatment, may illustrate further
its chemopreventive effects to gi cancers. nevertheless, its
potent pro-apoptotic activity, which is accompanied by a dramatic down-regulation of her2/neu oncogene, and the synergistic interaction that occurs following co-treatment with
orlistat and trastuzumab, cannot exclude the notion that more
potent or bioavailable variants of orlistat and/or orlistat-related
b-lactones as suitable drug candidates for treating her2/neuoverexpressing breast carcinomas.

acknowledgements
the authors wish to thank mien-chie hung (the university
of texas m.d. anderson cancer center, department of cancer biology, section of molecular cell biology, houston,
texas, usa) for kindly providing her2/neu promoter constructs. javier a. menendez is the recipient of a translational
research pilot project ( xxxd1307xxx ) and of a career development
award from the specialized program of research excellence
(spore) in breast cancer (robert h. lurie comprehensive
cancer center, chicago, usa), of a basic, clinical and translational award (brctr0403141) from the susan g. komen
breast cancer foundation (usa), and of a breast cancer
concept award (bc033538) from the department of defense
(dod, usa).

references
1. mcneely w, benfield p. orlistat. drugs 1998; 56: 241–249.
2. hadvary p, sidler w, meister w et al. the lipase inhibitor  xxxd2792xxx  binds covalently to the putative active site serine of  xxxg1789xxx . j biol chem 1991; 266: 2021– 2027.
3. kridel sj, axelrod f, rozenkrantz n, smith jw. orlistat is a novel
inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx  with antitumor activity. cancer res
2004; 64: 2070–2075.
4. tsukamoto y, wong h, mattick js, wakil sj. the architecture of the
animal fatty acid synthetase complex. iv. mapping of active centers
and model for the mechanism of action. j biol chem 1983; 258:
15312– 15322.
5. joshi ak, witkowski a, smith s. mapping of functional interactions
between domains of the animal  xxxg765xxx  by mutant complementation in vitro. biochemistry 1997; 36: 2316–2322.
6. chirala ss, jayakumar a, gu zw, wakil s. human fatty acid
synthase: role of interdomain in the formation of catalytically active
synthase dimmer. proc natl acad sci usa 2001; 98: 3104–3108.
7. rangan vs, joshi ak, smith s. mapping the functional topology of
the animal  xxxg765xxx  by mutant complementation in vitro.
biochemistry 2001; 40: 10792–10799.
8. alo pl, visca p, marci a et al. expression of  xxxg765xxx 
(fas) as a predictor of recurrence in stage i breast carcinoma
patients. cancer 1996; 77: 474–482.

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

that the simultaneous combination of a fas inhibitor, such as
orlistat and trastuzumab, is more effective than the single
treatments in inducing cytotoxicity and apoptotic cell death
toward her2/neu-overexpressing breast cancer cells. these
findings support the clinical potential of concurrent treatments
using fas blockers, which seem to repress her2/neu oncogene expression at the transcriptional levels by up-regulating
 xxxg735xxx , and monoclonal antibodies to her2/neu such as trastuzumab, which targets the ectodomain of p185her2/neu and promotes her2/neu protein degradation [74 –76]. pre-exposure to
orlistat does not affect fas expression [3], while significantly
down-regulating her2/neu expression. this, in turn, may raise
the sensitivity threshold for trastuzumab-induced cell growth
inhibition, then contributing to the observed reduction of
synergism under a sequential schedule orlistat ! trastuzumab. pre-exposure to trastuzumab not only reduces
p185her2/neu but further down-regulates fas [30, 31]. under
these conditions, trastuzumab pretreatment not only decreases
the levels of orlistat’s target (i.e. fas) but further blocks one
of the molecular mechanisms through which fas blockade
promotes breast cancer cell toxicity (i.e. her2/neu down-regulation). accordingly, the trastuzumab ! orlistat schedule
yields the highest ci (i.e. antagonistic) values in all the combinations tested for orlistat and trastuzumab. nonetheless,
considering that preclinical studies clearly indicate that transcriptional repressors that down-regulate her2/neu promoter
activity can be effective regimens for cancer treatment [77], if
chemically stable fas inhibitors or cancer cell-selective vector systems able to deliver rnai targeting fas
gene demonstrates systemic anticancer effects in vivo, our
results render fas as a promising therapeutic target to influence the outcome of her2/neu-overexpressing breast
carcinomas.
recent experimental and epidemiological data strongly
suggested a protective effect of statins on cancer and further
support a role of statins in chemoprevention and, perhaps,
treatment of cancer disease [78 –81]. the molecular mechanisms underlying the anticancer activity of different statins,
however, remain largely uncertain. the ability of statins such
as simvastatin to block the enzymatic activity of 3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl- xxxd1739xxx  reductase, might prevent the
expression of the oncogenic phenotype by blocking the activation of oncoproteins such as  xxxg1285xxx  [78–81]. this mechanism of action, however, should not affect the transcription of
oncogenes and, therefore, precludes the potential of simvastatin-related statins to affect the malignant phenotype. however,
orlistat actively regulates the malignant phenotype of breast
cancer cells as it suppresses her2/neu oncogene expression by
blocking the lipogenic activity of fas. though orlistat possess extremely low oral bioavailability, it is obvious that a
novel formulation and/or route of administration will be
required for treating tumors such breast carcinomas. in its
approved formulation orlistat is administered orally, which
could be useful in treating tumors of the gastrointestinal (gi)
tract. interestingly, we have recently found orlistat to
block her2/neu overexpression and induce apoptosis in the

1266

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

cancer cell proliferation and survival: role of exogenous dietary fatty
acids, p53-p21waf1/ xxxg418xxx ,  xxxg1369xxx /2 mapk,  xxxg419xxx , brca1, and
 xxxg1559xxx . int j oncol 2004; 24: 591–608.
kumar-sinha c, ignatoski kw, lippman me et al. transcriptome
analysis of her2 reveals a molecular connection to fatty acid synthesis. cancer res 2003; 63: 132–139.
menendez ja, ropero s, mehmi i et al. overexpression and hyperactivity of breast cancer-associated  xxxg765xxx  (oncogenic antigen-519) is insensitive to normal arachidonic fatty acid-induced
suppression in lipogenic tissues but it is selectively inhibited by
tumoricidal alpha-linolenic and gamma-linolenic  xxxd2154xxx : a novel
mechanism by which dietary fat can alter mammary tumorigenesis.
int j oncol 2004; 24: 1369–1383.
menendez ja, decker jp, lupu r. in support of  xxxg765xxx 
(fas) as a metabolic oncogene: extracellular acidosis acts in an epigenetic fashion activating fas gene expression in cancer cells. j cell
biochem 2005; 94: 1–4.
menendez ja, vellon l, mehmi i et al. inhibition of fatty acid
synthase (fas) suppresses her2/neu ( xxxg682xxx -2) oncogene overexpression in cancer cells. proc natl acad sci usa 2004; 101:
10715– 10720.
menendez ja, mehmi i, verma va et al. pharmacological inhibition
of  xxxg765xxx  (fas): a novel therapeutic approach for breast
cancer chemoprevention through its ability to suppress her2/neu
( xxxg682xxx -2) oncogene-induced malignant transformation. mol carcinog
2004; 41: 164–178.
chou tc, talalay p. quantitative analysis of dose-effect relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or enzyme inhibitors.
adv enzyme regul 1984; 22: 27 –55.
chou j, chou tc. quantitation of synergism and antagonism of two
or more drugs by computerized analysis. in chou tc, rideout dc
(eds): synergism and antagonism in chemotherapy. san diego, ca:
academic press 1991; 223– 244.
chou tc, motzer rj, tong y, bosl gj. computerized quantitation of
synergism and antagonism of taxoltm,  xxxd3401xxx  and cisplatin against
teratocarcinoma cell growth: a rational approach to clinical protocol
design. j natl cancer inst 1994; 86: 1517–1524.
mattick js, nickless j, mizugaki m et al. the architecture of the animal fatty acid synthetase. ii. separation of the core and thioesterase
functions and determination of the n-c orientation of the subunit. j
biol chem 1983; 258: 15300–15304.
moche m, schneider g, edwards p et al. structure of the complex
between the antibiotic  xxxd463xxx  and its target, b-ketoacyl-acyl carrier
protein synthase. j biol chem 1999; 274: 6031–6034.
kuhajda fp, pizer es, li jn et al. synthesis and antitumor activity of
an inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx . proc natl acad sci usa 2000; 97:
3450–3454.
kuhajda fp, jenner k, wood fd et al. fatty acid synthesis: a potential selective target for antineoplastic therapy. proc natl acad sci
usa 1994; 91: 6379–6383.
pizer es, jackisch c, wood fd et al. inhibition of fatty acid synthesis
induces programmed cell death in human breast cancer cells. cancer res
1996; 56: 2745–2747.
pizer es, chrest fj, digiuseppe ja, han wf. pharmacological inhibitors of mammalian  xxxg765xxx  suppress dna replication and
induce apoptosis in tumor cell lines. cancer res 1998; 58: 4611–4615.
li jn, gorospe m, chrest fj et al. pharmacological inhibition of fatty
acid synthase activity produces both cytostatic and cytotoxic effects
modulated by p53. cancer res 2001; 61: 1493–1499.
alli pm, pinn ml, jaffee em et al.  xxxg765xxx  inhibitors are
chemopreventive for mammary cancer in neu-n transgenic mice.
oncogene 2004; [epub ahead of print].

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

9. alo pl, visca p, trombetta g et al.  xxxg765xxx  (fas) predictive strength in poorly differentiated early breast carcinomas. tumori
1999; 85: 35–40.
10. wang y, kuhajda fp, li jn et al.  xxxg765xxx  (fas)
expression in human breast cancer cell culture supernatants and in
breast cancer patients. cancer lett 2001; 167: 99 –104.
11. wang yy, kuhajda fp, li j et al.  xxxg765xxx  as a tumor marker: its extracellular expression in human breast cancer. j exp ther
oncol 2004; 4: 101 –110.
12. nakamura i, kimijima i, zhang gj et al.  xxxg765xxx  expression
in japanese breast carcinoma patients. int j mol med 1999; 4: 381–387.
13. milgraum lz, witters la, pasternack gr, kuhajda fp. enzymes of
the fatty acid synthesis pathway are highly expressed in in situ breast
carcinoma. clin cancer res 1997; 3: 2115– 2120.
14. alo pl, visca p, botti c et al. immunohistochemical expression
of human erythrocyte glucose transporter and  xxxg765xxx 
in infiltrating breast carcinomas and adjacent typical/atypical hyperplastic or normal breast tissue. am j clin pathol 2001; 116:
129 –134.
15. kuhajda fp. fatty-acid synthase and human cancer: new perspectives
on its role in tumor biology. nutrition 2000; 16: 202–208.
16. menendez ja, lupu r.  xxxg765xxx -catalyzed de novo fatty
acid biosynthesis: from anabolic-energy-storage pathway in normal
tissues to jack-of-all-trades in cancer cells. arch immunol ther exp
(warsz) 2004; 52: 414–426.
17. menendez ja, colomer r, lupu r. obesity,  xxxg765xxx , and
cancer: serendipity or forgotten causal linkage? mol genet metab
2004; (in press; available online 9 december 2004).
18. calle ee, rodriguez c, walker-thurmond k, thun mj. overweight,
obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort
of u.s. adults. n engl j med 2003; 348: 1625–1638.
19. calle ee, kaaks r. overweight, obesity and cancer: epidemiological
evidence and proposed mechanisms. nat rev cancer 2004; 4:
579 –591.
20. loftus tm, jaworsky de, frehywot gl et al. reduced food intake
and body weight in mice treated with  xxxg765xxx  inhibitors.
science 2000; 288: 2379–2381.
21. bouchard c. inhibition of food intake by inhibitors of fatty acid
synthase. n engl j med 2000; 343: 1888– 1889.
22. mobbs cv, makimura h. block the fas, lose the fat. nat med 2002;
8: 335–336.
23. wang x, tian w. green tea  xxxd2006xxx : a natural inhibitor of fatty-acid synthase. biochem biophys res commun 2001; 288:
1200–1206.
24. brusselmans k, de schrijver e, heyns w et al. epigallocatechin-3gallate is a potent natural inhibitor of  xxxg765xxx  in intact
cells and selectively induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. int j
cancer 2003; 106: 856–862.
25. yeh cw, chen wj, chiang ct et al. suppression of fatty acid
synthase in mcf-7 breast cancer cells by tea and tea polyphenols: a
possible mechanism for their hypolipidemic effects. pharmacogenomics j 2003; 3: 267 –276.
26. slamon dj. proto-oncogenes and human cancers. n engl j med 1987;
317: 955 –957.
27. slamon dj, godolphin w, jones la et al. studies of the her2/neu
proto-oncogene in human breast and ovarian cancer. science 1989;
244: 707 –712.
28. marmor md, skaria kb, yarden y. signal transduction and oncogenesis
by  xxxg682xxx /her receptors. int j radiat oncol biol phys 2004; 58:
903–913.
29. menendez ja, mehmi i, atlas e et al. novel signaling molecules
implicated in tumor-associated  xxxg765xxx -dependent breast

1267

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.
75.

76.

77.

78.
79.
80.
81.
82.

detected by antibody mib-1 in node-negative breast cancer. j pathol
1995; 176: 343–352.
kuhajda fp, piantadosi s, pasternack gr. haptoglobin-related protein
(hpr) epitopes in breast cancer as a predictor of recurrence of the disease. n engl j med 1989; 321: 636–641.
pizer es, wood fd, heine hs et al. inhibition of  xxxg765xxx 
delays disease progression in a xenograft model of ovarian cancer.
cancer res 1996; 56: 1189–1193.
pizer es, thupari j, han wf et al. malonyl-coenzyme-a is a potential mediator of cytotoxicity induced by fatty-acid synthase inhibition
in human breast cancer cells and xenografts. cancer res 2000; 60:
213–218.
thupari jn, landree le, ronnett gv, kuhajda fp. c75 increases
peripheral energy utilization and fatty acid oxidation in diet-induced
obesity. proc natl acad sci usa 2002; 99: 9498– 9502.
lawrence ds, zilfou jt, smith cd. structure-activity studies of  xxxd463xxx  analogues as protein palmitoylation inhibitors. j med chem
1999; 42: 4932–4941.
de vos ml, lawrence ds, smith cd. cellular pharmacology of  xxxd463xxx  analogs that inhibit protein palmitoylation. biochem pharmacol
2001; 62: 985–995.
lu y, zi x, zhao y et al. insulin-like growth factor-i receptor signaling and resistance to trastuzumab (herceptin). j natl cancer inst
2001; 93: 1852–1857.
lu y, zi x, pollak m. molecular mechanisms underlying  xxxg1144xxx -induced
attenuation of the growth-inhibitory activity of trastuzumab (herceptin)
on skbr3 breast cancer cells. int j cancer 2004; 108: 334–341.
nahta r, takahashi t, ueno nt et al. p27( xxxg419xxx ) down-regulation is
associated with trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer cells. cancer
res 2004; 64: 3981– 3986.
nagata y, lan kh, zhou x et al. pten activation contributes to
tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of pten predicts trastuzumab resistance in patients. cancer cell 2004; 6: 117 –127.
baselga j, albanell j. mechanism of action of anti-her2 monoclonal
antibodies. ann oncol 2001; 12 (suppl 1): s35–s41.
albanell j, codony j, rovira a et al. mechanism of action of antiher2 monoclonal antibodies: scientific update on trastuzumab and
2c4. adv exp med biol 2003; 532: 253–268.
baselga j, albanell j, molina ma, arribas j. mechanism of action of
trastuzumab and scientific update. semin oncol 2001; 28 (5 suppl
16): 4 –11.
wang sc, zhang l, hortobagyi gn, hung mc. targeting her2:
recent developments and future directions for breast cancer patients.
semin oncol 2001; 28(6 suppl 18): 21 –29.
chan kkw, oza am, siu ll. the statins as anticancer agents. clin
cancer res 2003; 9: 10–19.
jakobisiak m, golab j. potential antitumor effects of statins (review).
int j oncol 2003; 23: 1055–1069.
graaf mr, beiderbeck ab, egberts ac et al. the risk of cancer in users
of statins. j clin oncol 2004; 22: 2388–2394.
a role for statins in chemoprevention? lancet oncol 2004; 5: 391.
menendez ja, vellon l, lupu r. orlistat: from antiobesity drug to
anticancer agent in her2/neu (erb b-2)-overexpressing gastrointestinal
tumors? exp biol med (maywood) 2005; 230: 151 –154.

downloaded from http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/ at brown university on november 24, 2012

46. knowles lm, axelrod f, browne cd, smith jw. a fatty acid
synthase blockade induces tumor cell-cycle arrest by down-regulating
skp2. j biol chem 2004; 279: 30540–30545.
47. pizer es, wood fd, pasternack gr, kuhajda fp.  xxxg765xxx 
(fas): a target for cytotoxic antimetabolites in hl60 promyelocytic
leukemia cells. cancer res 1996; 56: 745– 751.
48. jackowski s, wang j, baburina i. activity of the phosphatidylcholine
biosynthetic pathway modulates the distribution of  xxxd2154xxx  into
glycerolipids in proliferating cells. biochim biophys acta 2000;
1483: 301 –315.
49. jackowski s. coordination of membrane phospholipid synthesis with
the cell cycle. j biol chem 1994; 269: 3858–3867.
50. kaufmann sh, desnoyers s, ottaviano y et al. specific proteolytic
cleavage of poly(adp-ribose) polymerase: an early marker of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. cancer res 1993; 53: 3976–3985.
51. lazebnik ya, kaufmann sh, desnoyers s et al. cleavage of poly(adp-ribose) polymerase by a proteinase with properties like ice.
nature 1994; 371: 346–357.
52. oliver fj, de la rubia g, rolli v et al. importance of poly(adpribose) polymerase and its cleavage in apoptosis. lesson from an
uncleavable mutant. j biol chem 1998; 273: 33533–33539.
53. shah gm, kaufmann sh, poirier gg. detection of poly(adpribose) polymerase and its apoptosis-specific fragment by a
nonisotopic activity-western blot technique. anal biochem 1995; 232:
251 –254.
54. li x, darzynkiewicz z. cleavage of poly(adp-ribose) polymerase
measured in situ in individual cells: relationship to dna fragmentation and cell cycle position during apoptosis. exp cell res 2000; 255:
125 –132.
55. xie y, hung mc. nuclear localization of p185neu  xxxg2198xxx 
and its association with transcriptional transactivation. biochem biophys res commun 1994; 203: 1589– 1598.
56. wang sc, lien hc, xia w et al. binding at and transactivation of
the cox-2 promoter by nuclear  xxxg2198xxx  receptor  xxxg682xxx -2. cancer cell 2004; 6: 251–261.
57. xing x, wang sc, xia w et al. the ets  xxxg735xxx  suppresses
her2/neu overexpression and inhibits tumorigenesis. nat med 2000;
6: 189–195.
58. wang sc, hung mc. transcriptional targeting of the her2/neu
oncogene. drugs today (barc) 2000; 36: 835–843.
59. vogel cl, cobleigh ma, tripathy d et al. first-line herceptin monotherapy in metastatic breast cancer. oncology 2001; 61 (suppl 2):
37 –42.
60. harries m, smith i. the development and clinical use of trastuzumab
(herceptin). endocr relat cancer 2002; 9: 75–85.
61. arteaga cl, moulder sl, yakes fm. her ( xxxg682xxx )  xxxg2198xxx 
inhibitors in the treatment of breast cancer. semin oncol 2002; 29 (3
suppl 11): 4–10.
62. atalay g, cardoso f, awada a, piccart mj. novel therapeutic strategies targeting the  xxxg682xxx  (egfr) family
and its downstream effectors in breast cancer. ann oncol 2003; 14:
1346–1363.
63. jensen v, ladekarl m, holm-nielsen p et al. the prognostic value of
oncogenic antigen 519 ( xxxg765xxx ) expression and proliferative activity

