j. med. chem. 2005, 48, 3613-3620

3613

stereoselective binding of indomethacin ethanolamide derivatives to
 xxxg1883xxx 
christopher w. moth, jeffrey j. prusakiewicz, larry j. marnett, and terry p. lybrand*
departments of chemistry & pharmacology, vanderbilt university, center for structural biology, 5142 biosciences/mrb iii,
nashville, tennessee 37232-8725
received july 22, 2004

we have used molecular modeling studies and molecular dynamics simulations to generate
three-dimensional models for  xxxg1883xxx  complexes with a series of indomethacin
ethanolamide derivatives. these studies provide a plausible explanation for the stereoselective
ligand binding preferences observed experimentally for these inhibitors and predict the general
binding mode as well as specific structural details for the ligand-enzyme complexes. these
studies provide insight into the nature of  xxxg1883xxx  interactions with a series of novel
inhibitors and should help increase our understanding of key structural determinants for
cyclooxygenase isozyme-selective inhibitor binding.
introduction
cyclooxygenase (cox), the molecular target of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) such as
aspirin,1 metabolizes  xxxd208xxx  to generate prostaglandin h2.2 downstream enzymes convert prostaglandin h2 to other prostaglandins and thromboxanes.
these in turn bind to g-protein-coupled receptors and
effect diverse biological responses.3
two cox isoforms have been identified. cox-1 is
constituitively expressed in nearly all tissues, but its
activity is most strongly associated with prostaglandin
production in gastric mucosa and thromboxane production in platelets.4 cox-2 expression is upregulated in
response to inflammatory stimuli and elevates prostaglandin levels as part of the inflammatory response.
identification of this alternate role for cox-2 has led
to development of the cox-2-selective nsaids rofecoxib, celecoxib, and  xxxd3481xxx . these drugs have good
antiinflammatory activity, but with reduced ulcerogenicity compared to nonselective nsaids.
despite their commercial success, current cox-2
selective inhibitors may still exhibit undesirable side
effects, including increased risk of adverse thromboembolytic events in susceptible individuals.5 enzyme specificity is also an issue, as the sulfonamide-containing
inhibitors celecoxib and  xxxd3481xxx  can also inhibit
 xxxg293xxx .6 cox-1 selective inhibitors may
also have therapeutic value, as it was shown recently
that cox-1 is overexpressed in some ovarian cancer
cells, where it stimulates angiogenesis.7 thus, a more
detailed understanding of cox isoform differences could
aid in the design of more selective, and potent, inhibitors
of both cox isoforms.
previously, a wide range of ester and amide derivatives of the nonselective carboxylate-containing nsaid
indomethacin were synthesized and found to selectively
and potently inhibit cox-2.8 if these inhibitors bind to
cox-2 in a manner consistent with the published
crystal structure for the cox-2/indomethacin complex,9
* to whom correspondence should be addressed. phone: 615-3431247. fax: 615-936-2211. e-mail: terry.p.lybrand@vanderbilt.edu.

the indole ring c3 position side chain projects through
a constriction site formed by the arg120/glu524/tyr355
triad and into a cavity bounded by the four membrane
binding helices. this cavity is commonly referred to as
the “lobby” region in cox.8
two crystal structures for cox-2 complexes with
selective inhibitors ( xxxd3563xxx  derivatives) have been
published.10 these crystal structures confirm that the
 xxxd3563xxx  analogues do project into the lobby region,
but specific interactions between these ligands and cox
membrane binding helix residues were not identified
and the structures remain undeposited. in one of these
crystal structures, the typically observed constriction
site triad is rearranged substantially. the glu524
residue hydrogen bonds to arg513 rather than arg120,
and the arg120 side chain rotates away from the
constriction site and hydrogen bonds to the backbone
carbonyls of glu524 and phe470. the second half of the
fourth membrane binding helix, which includes arg120,
unwinds partially. the arg120 cr is displaced 2.3 å
away from the active site, relative to other published
cox crystal structures. this conformational rearrangement generates a notably larger binding pocket in the
cox-2 isoform. no cox-1/ligand complex crystal structures available to date exhibit a comparably enlarged
binding site. moreover, in cox-1, residue 513 is a
histidine rather than an arginine, so it is possible that
cox-1 cannot undergo comparable conformational
changes. if only the cox-2 isoform is able to adopt an
alternate, enlarged binding site conformation, this could
explain the cox-2-selective inhibition observed for a
wide variety of bulky indomethacin ester and amide
derivatives.8
an exception to cox-2-selective inhibition by indomethacin amide derivatives was discovered recently
in the case of r-substituted indomethacin ethanolamides. while r-(r)-alkyl indomethacin ethanolamides
are potent cox-2-selective inhibitors, r-(s)-alkyl- and
r-dimethyl-substituted indomethacin ethanolamides inhibit both cox isoforms well,11 as shown in table 1.
here, we focus our attention on the cox-1 isoform,
hypothesizing that cox-1 does not undergo major

10.1021/jm0494164 ccc: $30.25 © 2005 american chemical society
published on web 04/23/2005

3614

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10

table 1. inhibition of wild-type cyclooxygenases by
r-substituted indomethacin ethanolamides11

ic50 (µm)

rsubstituent

r

s

ovine
cox-1
inhibn

r-methyl
s-methyl
r-isopropyl
s-isopropyl
r-phenyl
s-phenyl
dimethyl

ch3
h
ch(ch3)2
h
c6h5
h
ch3

h
ch3
h
ch(ch3)2
h
c6h5
ch3

33
0.59
>63
0.40
47
<1.3
0.80

human
cox-2
inhibn

estimated
∆gbind to
ovine cox-1
(kcal/mol)a

0.17
0.27
0.11
0.37
0.44
0.085
0.19

-6.4
-8.8
>-4.6
-7.7
-4.7
<-6.9
-7.2

a the binding free energy for each ligand with cox-1 is
computed directly from the corresponding ic50 value.

constriction site reorganization or binding site expansion upon binding of indomethacin ethanolamides. our
modeling studies suggest that the r-substituted indomethacin ethanolamide derivative side chains interact with cox-1 through a network of hydrogen bonds
to glu524, arg120, and tyr355 and through hydrophobic interactions that involve primarily pro86, ile89,
leu93, and val116 in the lobby region. our studies
further suggest that while both r-(r)- and r-(s)-stereoisomers can be accommodated well in the binding site,
the r-(r)-isomers must adopt an energetically strained
conformation to form a comparable set of hydrogen
bonding and van der waals interactions with the
enzyme relative to the r-(s)-isomers.
results and discussion
on the basis of prior extensive mutagenesis experiments,11 it is hypothesized that indomethacin ethanolamide derivatives inhibit cox via binding at the active
site and not through some secondary (i.e., allosteric)
interactions with the enzyme. thus, we have attempted
to generate cox-1/ligand complexes that are consistent
with the mutagenesis data and that also help explain
the stereoselectivity profile.
it is well-known that small changes to ligand structure can result in dramatically different binding orientations, and a recently published crystal structure of the
inhibitor diclofenac bound to cox-2 reveals that it binds
with its carboxylate group interacting with ser530 and
tyr385, rather than arg120, as seen for all other carboxylic acid ligand complexes with cox published to
date.12 therefore, we chose to explore alternate active
site orientations for each ligand. attempts to place the
ethanolamide ligands in a “flipped” binding site orienta-

moth et al.

tion, analogous to the cox-2/diclofenac structure, invariably led to severe protein-ligand steric overlap, and
it appears that these compounds must bind in a more
conventional orientation. attempts were also made to
rotate each ligand about the indole ring center of mass,
but again these alternate ligand orientations produced
serious steric clashes, and it appears that the ethanolamide derivatives’ binding mode must be rather similar
to that observed in the cox-2/indomethacin crystal
structure.
in the initial model building process, the indole ring
for each ethanolamide derivative was superimposed
directly on the indole ring for the indomethacin template
structure. while the indole ring core fits nicely in the
active site in this position, there are unfavorable steric
interactions between the ethanolamide side chain and
arg120, regardless of which low-energy ligand conformer is docked. most of these unfavorable steric
interactions were relieved by shifting the ligand indole
ring ∼1 å lower in the binding pocket toward the lobby
region. this ligand displacement toward the lobby
region is consistent with crystal structures that exhibit
a comparable shift between a  xxxd3563xxx  amide derivative and  xxxd2141xxx  in the cox-2 active site.10
given a plausible placement and orientation for the
indole ring core of each ligand, we explored potential
interactions for the ethanolamide side chain in the lobby
region. as can be seen in table 1, cox-1 can accommodate s-isomer derivatives with relatively small aliphatic side chain substituents (e.g., methyl, isopropyl)
and the achiral, dimethyl analogue, but larger alkyl or
aryl substituents are not tolerated as well. these data
suggest that smaller aliphatic substituents likely interact with a small hydrophobic pocket somewhere in
the lobby region. manual docking of low-energy conformers for each ligand reveals that compounds with
isopropyl substituents form favorable van der waals
interactions with a hydrophobic pocket formed by lobby
residues pro86, ile89, leu93, and val116 and the
aromatic ring of tyr355. the methyl and dimethyl
derivatives also fit nicely, but compounds with larger
substituents (e.g., phenyl) cannot be accommodated in
this hydrophobic pocket without significant shifting of
the ligand and concomitant disruption of favorable
protein-ligand interactions. these models thus provide
a simple explanation for the ligand binding preferences
as a function of side chain size.
while these models explain the size constraints for
ethanolamide side chain substituents, they do not
provide a clear explanation for stereoselective binding
of these compounds. low-energy conformers for both rand s-isomers can fit well in the lobby region, forming
a strong hydrogen bond between the side chain hydroxyl
group and glu524. since manual ligand docking and
structural refinement did not suggest any clear explanation for stereoselectivity control, we generated several
relatively long (1-1.5 ns) equilibrium md trajectories
for each complex to assess energetic contributions and
stability of ligand-protein interactions.
we used the mm-gbsa protocol13 to estimate ligand
binding free energies from each equilibrium md trajectory and identified those trajectories yielding the most
energetically favorable complexes for each ligand. we
did not compute entropy contributions explicitly, since

binding of indomethacin ethanolamides to cox-1

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10 3615

table 2. mm-gbsa energy components for enzyme-ligand
complexesa
enzyme only
r-methyl
s-methyl
r-isopropyl
s-isopropyl

-26605.3 (89.0)
-26540.2 (86.7)
-26622.2 (90.5)
-26518.8 (93.2)

ligand only
23.5 (4.8)
21.2 (5.5)
26.2 (5.2)
21.0 (4.8)

complex
-26640.5 (89.1)
-26576.3 (87.1)
-26658.4 (89.9)
-26561.4 (93.5)

table 3. total intramolecular strain energy for bound
ligandsa
r-isomer

s-isomer

∆eb
(r vs s)

58.4 (4.8)
66.3 (5.2)

56.3 (5.0)
61.5 (5.1)

2.1
4.8

∆h
-58.7
-57.3
-62.4
-63.6

a

total energy values are listed for the enzyme, ligand, and
enzyme-ligand complex (standard deviations are listed in parentheses), and include the generalized born solvation contribution.
the binding energy estimate listed in column 4 is calculated as
the total complex energy minus the enzyme plus ligand energies,
but it does not include the entropy contributions and thus may be
best regarded as a binding enthalpy estimate. all values are
reported in kcal/mol units.

the large size of these complexes makes normal mode
calculations impractical, and the trajectories are not
sufficiently long to obtain reliable entropy estimates
from quasiharmonic analysis. however, we reason that
the entropy contribution will be quite comparable for
different trajectories of a particular ligand-enzyme
complex, and probably for trajectories with different
stereoisomers. the entropy contribution might be comparable for all the ligand-enzyme complexes, since the
ligands are all quite similar. however, this is a rather
tenuous assumption, and we therefore did not attempt
to make any rigorous quantitative comparison of binding free energies for different ligands. total energies for
the enzyme, ligand, and the enzyme-ligand complex
from the mm-gbsa calculations are listed in table 2,
and experimental ligand binding free energies for smethyl versus r-methyl and s-isopropyl versus risopropyl derivatives are listed in table 1, calculated
from the experimental ic50 values for these compounds.
it must be noted that a simple correlation between ic50
ratios and relative binding free energies is strictly true
only for enzymes that exhibit michaelis-menton kinetics, but many cox inhibitors do not display simple
michaelis-menton kinetics. however, we also note that
excellent correlation for ic50 values and computed
binding free energies for celecoxib analogues was observed by assuming this relationship in a previous
study.14 as can be seen from the data in table 2, the
energy component terms are quite large, and the
statistical uncertainty for most terms is larger than the
estimated binding free energy difference for r- versus
s-stereoisomers. therefore, even if we did assume that
the entropy contributions are comparable for r- and
s-stereoisomer complexes, we still cannot make definitive predictions about ligand binding preferences using
these data. final energetic and structural results are
derived primarily from analysis of these “energetically
most favorable” trajectories, although all independent
trajectories were considered in the analyses. in each
case, the md trajectories exhibiting less energetically
favorable complexes (i.e., less favorable ligand binding
free energies based on mm-gbsa calculations) involved
complexes with higher ligand conformational strain
energy and are a direct consequence of our decision to
build initial complex models with several low-energy
conformers for each ligand. in many equilibrium trajectories, the strained ligand conformers relaxed to
lower energy conformations, but in some trajectories the
higher energy conformers appear to be effectively locked,
because these higher energy ligand conformers facilitate
optimal ligand-enzyme interactions. thus, we observe

r-methyl ligands
r-isopropyl ligands

a the total intramolecular energy for each ligand is computed
as the average over the final 800 ps of equilibrium molecular
dynamics trajectories for each complex. the intramolecular energy
is a sum of bond stretch, angle bending, dihedral, and intramolecular van der waals and electrostatics energy components
(standard deviations are listed in parentheses). b the relative
conformational strain energy for r- versus s-isomers is listed. in
each case, the s stereoisomer displays a more favorable conformational energy in the bound complexes. all energies are reported
in kcal/mol units.

figure 1. conformational strain energy for s-methyl and
r-methyl compounds during the last 800 ps of equilibrium md
trajectories. the conformational energies were calculated every
picosecond and are displayed as configurations 1-800.

that the net ligand binding free energies calculated from
these trajectories are a relatively subtle balance between ligand-enzyme interactions and ligand conformational strain energy.
this balance of ligand-enzyme interaction energy
with ligand conformational strain energy appears to
successfully explain the stereoselective binding preferences for the ethanolamide analogue series. as can be
seen in table 2, the ligand energies are consistently
lower for s-methyl and s-isopropyl ligands than for the
corresponding r-stereoisomers. the solvation energy
terms are essentially identical for ligand stereoisomers,
so the ligand energy difference must reflect differences
in conformational strain energies for r- versus sstereoisomers in these complexes. to investigate this
possibility more thoroughly, we performed detailed

3616

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10

figure 2. conformational strain energy for s-isopropyl and
r-isopropyl compounds during the last 800 ps of equilibrium
md trajectories. the conformational energies were calculated
every picosecond and are displayed as configurations 1-800.
table 4. enzyme-ligand interaction energiesa
r-methyl ligands
r-isopropyl ligands

r-isomer

s-isomer

-96.5 (3.2)
-99.4 (4.6)

-94.1 (4.1)
-101.6 (4.7)

a the enzyme-ligand interaction energies are computed as the
average over the final 800 ps of equilibrium molecular dynamics
trajectories for each complex (standard deviations are reported in
parentheses). all energies are reported in kcal/mol units.

energy decomposition and structural analyses for 800
configurations from trajectories of each enzyme-ligand
complex. the energetic analysis reveals that the rmethyl and r-isopropyl isomers do indeed have higher
conformational strain energies on average than the
s-methyl and s-isopropyl isomers, as shown in table
3. while the energy fluctuations are reasonably large,
as shown by the standard deviations in table 3, the
trends observed over these trajectories are quite dramatic, and the s-isomers consistently adopt lower
energy conformations, as can be seen from the plots in
figures 1 and 2. the energy decomposition analysis
further reveals that the ligand-enzyme interaction
energies are statistically indistinguishable for corresponding r- and s-isomers, as shown in table 4. these
results are consistent with the initial manual model
building and structural refinement, which indicated that
r- and s-stereoisomers formed equally good interactions
with the enzyme. the structural analysis shows clearly
that the r-isomers on average adopt a more strained
conformation than the corresponding s-isomers, as seen
in figure 3. basically, these analyses indicate that the

moth et al.

figure 3. newman projections of average conformations for
r-substituted indomethacin ethanolamides bound to cox-1.
the projections display the view looking down the bond from
the cr carbon to the amide nitrogen. to bind cox-1, renantiomers must adopt a strained conformation in which the
amide carbon (top of diagram) is gauche to both the cbeta carbon
and the alkyl substituent. the s-enantiomers bind to cox-1
in a low-energy conformation that places both the cbeta carbon
and the alkyl substituent in a gauche arrangement relative
to the amide hydrogen. the dimethyl compound adopts a
gauche conformation similar to that of the r-enantiomers, but
this is the lowest energy conformation observed for the
dimethyl analogue in a detailed conformational analysis.

r-isomers generally adopt a conformation that places
both the ligand cbeta carbon and the methyl or isopropyl
substituent gauche to the amide carbonyl carbon, while
the s-isomers position the cbeta carbon and alkyl substituent gauche to the amide hydrogen. to test whether
these results might reflect bias in the original model
construction and manual ligand docking or simply
inadequate configurational sampling in the md simulations, we generated equilibrium md trajectories starting
with lower energy r-methyl and r-isopropyl conformers
(i.e., conformations where the cbeta and alkyl side chains
are positioned gauche to the amide hydrogen) docked
in the binding site. for these trajectories, there was no
significant difference in ligand conformational strain
energy compared to the s-isomer complexes, but the
ligand-enzyme interaction energies were 6-10 kcal/mol
higher (i.e., less favorable) compared to the earlier
r-methyl and r-isopropyl complex trajectories. together, these results suggest that the r-methyl and
r-isopropyl compounds can indeed optimize binding site
interactions and ultimately yield lower binding free
energies, by adopting slightly strained conformations.
the higher conformational strain energy for r- versus
s-isomers correlates rather well with the experimental
binding energies for r- versus s-isomers and nicely
explains the basis for stereoselective ligand binding in
this ethanolamide analogue series.
the equilibrium md trajectories also provide additional structural information for the complexes. sev-

binding of indomethacin ethanolamides to cox-1

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10 3617

figure 4. stereoview of (a) r-(r)- and (b) r-(s)-methyl indomethacin enthanolamide ligand bound to cox-1. hydrogen bonds
between ligand, protein, and crystallographic water are shown as dashed yellow lines. the ligand also makes van der waals
contacts with lobby residues p86, i89, l93, and v116. the lobby region backbone atoms are displayed in purple, while the active
site backbone atoms are green. figures 4-7 were generated with the dino program.22

figure 5. stereoview of (a) r-(r)- and (b) r-(s)-isopropyl indomethacin enthanolamide ligand bound to cox-1. hydrogen bonds
between ligand, protein, and crystallographic water are shown as dashed yellow lines. the ligand also makes van der waals
contacts with lobby residues p86, i89, l93, and v116. the color scheme is as defined in figure 4.

3618

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10

moth et al.

figure 6. stereoview of r-dimethyl indomethacin enthanolamide ligand bound to cox-1. hydrogen bonds between ligand, protein,
and crystallographic water are shown as dashed yellow lines. the ligand also makes van der waals contacts with lobby residues
p86, i89, l93, and v116. the color scheme is as defined in figure 4.

figure 7. stereoview of r-(s)-phenyl indomethacin enthanolamide ligand docked in cox-1. the ligand is rendered as a cpk
structure, and the cox-1 lobby region is displayed with a translucent purple molecular surface. the unfavorable steric interactions
for this molecule are highlighted by the penetration of the ligand phenyl side chain cpk surface through the purple molecular
surface of enzyme residues i89 and v116. the molecular surface was computed with the msms23 program.

eral ligand-enzyme interactions are observed for all
molecules in every trajectory and probably represent the
predominant, stabilizing interactions for the complexes.
the ethanolamide side chain hydroxyl group forms a
hydrogen bond with glu524, and the side chain amide
carbonyl oxygen accepts a hydrogen bond from arg120.
these two hydrogen bonds are maintained consistently
in all simulations. the ligand side chain amide nh
forms a hydrogen bond with the tyr355 side chain,
although this hydrogen bond does fluctuate and occasionally breaks in some of the trajectories, particularly
for the dimethyl compound. lobby residues pro86, ile89,
leu93, and val 116, and the aromatic ring of tyr355
make favorable van der waals contacts with smaller
alkyl substitutes in the ethanolamide side chain in all
complexes, as shown in figures 4-6. the simulations
suggest that the pocket size does not fluctuate dramatically, so larger side chain substituents such as a phenyl
group cannot be accommodated quite as well, as shown
in figure 7.
water molecules also appear to play an important role
in stabilization of the enzyme-ligand complexes. we
retained crystallographic waters observed in the cox-1
reference structure used for all model-building exercises,
since it was easy to dock the ethanolamide derivatives
in the binding site without removal of these waters.
during the simulations, some of these waters did shift
positions, and waters near the entrance of the lobby

region can migrate freely and/or exchange with bulk
solvent. two water molecules are particularly well
localized, however, and have important structural roles
in the complexes. one water molecule forms a stable
bridging hydrogen bond between the glu524 backbone
carbonyl oxygen and the arg120 guanidinium side
chain, anchoring these two residues strategically in the
binding site, where both form key interactions with all
ligands. this water molecule is present in the 1ht5
crystal structure, and although it exchanges occasionally
with bulk water during our simulations, this particular
water molecule has a mean occupancy value of 1.0 in
all trajectories and always forms this bridging hydrogen
bond between arg120 and glu524, as observed in the
crystal structure. a second key water molecule is buried
more deeply in the binding site and forms a bridging
hydrogen bond between tyr355, his90, and glu524 side
chains in the 1ht5 crystal structure. however, in all
our simulations, his90 rotates away from the ligand
binding site to eliminate an unfavorable electrostatic
interaction with the indole ring methoxy group, and this
water molecule then forms bridging hydrogen bonds
between the ligand side chain hydroxyl or indole ring
methoxy substituents and nearby protein side chains
(e.g., tyr355) or backbone carbonyl oxygens (e.g., pro84).
while these hydrogen bonds fluctuate significantly
during the simulations, and his90 does infrequently
rotate back into the binding site to re-form a hydrogen

binding of indomethacin ethanolamides to cox-1

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10 3619

bond with the second water molecule, this water molecule does remain well-localized in the binding site
(figures 4-6). bulk water molecules do occasionally
enter the binding site and make direct contact with this
buried water molecule, so exchange with bulk water
should be possible. however, we did not observe direct
exchange with bulk water during the course of these
simulations.
in summary, all ligands appear to form a consistent
set of discrete interactions with enzyme binding site side
chains. both r- and s-stereoisomers form comparable
interactions with the enzyme, but the r-isomers do so
at the expense of modest conformational strain. the
relative conformational strain energies for r- versus
s-stereoisomers parallel the relative binding free energies for the stereoisomers extremely well. there appears
to be little size fluctuation in the hydrophobic pocket of
the lobby region, explaining why ethanolamide derivatives with larger aliphatic or aromatic substituents do
not bind as well. finally, it seems clear from these
simulations that water molecules play a crucial role in
stabilizing the ligand-enzyme complexes, either by
mediating ligand-enzyme hydrogen bonds or else by
stabilizing enzyme side chain conformations in the
ligand binding site.

for active site residues, so it seems quite likely that experimental data and modeling results obtained for ovine cox-1
will be relevant for human cox-1 as well. protein backbone
atoms for the cox-1 complex were superimposed onto the
cox-2 reference structure (backbone rmsd ) 0.86 å) to project
a plausible reference position for indomethacin in the cox-1
binding site. crystallographic waters, including active site
waters, and detergent molecules observed in the 1ht5 structure were retained in all models. we felt it was important to
retain the detergent molecules in these simulations, since all
enzymatic assays referenced in this work were performed in
aqueous detergent solution. while the crystal structures may
not perfectly represent the enzyme-detergent interactions
that exist in aqueous solution, these crystal structures do
reflect favorable detergent interaction sites on the enzyme in
crystals with high water content. the oligosaccharide substituents were not retained, since the electron density for these
residues is neither complete nor well-resolved in the crystal
structure. previous experimental studies suggest that the
oligosaccharides are important for proper folding, but they are
not necessary for enzymatic function of properly folded protein.15 the indole ring of each ethanolamide derivative was
then superimposed on the indomethacin indole ring in this
reference template. each ethanolamide derivative was shifted
down in the binding pocket toward the lobby region by ∼1 å
to improve ligand-protein contacts, as suggested by crystal
structures for  xxxd2141xxx  and  xxxd3563xxx  derivatives with
cox-2.10 binding site residue side chains were adjusted to
reduce bad steric contacts with ligands, using a systematic
conformational search procedure and a backbone-dependent
side chain rotamer library.16 all ligand conformers with serious
binding site steric clashes were discarded, and the remaining
complexes were refined with energy minimization and limited,
low-temperature molecular dynamics to relieve any residual
bad protein-ligand interactions.
each refined complex was solvated with spc/e water17 in
a truncated octahedron periodic box, and two sodium cations
were added for net charge neutrality, to facilitate particle-mesh
ewald calculations described below. as discussed previously,
all enzymatic analyses for these inhibitors were performed in
aqueous detergent solution, rather than in vesicles or some
other membrane environment. therefore, it is appropriate to
use aqueous solution simulations with included detergent
molecules to better reflect the experimental conditions. water
and cation positions were relaxed with 1000 steps of conjugate
gradient energy minimization, while keeping all protein,
ligand, and detergent atoms fixed. next, all protein, ligand,
and detergent atoms were refined with 1000 steps of energy
minimization, while water and counterions were held fixed.
finally, the entire system was relaxed with 1000 additional
steps of energy minimization. the minimization procedure was
followed by 20 ps of low-temperature molecular dynamics,
allowing only water, ligand, detergent molecules, and counterions to move freely. a thermalization procedure was then
used to prepare the system for equilibrium molecular dynamics
simulation. initial velocities for each atom were assigned from
a boltzmann distribution at 310 k, followed by a 0.2 ps md
simulation. this procedure was repeated 10 times with a
different boltzmann velocity distribution in each cycle, and
then equilibrium md simulations were run for each complex.
a weak harmonic restraint (20 kcal/mol/å) was applied to
tether the heme prosthetic group securely to its histidine
ligand in each monomer. each complex was equilibrated for
several hundred picoseconds until total energies and structural
fluctuations stabilized. various low-energy configurations were
selected from these initial md trajectories and used as starting
points for subsequent, more extensive (1-1.5 ns) equilibrium
md simulations, so that several trajectories were available for
analysis for each complex. the final 800 ps segment of each
trajectory was used for subsequent energetic and structural
analysis.
standard amber all-atom potential functions were used
for these calculations. atom types and all necessary potential
function parameters for ethanolamide ligands were assigned

conclusions
we have used model building and equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations to propose three-dimensional models for ovine cox-1 bound to a series of
indomethacin ethanolamide derivatives and to investigate energetic and structural aspects of these complexes.
our modeling studies yield a detailed picture for the
various inhibitor complexes that is consistent with
available experimental data, and the calculations also
provide a plausible explanation for the basis of stereoselective ligand binding for this set of molecules. these
calculations confirm that it is possible for cox-1 to bind
indomethacin enthanolamide analogues without a significant structural rearrangement or expansion of the
binding site region. results obtained in these modeling
studies may be helpful in further defining some key
features that govern cox-1 versus cox-2 isozyme
inhibitor selectivity and could be useful in future
attempts to design inhibitors with increased isozyme
selectivity.
experimental section
three-dimensional models for all indomethacin ethanolamide analogues listed in table 1 were generated using crystal
structure coordinates for indomethacin9 as a template. a
systematic search procedure was used to sample ethanolamide
side chain conformations for each molecule, and all conformers
were then energy-minimized. a clustering algorithm was used
to eliminate redundant conformers (i.e., conformers with rmsd
< 0.3 å), and all remaining conformers within 8 kcal/mol of
the global minimum energy conformation were retained for
subsequent ligand docking studies.
crystal structures for  xxxd2141xxx  methyl ester bound to
ovine cox-1 (pdb id code 1ht5) and indomethacin bound
to human cox-2 (pdb id code 4cox) were used as reference
structures to guide manual ligand docking exercises. to date,
only ovine cox-1 crystal structures are available and nearly
all biochemical characterization for cox-1 has been done with
the ovine enzyme, because human cox-1 cannot be expressed
in large quantities. however, human and ovine cox-1 have
∼95% sequence identity overall and 100% sequence identity

3620

journal of medicinal chemistry, 2005, vol. 48, no. 10

by analogy with existing parameters. optimized geometries
for each ligand were obtained from hartree-fock calculations
with a 3-21g* basis set. partial charges for each ligand were
derived from ab initio molecular electrostatic potential calculations using a 6-31g* basis set, followed by fitting of the
electrostatic potential to an atom-centered point charge model.
charge fitting was constrained to ensure that r- and sstereoisomers had identical partial charge assignments. all
energy minimization, molecular dynamics, and energetic and
structural analysis calculations were performed with the
amber 7 suite of programs.18 a 1 fs integration time step
was used in all md simulations, with a 9 å nonbonded cutoff
and particle-mesh ewald summation to correct for long-range
electrostatic interactions. relative ligand binding free energies
were estimated using the mm-gbsa protocol in amber.13
gaussian-98 was used for all ligand geometry optimization and
molecular electrostatic potential calculations,19 and partial
charge fitting was performed using the resp program.20 the
mddisplay program was used for visual analysis of md
trajectories.21

acknowledgment. this work was supported in part
by grant ns33290 (t.p.l.) from the national institutes
of health. c.w.m. was supported by training grant t32
gm65086-02 from the national institutes of health.
supporting information available: potential function
parameters for all ligands presented here. this material is
available free of charge via the internet at http://pubs.acs.org.
coordinates for all receptor-ligand complexes discussed here
are available from the corresponding author upon request.

references
(1) vane, j. r. inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a mechanism
of action for aspirin-like drugs. nature-new biol. 1971, 231,
232-235.
(2) hamberg, m.; samuelsson, b. detection and isolation of an
endoperoxide intermediate in prostaglandin biosynthesis. proc.
natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 1973, 70, 899-903.
(3) funk, c. d. prostaglandins and leukotrienes: advances in
eicosonoid biology. science 2001, 294, 1871-1875.
(4) smith, w. l.; dewitt, d. l.; garavito, m. cyclooxygenases:
structural, cellular and molecular biology. annu. rev. biochem.
2000, 69, 145-182.
(5) http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/answers/2002/ans01145.
html, http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/answers/2002/ans01170.
html. solomon, d. h.; glynn, r. j.; levin, r.; avorn, j.
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and acute myocardial
infarction. arch. intern. med. 2002, 162, 1099-1104. fitzgerald,
g. a. coxibs and cardiovascular disease. n. engl. j. med. 2004,
351, 1709-1711.
(6) weber, a.; casini, a.; heine, a.; kuhn, d.; supuran, c. t.;
scozzafava, a.; klebe, g.; unexpected nanomolar inhibition of
carbonic anhydrase by cox-2-selective celecoxib: new pharmacological opportunities due to related binding site recognition. j. med. chem. 2004, 47, 550-557.
(7) gupta, r. a.; tejada, l. v.; tong, b. j.; das, s. k.; morrow, j.
d.; dey, s. k.; dubois, r. n.  xxxg1883xxx  is overexpressed
and promotes angiogenic growth factor production in ovarian
cancer. cancer res. 2003, 63, 906-911.
(8) kalgutkar, a. s.; marnett, a. b.; crews, b. c.; remmel, r. p.;
marnett, l. j. ester and amide derivatives of the nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug, indomethacin, as selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors. j. med. chem. 2000, 43, 2860-2870.

moth et al.
(9) kurumbail, r. g.; stevens, a. m.; gierse, j. k.; mcdonald, j.
j.; stegeman, r. a.; pak, j. y.; gildehaus, d.; miyashiro, j. m.;
penning, t. d.; seibert, k.; isakson, p. c.; stallings, w. c.
structural basis for selective inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx  by
antiinflammatory agents. nature 1996, 384, 644-648.
(10) luong, c.; miller, a.; barnett, j.; chow, j.; ramesha, c.;
browner, m. f. flexibility of the nsaid binding site in the
structure of human  xxxg1884xxx . nat. struct. biol. 1996,
3, 927-933.
(11) kozak, k. r.; prusakiewicz, j. j.; rowlinson, s. w.; marnett, l.
j. enantiospecific, selective  xxxg1884xxx  inhibitors. bioorg.
med. chem. lett. 2002, 12, 1315-1318.
(12) rowlinson, s. w.; kiefer, j. r.; prusakiewicz, j. j.; pawlitz, j.
l.; kozak, k. r.; kalgutkar, a. s.; stallings, w. c.; kurumbail,
r. g.; marnett, l. j. a novel mechanism of  xxxg1884xxx 
inhibition involving interactions with ser-530 and tyr-385. j.
biol. chem. 2003, 278, 45763-45769.
(13) massova, i.; kollman, p. a. combined molecular mechanical and
continuum solvent approach (mm-pbsa/gbsa) to predict
ligand binding. persp. drug disc. des. 2000, 18, 113-135.
(14) plount price, m. l.; jorgensen, w. l. analysis of binding
affinities for celecoxib analogues with cox-1 and cox-2 from
combined docking and monte carlo simulations and insight
into the cox-2/cox-1 selectivity. j. am. chem. soc. 2000, 122,
9455-9466.
(15) otto, j. c.; dewitt, d. l.; smith, w. l. n-glycosylation of
prostanglandin endoperoxide synthases-1 and -2 and their
orientations in the endoplasmic reticulum. j. biol. chem. 1993,
268, 18234-18242.
(16) dunbrack, r. l., jr.; karplus, m. backbone-dependent rotamer
library for proteins: application to side-chain prediction. j.
mol. biol. 1993, 230, 543-574.
(17) berendsen, h. j. c.; grigera, j. r.; straatsma, t. p. the missing
term in effective pair potentials. j. phys. chem. 1987, 91,
6269-6271.
(18) case, d. a.; pearlman, d. a.; caldwell, j. w.; cheatham, t. e.,
iii; wang, j.; ross, w. s.; simmerling, c. l.; darden, t. a.; merz,
k. m.; stanton, r. v.; cheng, a. l.; vincent, j. j.; crowley, m.;
tsui, v.; gohlke, h.; radmer, r. j.; duan, y.; pitera, j.;
massova, i.; seibel, g. l.; singh, u. c.; weiner p. k.; kollman,
p. a. amber 7; university of california, san francisco, 2002.
(19) frisch, m. j.; trucks, g. w.; schlegel, h. b.; scuseria, g. e.;
robb, m. a.; cheeseman, j. r.; zakrzewski, v. g.; montgomery,
j. a., jr.; stratmann, r. e.; burant, j. c.; dapprich, s.; millam,
j. m.; daniels, a. d.; kudin, k. n.; strain, m. c.; farkas, o.;
tomasi, j.; barone, v.; cossi, m.; cammi, r.; mennucci, b.;
pomelli, c.; adamo, c.; clifford, s.; ochterski, j.; petersson, g.
a.; ayala, p. y.; cui, q.; morokuma, k.; malick, d. k.; rabuck,
a. d.; raghavachari, k.; foresman, j. b.; cioslowski, j.; ortiz,
j. v.; stefanov, b. b.; liu, g.; liashenko, a.; piskorz, p.;
komaromi, i.; gomperts, r.; martin, r. l.; fox, d. j.; keith, t.;
al-laham, m. a.; peng, c. y.; nanayakkara, a.; gonzalez, c.;
challacombe, m.; gill, p. m. w.; johnson, b. g.; chen, w.; wong,
m. w.; andres, j. l.; head-gordon, m.; replogle, e. s.; pople,
j. a. gaussian 98; gaussian, inc.: pittsburgh, pa, 1998.
(20) bayly, c. i.; cieplak, p.; cornell, w. d.; kollman p. a. a well
behaved electrostatic potential based method using charge
restraints for determining atom-centered charges: the resp
model. j. phys. chem. 1993, 97, 10269-10280.
(21) callahan, t. j.; swanson, e.; lybrand, t. p. md display: an
interactive graphics program for visualization of molecular
dynamics trajectories. j. mol. graph. 1996, 14, 39-41.
(22) dino: visualizing structural biology, 2002 (http://www.
dino3d.org).
(23) sanner, m. f.; olson, a. j.; spehner, j. c. reduced surface: an
efficient way to compute molecular surfaces. biopolymers 1996,
38, 305-320.

jm0494164

