medical hypotheses (2005) 65, 65–67

http://intl.elsevierhealth.com/journals/mehy

using histamine (h1) antagonists, in
particular atypical antipsychotics, to treat
anemia of chronic disease via interleukin-6
suppression
eric lewin altschuler
a
b

a,*
,

richard e. kast

b

mt. sinai school of medicine, 1425 madison avenue, box 1240, ny 10029, usa
university of vermont, 2 church street, burlington vt 05401, usa

received 18 january 2005; accepted 18 january 2005

summary anemia of chronic disease (acd) is a condition of decreased red cell mass secondary to some other chronic
inflammatory condition. in acd total body iron stores are normal, though serum iron is typically low secondary to iron
sequestration by macrophages, and often iron supplementation is not an effective treatment for acd for the same
reason. the pathogenesis of acd had been poorly understood, but recently there has been important progress:
upregulation of interleukin-6 (il-6) secondary to the underlying chronic inflammatory disease upregulates expression of
the protein hepcidin. upregulation of hepcidin causes anemia by a number of mechanisms: decreased intestinal
absorption of iron from the duodenum, increased sequestration of iron by macrophages. thus, downregulation of il-6
may represent a most important treatment avenue for acd. anti-il-6 antibodies might be a way to lower il-6 levels, but
such antibodies besides being expensive would have to be given intravenously or intramuscularly, and such large
immunogenic molecules may not be appropriate in patients already with a chronic inflammatory condition. here, we
note that an immediately available and potentially effective treatment for acd is to decrease il-6 levels by histamine
(h1) receptor antagonism, given that histamine acting through the  xxxg1078xxx  is known to be a potent positive
regulator of il-6. among the classes of medications that are h1 antagonists we point out that atypical antipsychotic
medications such as olanzapine and quetiapine are among the most potent h1 antagonists, and can have simple daily
dosing schedules and thus may be particularly useful in acd.
c 2005 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.



anemia can have multiple causes and with acute
and/or chronic time courses. some causes of ane-

*

corresponding author. tel.: +1 212 659 9351; fax: +1 212 348
5901.
e-mail address: eric.altschuler@mssm.edu (e.l. altschuler).



mia are relatively easy to understand and potentially straightforward to treat: for example,
anemia caused by acute blood loss from a lacerated
vessel is treated by finding the site of bleeding,
temporarily stopping the bleeding by applying pressure, ligating the vessel and, if necessary, transfusing the patient with packed  xxxd187xxx . anemia from

0306-9877/$ - see front matter c 2005 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2005.01.036

66
a chronic deficiency of dietary iron is also relatively
easily treated by oral iron supplementation.
other forms of anemia have proven far more
difficult. one type of currently difficult to treat
anemia is the so-called anemia of chronic disease
(acd) [1], found in patients with a variety of
infectious, neoplastic, presumed autoimmune or
diseases. in acd total body iron stores are normal, though serum iron and ferritin is typically
low. typically iron supplementation is not a particularly effective treatment for acd. a unified
understanding of these iron and iron supplementation data and results in acd appears to result
from an appreciation that macrophages are
sequestering iron: total body iron is normal in
acd, but serum levels are low because the iron
is sequestered in macrophages. iron supplementation does not improve anemia because the supplemental
iron
is
also
sequestered
by
macrophages and thus not available to increase
red cell mass. in general there are yet no specific
treatments for acd. a mainstay of treatment for
the anemia of acd is control of the underlying
chronic disease. however, for a number of reasons this is often not sufficient to treat the anemia: (1) in some cases it can be difficult or
impossible to gain good control of the underlying
disease; (2) in other cases while in theory control
of the underlying disease with concomitant normalization of anemia is possible, the therapeutic
regimen necessary to control the underlying disease has unacceptable side-effects and/or toxicities so as to preclude its use; (3) there is not
complete correlation of control of the underlying
disease and improvement in anemia. thus, it may
not be possible to safely or tolerably control the
underlying disease to a sufficient extent to normalize the anemia. the anemia in acd can run
a full spectrum from mild to severe. while the
focus of treatment in acd is typically on the
underlying disease, the anemia itself can in some
occasions be a patient’s more serious medical
problem and one from which a patient could substantially and specifically benefit from a safe and
effective treatment for the acd. for example,
consider a patient with mild to moderate rheumatoid arthritis (ra) but moderate to severe anemia from acd associated with the ra, and also
severe coronary artery disease not associated
with the ra. in this case, maintenance of a certain hemoglobin level, e.g., 10 mg/dl, is crucial
to ensure adequate coronary perfusion.
the pathogenesis of acd had not until recently
been well-understood. one cause is thought to be
some degree of bone marrow suppression from

altschuler and kast
inflammatory cytokines associated with the
underlying chronic disease [2]. recently, another
crucial cause of acd appears to have been found:
upregulation of interleukin-6 (il-6) secondary to
the underlying chronic inflammatory disease
upregulates expression of the protein hepcidin.
increased expression of hepcidin, under control
of il-6, by a number of mechanisms leads to anemia: (1) decreased intestinal absorption of iron
from the duodenum, and crucially (2) increased
sequestration of iron by macrophages see ref.
[3] and references therein.
suppression of il-6 thus may represent a most
important mechanism to treat acd. the straightforward approach to accomplishing this would be
to employ an anti-il-6 antibody. besides the
expensive or such a treatment, and the likely
need for intravenous or intramuscular administration of such an antibody, there is great potential
for side effects and toxicities associated with
using a large and highly immunogenic molecule
in individuals already with chronic inflammatory
conditions.
we point out here that modulation of histamine,
in particular histamine  xxxg1078xxx  blockade may
be a much simpler way to reduce il-6 levels and
thus hepcidin expression, and improve the anemia
of acd. indeed, histamine is a potent positive regulatory factor for il-6 [4]. there are numerous
medications in the current pharmacopeia that are
good h1 antagonists. these medications have their
own side effects. for example, first generation
antihistamines such as diphenhydramine are highly
sedating. we note here that many of the so-called
‘‘atypical’’ antipsychotic medications such as olanzapine and quetiapine are in vitro among the most
potent h1 antagonists known by up to a factor of 10
[5]. clinically, these medications can be sedating,
though usually not the extent of medicines such
as diphenhydramine. another advantage of
employing atypical antipsychotics to decrease il-6
in acd is that they are medications which can be given on a once-a-day dosing schedule for ease of
use.
in summary, we have noted that a new potential treatment for acd hepcidin downregulation
by decreasing of il-6 levels by h1 antagonists.
the h1 antagonist most appropriate for a given
patient should be used. we have pointed out that
due to potency and ease of use atypical antipsychotics should be strongly considered. trials of
h1 antagonists in acd are warranted, and, if successful, h1 antagonists would be a most welcome
addition to the treatment armamentarium of
acd.

using histamine (h1) antagonists, in particular atypical antipsychotics, to treat anemia

references
[1] cash jm, sears da. the anemia of chronic disease: spectrum
of associated diseases in a series of unselected hospitalized
patients. am j med 1989;87:638–44.
[2] means jr rt. advances in the anemia of chronic disease. int
j hematol 1999;70:7–12.
[3] pietrangelo a, trautwein c. mechanisms of disease: the role
of hepcidin in iron hemostatis implications for hemachro-

67

matosis and other disorders. nat clin pract gastroenterol
hepatol 2004;1:39–45.
[4] triggiani m, gentile m, secondo a et al. histamine induces
exocytosis and il-6 production from human lung macrophages through interaction with h1 receptors. j immunol
2001;166:4083–91.
[5] richelson e, souder t. binding of antipsychotic drugs to
human brain receptors focus on newer generation compounds. life sci 2000;68:29–39.

