0026-895x/05/6803-711–719$20.00
molecular pharmacology
copyright © 2005 the american society for pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
mol pharmacol 68:711–719, 2005

vol. 68, no. 3
14134/3045818
printed in u.s.a.

a rapid new assay to detect rna editing reveals
antipsychotic-induced changes in serotonin-2c transcripts
monsheel s. k. sodhi, david c. airey, warren lambert, philip w. j. burnet,
paul j. harrison, and elaine sanders-bush
departments of pharmacology and psychiatry, vanderbilt university, nashville, tennessee (m.s.k.s., d.c.a., e.s.-b.);
vanderbilt kennedy center for research on human development, nashville, tennessee (w.l., e.s.-b.); and department of
psychiatry, university of oxford, oxford, united kingdom (p.w.j.b., p.j.h.)
received april 26, 2005; accepted may 24, 2005

the revelation that the human genome comprises between
30,000 and 40,000 protein-coding genes was unexpected, because such few genes are unlikely to explain the functional
diversity between humans and less complex organisms.
these interspecies differences could arise from post-transcriptional processes such as rna editing and alternative
splicing, which allow a single gene to generate several protein variants. the current study focuses on rna editing. the
recent detection of 1637 potential new substrates for rna
editing (levanon et al., 2004) indicates that it is likely to be
more widespread in the transcriptome than originally believed. rna editing occurs in the pre-mrna and has many
forms, including insertion, deletion, and the conversion of
this work was funded by a medical research council (united kingdom)
fellowship and a national alliance for research on schizophrenia and depression young investigator award (to m.s.), the stanley medical research institute (to p.j.h.), national institutes of health research grants mh32007 and
ns35891 (to e.s.-b.), and national institute of child health and human
development grant p30-hd15052 to the vanderbilt kennedy center for research on human development (to w.l.).
article, publication date, and citation information can be found at
http://molpharm.aspetjournals.org.
doi:10.1124/mol.105.014134.

marily a dopamine receptor antagonist, reduced 5-ht2c vnv
isoform frequency and the level of rna editing at the d site,
risperidone and not the prototype atypical antipsychotic drug
clozapine increased the frequency of 5-ht2c vnv and d-site
editing. our data emphasize that caution is required in the
interpretation of rna-editing data in studies of psychiatric disorders, because these studies usually include subjects who
received long-term exposure to medication. this newly established method will facilitate high-throughput investigations of
rna editing in disease pathology and in the pharmacological
activity of drugs.

cytidine to uridine or adenine to inosine. in the latter case,
editing of specific adenine residues involves their hydrolytic
deamination by a double-stranded rna  xxxg62xxx  (adar) enzyme. because inosine base pairs with cytidine in transfer rna, it is predicted to be translated as
guanidine by the ribosome. these changes alter the codon
and often the amino acid sequence of the protein, usually
with functional consequences (gott, 2003).
because of their relatively recent discovery, substrates of
rna editing have not been extensively characterized. adenine-to-inosine rna editing in mammalian brain has been
identified in ionotropic receptors (such as the  xxxg953xxx  subunit
of the ␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate receptor) and in the serotonin (5-ht)-2c receptor (r), which is
coupled to  xxxg1027xxx . discrepancies between
genomic dna and cdna sequences led to the discovery of
nucleotide changes caused by the activity of adar enzymes.
in the fully edited 5-ht2cr, three amino acid codons in the
pre-mrna are changed so that the sequence coding for
irnpi becomes vrgpv (fig. 1) (burns et al., 1997).
rna editing produces many coexisting, functionally dis-

abbreviations: 5-ht2cr,  xxxg1115xxx ; adar,  xxxg62xxx  acting on rna; pcr, polymerase chain reaction; rt-pcr, reversetranscription polymerase chain reaction; icc, intraclass correlation coefficient; gee, generalized estimating equation; or, odds ratio; bp, base
pair; ci, confidence interval.
711

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

abstract
we report the development of a new assay as an alternative to
direct dna sequencing to measure rna-edited variation in
tissue. the new assay has been validated and is accurate,
cheaper, more rapid, and less labor-intensive than dna sequencing. we also outline the statistical modeling required for
analyses of the hierarchical, clustered rna-editing data generated in these studies. using the new technique, we analyzed
the effects of long-term antipsychotic medication on serotonin-2c receptor (5-ht2cr) rna editing in rat brain. our hypothesis that a drug with high affinity for 5-ht2cr, such as clozapine, would alter its rna-editing profile was not confirmed.
whereas haloperidol, a typical antipsychotic drug that is pri-

712

sodhi et al.

now, this has been a daunting task, because the complete
assessment of rna editing has involved extensive dna purification and sequencing, impeding replication studies in the
large number of subjects needed for optimum statistical
power (see results). therefore a high-throughput rna-editing detection method would be invaluable.
herein, we present a newly developed assay for rna editing modeled on one of the more complex substrates, the
multiply edited 5-ht2c pre-mrna. the new rna-editing
detection assay is as accurate and informative as dna sequencing. it is much cheaper and can be adapted for highthroughput protocols and for other rna-edited substrates.
using this assay, we tested the effects of antipsychotic treatments on 5-ht2c mrna editing. furthermore, we clarify the
hierarchical sampling design of rna-editing data sets, investigate the impact of clustering on statistical power analyses,
and guide statistical modeling choices appropriate for future
studies of rna editing.

materials and methods
preparation of 5-ht2c cdna template. messenger rna (2
␮g) was extracted by standard methods and pretreated at 37°c for 30
min with 1 unit of rq-1 rnase-free dnase and 10 units of rnasin
rnase inhibitor (both from promega, madison, wi), followed by 6
min at 70°c. reverse transcription was carried out using 200 units of
moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase with 10 units
of rnase inhibitor (promega), 30 ng of poly(dt) oligonucleotides
(oswel, southampton, uk), buffer (50 mm tris-hcl, ph 8.3, 75 mm
kcl, 3 mm mgcl2, and 10 mm dithiothreitol), and a 0.5 mm concentration of each dntp (promega). the reaction mixture was incubated
at 42°c for 1 h followed by 72°c for 10 min. the cdna produced was

fig. 1. sequence changes observed in the 5-ht2c rna edited region. the sites of a to i editing, detected as “a” to “g” changes, are indicated as
underlined gs. the top sequence represents the genomic dna sequence, which is also detected in the cdna when rna editing has not occurred (i.e.,
in the 5-ht2c ini unedited isoform). the sequence of one of the frequently edited isoforms, 5-ht2c vsv, has “a” to “g” changes at sites a–d, which
alter three amino acids. the 5-ht2c vgv fully edited isoform has “a” to “g” changes at sites a–e, leading to three altered amino acids. 5-ht2c vnv,
5-ht2c vsv, and 5-ht2c vni isoforms were found to be frequent in this study.

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

tinct variants of 5-ht2cr. rna extracted from tissue expressing the 5-ht2c gene is a heterogeneous mixture of up to
32 different 5-ht2c mrna transcripts. these are predicted
to encode 24 protein isoforms and have been detected in both
rodent and human brain, with regional differences in their
frequencies (burns et al., 1997; niswender et al., 2001).
pharmacological evidence shows that 5-ht2c rna editing
reduces constitutive activity and g-protein activation in response to agonist stimulation (niswender et al., 1999).
therefore, the rna editing process represents a regulatory
mechanism by which cells can modulate their response to
environmental stimuli by altering the efficacy and specificity
of g-protein to receptor interactions. it is possible that disruption of this process could have pathophysiological effects,
but this has not been extensively explored because rna
editing is difficult to detect and quantify.
limited data indicate that altered rna editing is associated with a variety of disease processes. most notably, reduced rna editing of  xxxg953xxx  has been found in spinal motor
neurons of patients with amylotrophic lateral sclerosis
(kawahara et al., 2004). furthermore, altered levels of rnaediting enzymes have been detected in inflamed tissues
(yang et al., 2003) and in malignant gliomas (maas et al.,
2001), whereas studies of psychiatric disease have revealed
altered 5-ht2c rna-editing patterns in schizophrenia
(sodhi et al., 2001) and in suicide (niswender et al., 2001;
gurevich et al., 2002). however, there are conflicting data
(dracheva et al., 2003), and whether the observed changes in
subjects treated with antidepressants are caused by drug
treatment is unresolved (gurevich et al., 2002). more extensive investigations are needed to clarify these findings. until

novel rna editing method: analysis of antipsychotic effects

that uses a luciferase-based enzyme reaction to monitor dna synthesis in real time and is widely used for genotyping (fakhrai-rad et
al., 2002). a pyrosequencing assay was adapted for use as an alternative to direct dna sequencing for the identification of rna edited
isoforms. pcr product (25 ␮l) was mixed with 4 ␮l of streptavidincoated sepharose beads (amersham biosciences, uppsala, sweden)
and 21 ␮l of binding buffer (10 mm tris-acetate, 2 m nacl, 1 mm
edta, and 0.1% tween 20, ph 7.6). the mixture was agitated at
1400 rpm for 10 min at room temperature and transferred to a milliq
filter plate (millipore, molshelm, france). the plate was affixed to a
vacuum, and liquid was removed. a 50-␮l sample of 0.2 m naoh was
added to the plate, incubated for 1 min, and removed by vacuum.
next, 150 ␮l of 10 mm tris-acetate, ph 7.6, was applied twice and
removed immediately as before. a 54-␮l sample of annealing buffer
(20 mm tris-acetate and 2 mm mg-acetate, ph 7.6) was mixed with
1.92 ␮l of 10 ␮m sense primer (5⬘-atatcgctggatcggtatgtag3⬘) and used to resuspend the immobilized template in the filter
plate. thereafter, 45 ␮l of this mixture was transfered to a 96-well
psq plate (pyrosequencing, uppsala, sweden). the plate was covered, and the annealing reaction proceeded in a thermal cycler (mj
research) at 80°c for 2 min. enzyme and substrate reagents from
the sodium nitroprusside reagent kit 5 ⫻ 96 (pyrosequencing) were
dissolved in 620 ␮l of high-purity water after reaching room temperature and loaded onto a psq 96 reagent cartridge (pyrosequencing).
of each dntp, 200 ␮l was also loaded into compartments in the psq
96-reagent cartridge, as instructed by the manufacturer’s protocol.
the sample plate and cartridge were inserted into the psqha96
instrument, and analysis occurred automatically. the dispensation
sequence entered into the psqha96 analysis program was
gcagctagtcgtagagtctagct. the biotage.com technical support team (http://www.biotage.com/) designs dispensation sequences
using proprietary software on request. pcr contamination was eliminated by fastidious pcr procedures, including the use of a filtered
pcr cabinet, “dna away” reagent (molecular bioproducts, san diego, ca), filtered pipette tips and regular uv irradiation of all
equipment. if present, contamination can be detected in negative
controls or “blanks” and by the presence of extra peaks, indicating
the presence of both g and a at a single site in a transcript. the
presence of any apparent “heterozygosity” indicated contamination,
thus ensuring the stringency of the method.
animals and drug treatments. male sprague-dawley rats
(harlan, olac, uk) weighing 250 to 300 g received once-daily injec-

fig. 2. a direct comparison between the new rna-editing
assay and the direct sequencing protocol. rna is extracted
by standard methods, and rt-pcr is performed to produce
a mixed population of products, with varying degrees of
rna editing. the products can be analyzed by subcloning
and then either sequencing or pyrosequencing. rt-pcr
products are subcloned, and colonies are chosen at random
and tested for insert using pcr. each colony represents
one mrna transcript within the heterogeneous population
of mrnas. for dna sequencing (represented on the right
side of the chart), positive colonies are incubated overnight
in liquid culture, and dna is extracted and purified before
sequencing can be performed. the left side of the flowchart
illustrates the steps involved in the new assay. the steps
eliminated from the direct sequencing method are contained by the box on the right side of the flow chart.
therefore, the new assay eliminates the need for overnight
bacterial culture, dna extraction, purification, and sequencing, which considerably reduces time and expense,
thereby facilitating the high-throughput processing of
samples.

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

diluted with nine parts of sterile deionized water. the subsequent
pcr amplification of the 5-ht2c rna-edited region was performed
using oligonucleotide primers designed to span the rat exon 3/intron
3 boundary to prevent the amplification of residual contaminant
genomic dna. this pcr reaction included template cdna (90%
dilution), 1 mm concentration of each primer msf (5⬘-tttcaactgcgtccatcatgcacct-3⬘) and msr (5⬘-aacgaagttggggtcattgagcac-3⬘), 250 mm concentration each of  xxxd1148xxx , dctp,
 xxxd1837xxx , and dttp (dntps), 2 units of dna polymerase and recommended buffer (qiagen, valencia, ca) in a total volume of 20 ␮l.
samples were amplified for 27 cycles (in the linear phase of amplification). cycling conditions comprised 1 cycle at 96°c for 5 min
followed by 27 cycles at 96°c for 15 s, 50°c for 30 s, and 72°c for 30 s,
and finally 1 cycle of 72°c for 5 min in a thermal cycler (peltier; mj
research, watertown, ma), resulting in a 236-bp product. dna
fragments were resolved by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis, stained
with ethidium bromide (50 ng/ml), excised from the gel, and purified
using qiaex ii (qiagen).
characterization of rna edited transcripts. the gel-purified dna was ligated and cloned using the pgem-t system ii (promega). randomly picked colonies were either characterized using
direct sequencing or were identified using the new pyrosequencing
method (fig. 2). the dna sequencing protocol required overnight
subcloning, and the dna was purified and sequenced according to
the automated abi protocol using an abi377 sequencer (applied
biosystems, warrington, uk).
in contrast, with the new pyrosequencing protocol, the liquid
culture and dna purification steps were not necessary. instead,
bacteria from each colony were directly inoculated in a pcr reaction
mixture containing 0.2 ␮m sense oligonucleotide primer (5⬘atatcgctggatcggtatgtag-3⬘) and 0.2 ␮m antisense biotinylated primer (5⬘-biotin cgaattgaaacggctatgct-3⬘), 1⫻
taq gold buffer with 1.5 mm mgcl2 (perkinelmer life and analytical sciences, boston, ma), 0.75 units of taq gold (perkinelmer),
and 0.24 mm dntps. samples were heated to 96°c for 5 min and
then amplified for 45 cycles each consisting of 20 s at 96°c, 30 s at
58°c, and 20 s at 72°c in a thermal cycler (peltier; mj research),
resulting in a 60-bp product in 30 ␮l of total reaction volume. a total
of 5 ␮l was resolved by 3% agarose gel electrophoresis, with a 20-bp
dna standard (qiagen) to ensure successful transformation. the
remainder of pcr product was used for the pyrosequencing assay.
pyrosequencing is a nonelectrophorectic method of dna synthesis

713

714

sodhi et al.
clustering (kirkwood and sterne, 2003a). gee was used in the
analyses of data generated in the current study.
we applied gee models to clustered binary-dependent variables,
a modeling framework that has not been used in previous studies of
5-ht2c rna editing. we modeled the effects of drug treatment on
each dependent variable (either a predicted 5-ht2c protein variant
or a single site of rna editing) using a gee model with binomial
family, logit link, and exchangeable correlation. in these models,
saline was the reference category or odds ratio denominator (saline
odds ratio was considered to be 1.0). we described the data using
binary variables, including presence or absence of specific 5-ht2c
protein isoforms and presence or absence of editing at specific sites a
to e. the level of rna editing at specific sites was calculated as the
percentage edited fraction of the total number of molecules processed
for that subject. to determine whether antipsychotic drug treatments alter 5-ht2c rna editing, we sampled a mean of 15 clones
from each of 31 sprague-dawley rats (470 clones in total) and randomized to one of four antipsychotic treatments or a saline control
treatment (see animals and drug treatments). we tested for rna
editing differences between saline and drug treatment conditions by
measuring protein isoform or rna edit site frequencies. protein
isoform or rna edit site categories with less than 5% frequency were
not analyzed. the probability of detecting a false positive effect (␣)
was considered to be 0.05. before using the gee models, we tested
for the presence of data clustering in the dependent variables using
a likelihood ratio test.

results
until now, the most complete information of rna-editing
levels and frequencies of individual isoforms has been obtained by direct dna sequencing of cloned rt-pcr products.
therefore, validation of the new high-throughput method has
been performed using dna sequencing. substitution of dna
sequencing with the new assay reduces sample processing
time from days to hours and reduces the cost of reagents to
less than 10% of the usual price of dna purification and
sequencing.
validation of the new method. the key to the new
method is the identification of rna-edited transcripts by
adapting a technique used for genotyping dna, pyrosequencing. in our protocol, rt-pcr of the 5-ht2c rna-edited region is required, and subsequently, the sampled amplicons
are subcloned and single colonies (each of which corresponds
to an individual transcript) are amplified directly to produce
a template for identification using a pyrosequencing assay.
the protocol is described in detail under materials and methods and is summarized in fig. 2.
the new assay was validated using sequenced plasmid
dna. eleven sequenced clones were identified with 100%
accuracy when both sense and reverse strands were analyzed
by the new assay. figure 4 displays the results of sequencing
analyses and pyrosequencing identification of each clone,
which were in complete agreement.
5-ht2c rna editing in rat brain after long-term
antipsychotic treatment. application of the novel highthroughput 5-ht2c rna-editing assay in an original data set
exhibits the usefulness of this assay and reveals that rna
editing is altered by antipsychotics. haloperidol (1 mg/kg)
and risperidone (0.5 mg/kg) significantly altered 5-ht2c
rna editing in rats treated with a 2-week regimen of daily
injections.
haloperidol decreased the level of editing at the d site
[odds ratio (or) ⫽ 0.37, p ⫽ 0.009, 95% ci ⫽ 0.17 to 0.78],

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

tions intraperitoneally for 14 days with clozapine (25 mg/kg), haloperidol (1 mg/kg), risperidone (0.5 mg/kg), chlorpromazine (15 mg/
kg), or saline vehicle. animals were killed 6 h after the final dose by
a lethal injection of pentobarbital and perfused transcardially with
phosphate-buffered saline. brains were removed, frozen on dry ice/
alcohol slurry, and stored at ⫺80°c. all procedures were carried out
in accordance with united kingdom ethical and legal regulations.
cryotome sections (18 ␮m) were cut from each block (corresponding
coronal brain sections at the level of the hippocampus), and 12
sections were homogenized before rna extraction.
statistical analysis: statistical power and data clustering.
to date, inadequate attention has been given to appropriate statistical analysis of rna-editing measures. in these experiments, the
data are usually collected as multiple categorical measures (e.g.,
isoform type) per subject. repeated measures from the same subject
may not be independent. greater similarity in the measures within
a subject compared with measures in the rest of its group, is defined
as data “clustering”. failure to recognize the presence of clustering
in data can produce misleading standard errors, confidence intervals, and probability values. the degree of data clustering and cluster size (rna molecules processed per animal) are critical, because
clustering of observations within animals reduces statistical power.
the presence and strength of clustering can be quantified by the
intraclass correlation coefficient (icc; the ratio of between-cluster
variation to total variation).
if the presence of significant data clustering is confirmed by the
icc, additional observations must be added to the sample size
needed if clustering was absent (icc ⫽ 0). the effect of sample
clustering on sample size calculations is quantified by the design
effect (snijders and bosker, 1999): design effect ⫽ 1 ⫹ (n⬘ ⫺ 1) ⫻ icc,
where icc is the intraclass correlation and n⬘ is the average cluster
size. the following formula shows that the design effect increases
with cluster size and icc. figure 3 illustrates the effect of different
degrees of data clustering on statistical power achieved with different sample sizes (numbers of subjects and clones) considering large,
medium, and small effect sizes. for example, if the icc is 0.10 and
there are 10 measures per animal, the design effect is 1 ⫹ (10 ⫺ 1) ⫻
0.10 ⫽ 1.9. this means that to have the same power as an unclustered analysis (with icc ⫽ 0), almost twice the number of observations would be needed. if we needed “n” animals without clustering
and then discovered that icc ⬎ 0, the larger number of animals
required would be the following: number of clusters ⫽ n ⫻ (design
effect) ⫽ n ⫻ ([1 ⫹ (n⬘ ⫺ 1) ⫻ icc]), where n⬘ ⫽ average cluster size
in observations per animal.
therefore if we use five animals each with 10 clones for a total of
50 observations, and the icc is 0.1, we would need 5 ⫻ (1 ⫹ (10 ⫺
1) ⫻ 0.1) ⫽ 5 ⫻ 1.9 ⫽ 9.5 (i.e., 9 or 10 animals). an icc value of 0.1
may be considered medium clustering (raudenbush and liu, 2000),
and with 10 observations per animal, a moderate amount of clustering almost doubles the necessary number of measurements to
achieve the same statistical power.
accurate estimation of statistical power must consider the possibility of clustered data. traditional power analysis (cohen, 1988,
1992) can estimate the required sample size in the absence of clustering, after which the design effect and corrected number of animals
or patients can be calculated. if no pilot data are available to estimate an icc, one may plot a range of cluster sizes and iccs, as
shown in fig. 3.
statistical analysis: comparisons of drug treatments. appropriate analyses of data that are significantly clustered include 1)
deriving a summary statistic for each subject (e.g., level of editing at
each site) and comparing the distribution of summary statistics; 2)
using a robust estimate of variance that corrects for the effect of
clustering on the standard error calculation; 3) using a randomeffects model, that explicitly models the similarity of units within
clusters; and 4) using a generalized estimating equation (gee) that
adjusts both standard errors and parameter estimates to allow for

novel rna editing method: analysis of antipsychotic effects

715

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

fig. 3. graphs to illustrate sample sizes required to
detect small (a), medium (b), or large (c) effect sizes.
the number of subjects and molecules processed per
subject are compared at different levels of data clustering and statistical power. these graphs show that
increased data clustering reduces statistical power,
and therefore estimation of cluster size is especially
critical if medium or small effect sizes are being
measured.

716

sodhi et al.

case, and we need to consider clustering when estimating
statistical power. the design effect was calculated to be 1 ⫹
(n⬘ ⫺ 1) ⫻ icc ⫽ 1 ⫹ (15 ⫺ 1) ⫻ 0.11 ⫽ 2.54. the number of
clusters (or subjects) actually required for the statistical
power calculated, when the icc is really 0.11, is n/n⬘ [1 ⫹ (n⬘
⫺ 1) ⫻ icc] ⫽ 210/15 ⫻ 2.54 ⫽ 35.6 animals. the actual
number of clones required for the sample power to be as
predicted above is 35.6 ⫻ 15 ⫽ 533 (i.e., more than twice the
number sampled). dividing by the design effect suggests that
the sample of 210 clones has the statistical power of a sample
size of 83 independently sampled clones (210/2.54 ⫽ 83).
standard power tables indicate that the genuine power to
detect large effect sizes is 99%, for medium effects there is
77% power, and there is only 15% power to detect a small
effect. using cohen’s traditional criterion of 80% as adequate
power, we have adequate power only to detect large effects; if
the effects are medium or small, the study is underpowered
to detect changes in b-site editing.

discussion
development of the novel assay. we report a simple
but powerful new method of facilitating the evaluation of
rna editing. several genotyping strategies were attempted
previously as alternatives to dna sequencing to identify
cloned transcripts (e.g., dot blotting and restriction fragment
length polymorphism), but only our adapted pyrosequencing
protocol produced accurate reproducible data with a straightforward procedure. our pyrosequencing assay was validated
in comparison with dna sequence data and was found to be
100% accurate on both strands. the new method, which
eliminates the need for overnight liquid culture and subsequent plasmid dna extraction and purification stages, is
therefore less labor-intensive and 90% less expensive than
direct dna sequencing. hence, our new assay has replaced
the use of primer extension and direct dna sequencing in
our research group.
direct sequencing has been the preferred method in all the
detailed studies of 5-ht2crna editing to date because it is
the only method currently available for determining 5-ht2c
isoform profiles (sodhi et al., 2001; gurevich et al., 2002;
dracheva et al., 2003; yang et al., 2004). in addition, direct
sequencing has been used for the identification of multiple
rna-editing sites produced by overexpression and subsequent hyperediting activity of the rna editing enzyme apo-

fig. 4. validation of the new high-throughput rna-editing
assay. cloned plasmid dnas from the 5-ht2cr rna edited
region were first sequenced using standard dna sequencing
techniques and subsequently processed using the new highthroughput assay. the pyrograms demonstrate the accuracy
of the new assay in the identification of each rna-edited site.
each trace is labeled according to the sequencing data, which
were replicated by the new method in every clone tested. the
positions of sites vulnerable to rna editing are indicated,
and each peak is labeled to provide the clone sequence.

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

leading to increased 5-ht2c vni isoform frequency (or ⫽
3.07, p ⫽ 0.017, 95% ci ⫽ 1.22 to 7.71) and decreased 5-ht2c
vnv isoform frequency (or ⫽ 0.48, p ⫽ 0.030, 95% ci ⫽ 0.25
to 0.93). by contrast, risperidone increased 5-ht2c vnv
isoform frequency (or ⫽ 3.05, p ⫽ 0.005, 95% ci ⫽ 1.40 to
6.65). risperidone also tended to alter editing levels at the b,
c, and d sites, although the direction of this effect relative to
saline was different at each site, and these differences were
less marked (p ⬍ 0.10). neither clozapine nor chlorpromazine
treatment led to statistically significant changes in any
5-ht2c rna-editing variable analyzed. results are summarized graphically in fig. 5.
rna editing measurements with less than 5% frequency
were excluded from the analysis (see materials and methods). three 5-ht2c protein isoforms had greater than 5%
frequency: 5-ht2c vni, 63/470; 5-ht2c vnv, 224/470; and
5-ht2c vsv, 112/470; therefore, these were included. when
editing at individual sites was considered, only the unedited
a and edited e sites were too infrequent to analyze. b-site
editing levels were significantly clustered by animal after
accounting for the treatment effect (icc ⫽ 0.11, 95% ci ⫽
0.03 to 0.32, ␹2 ⫽ 7.01, p ⫽ 0.004). of six gee models tested
(fig. 5), the full model probability was significant for the d
site (p ⫽ 0.0025) and 5-ht2c vni (p ⫽ 0.0192) and 5-ht2c
vnv (p ⫽ 0.0001) isoforms using wald tests (4 df).
analysis of data clustering. we demonstrate data analysis in the current study by considering rna editing at the b
site, which was measured as either edited or unedited. effect
size for a ␹2 test was considered to be cohen’s w. our aim is
for sufficient statistical power to detect small or medium
effects, defined as w ⫽ 0.1 and 0.3, respectively (cohen,
1992), and the probability of detecting a false-positive effect
(␣) was considered to be 0.05. we tested 31 animals (four
treatment groups of six, and one group of seven animals),
with 15 clones sampled per animal (31 ⫻ 15 ⫽ 465 clones).
the icc value was calculated to be 0.11. the effects of saline
treatment on binary rna-editing measures were compared
separately with the effects of each drug treatment in a 2 ⫻ 2
␹2 table (1 df), with 7 versus 7 animals and 15 clones per
animal, for a total of 210 measures of presence or absence of
an edited b site in each group. if we ignore clustering and
assume that the measures are independent (icc ⫽ 0), we
estimate 99% power to detect a large and medium effect sizes
but only 30% power to detect a small effect. however, the
observations from each animal are not independent in this

novel rna editing method: analysis of antipsychotic effects

bec (yamanaka et al., 1996) or for the identification of 16
naturally occurring edited sites in adar 2 (dawson et al.,
2004). the assay developed in this study can be adapted to
quantify changes in these and other newly discovered rna
edited substrates. although our protocol is optimized using
pyrosequencing technology, similar dna synthesis genotyping platforms have been developed by genovoxx (luebeck,
germany) and 454 life sciences (branford, ct), which could
be adapted for the assessment of rna editing with minimal
alterations to the current protocol.
effects of antipsychotic drugs on 5-ht2c rna editing. this is the first report of altered 5-ht2c rna editing
after long-term treatment with antipsychotic drugs. haloperidol, a commonly prescribed antipsychotic drug, reduces dsite editing, thereby increasing the frequency of the 5-ht2c
vni isoform and reducing the frequency of the 5-ht2c vnv
isoform. risperidone had the opposite effect. it is not clear

717

why haloperidol, an antipsychotic drug with no affinity for
5-ht2cr, would alter its rna editing. because chlorpromazine did not duplicate these effects, it seems that the common
property of dopamine receptor antagonism is unlikely to be
the mechanism. although the decrease in rna editing may
be related to a generalized toxic effect of haloperidol, this is
improbable because the reduction was not uniform across
editing sites. further studies including specific ligands for
the receptors targeted by risperidone and haloperidol are
required to determine which receptor(s) are involved in the
mechanism producing the rna editing changes observed.
clozapine did not cause any significant change in rna editing; although our study had sufficient power (80%) to detect
medium-sized effects (with the exception of changes at the b
site, see analysis of data clustering under materials and
methods), it is possible that small effects were missed.
altered d-site editing of the 5-ht2cr is responsible for the
downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

fig. 5. the effects of antipsychotic drug treatments on 5-ht2c rna editing in rat brain. the bar chart on the left illustrates the percentage frequencies
of each variable measured in the different treatment groups. saline is the reference category for all models, b, c, and d are the percentage of editing
levels. vni, vnv, and vsv are the inferred 5-ht2c-edited isoforms. the average measurements of each variable for the saline-treated group of
animals can be compared directly with each drug-treatment group. the chart on the right illustrates the point or values generated by gee for each
drug treatment group plotted on a logarithmic odds ratio scale (with the horizontal axis labeled on the or scale). the 95% confidence intervals are
indicated as bars around the point or. the saline treatment is considered to have a point or ⫽ 1. the statistical significance of the most robust
changes is indicated.

718

sodhi et al.

from which they were sampled (sodhi et al., 2001). this is
equivalent to assuming that the icc ⫽ 0. caution is warranted with this approach, because 1) the icc confidence
interval in previously published and current data often have
an upper limit invalidating the assumption of independence,
and 2) it can be argued that the appropriate null hypothesis
for using a test that assumes independence should be that
the icc is less than a specific negligible value, which is
analogous to a minimum-effect null hypothesis (murphy and
myors, 2003). these statistical calculations depend on an
accurate estimation of the icc or clustering (zou and donner, 2004).
the presence of clustering will reduce the statistical power
of a given sample size compared with the same sample size in
which clustering is absent (i.e., the measures are independent). this reduction will depend on the level of the clustering present. with medium-sized data clustering (icc ⫽ 0.1),
the study had 99% power to detect large effects (effect size,
w ⫽ 0.5) and greater than 95% power to detect medium
effects (w ⫽ 0.3). however to detect small effects (w ⫽ 0.1),
the presence of medium-sized clustering reduces the statistical power to approximately 25%. these statistical power
estimations were made from the graphs in fig. 3 and published tables of statistical power (cohen, 1988). figure 3
illustrates that if the icc is large (⬎0.3), power rapidly
becomes insensitive to additional clones per animal and that
increased power is best achieved by the addition of animals
or subjects (hsieh, 1988). the use of models that allow for
clustering should have at least 30 clusters (kirkwood and
sterne, 2003b). in smaller samples, simpler analyses of summary statistics should be considered.
in conclusion, we have adapted a simple genotyping
method to identify rna edit variants and have addressed
statistical issues associated with this research problem.
there seems little doubt that rna editing is widespread and
is an important source of protein diversity (levanon et al.,
2004). the rna-editing events detected in mammals have
profound effects on protein function, and these are yet to be
fully explored in the etiology of neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders (akbarian et al., 1995; niswender et al.,
2001; sodhi et al., 2001; gurevich et al., 2002; dracheva et
al., 2003). furthermore, the current study provides evidence
that risperidone and haloperidol alter 5-ht2c rna editing in
different ways that may be related to their efficacy as antipsychotics. therefore, we have developed an accurate, highthroughput tool for greater exploration of the pathological
consequences of altered rna editing. the importance of rna
editing is likely to increase as new substrates are identified,
and it is possible that the novel rna editing assay could be
adapted in the future for the purpose of diagnosis or drug
development.
acknowledgments

we thank louise hutchinson for preparation of animal tissue and
drs. paul gresch and ron emeson for useful discussion. we express
our appreciation to dr. mark lawson at http://www.pyrosequencing.
com (now http://www.biotage.com) for technical advice.
references
akbarian s, smith ma, and jones eg (1995) editing for an  xxxg981xxx  subunit
rna in prefrontal cortex and striatum in alzheimer’s disease, huntington’s disease and schizophrenia. brain res 699:297–304.
burns cm, chu h, rueter sm, hutchinson lk, canton h, sanders-bush e, and

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

change in 5-ht2c vni and 5-ht2c vnv isoform frequencies.
because isoforms differing at the d site have similar gprotein coupling and constitutive activities in vitro (herrickdavis et al., 1999), it is reasonable to assume the editing
changes resulting from haloperidol or risperidone treatment
will be functionally silent, at least with respect to these
components of 5-ht2cr activity. the d site of 5-ht2cr is
edited by adar 2 (burns et al., 1997), and therefore the
current data may indicate that haloperidol directly or indirectly alters the rna editing machinery connected with
adar 2 activity. adar 2 edits five members of the glur
gene family. in particular, the rna edited q/r-site of the
␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate receptor
 xxxg953xxx  subunit critically controls the calcium permeability of
the associated ion channel (lomeli et al., 1994). many additional substrates for rna editing are emerging (levanon et
al., 2004), and therefore a hitherto unidentified substrate
could explain these findings.
our data also have implications for neurogenetic studies of
human disease. postmortem findings have shown reduced
 xxxg953xxx  q/r site editing and reduced 5-ht2c rna editing (at
all sites) in schizophrenia (akbarian et al., 1995; sodhi et al.,
2001). although many of the patients in the latter study were
not treated with haloperidol (sodhi et al., 2001), it is possible
that long-term antipsychotic treatment could have contributed to the rna editing reduction in subjects with schizophrenia compared with the control subjects. however, the
reduced rna editing in subjects with schizophrenia was
observed at all editing sites, and not just at the d site as in
the haloperidol-treated rats. additional studies of animals
administered drug doses with greater equivalence and clinical relevance will clarify these findings, but the current data
indicate that caution is required in the interpretation of rna
editing changes in tissue taken from patients exposed to
long-term antipsychotic drug treatments. furthermore we
demonstrate that in vivo rna editing can be modulated by
an environmental, nongenetic factor (i.e., drugs) to interrupt
the linear relationship between genotype and phenotype.
this would not be detected by genomic dna analysis and
therefore could produce contradictory molecular genetic data
in studies of complex hereditary diseases, such as schizophrenia.
statistical power and data clustering. statistical
power estimates of the current study deal with data clustering and support the need for a high-throughput method to
measure rna editing. it is estimated that to achieve 80%
power to detect a small effect with medium clustering, the
minimum number of subjects required would be 84 when 200
rna molecules from each subject are tested. although this is
a large sample, using the new methodology, 16,000 clones
could be processed using 178 ⫻ 96-well plates. the same task
using dna sequencing would be prohibitively lengthy and
expensive. circumventing this problem by pooling extracted
rna or cdna from animals in a group to compare differences
between groups ignores the environmental differences between animals that could create clustering in some variables
measured. clustering was observed in the current data when
the level of b site editing was measured. pooling of mrna or
cdna would therefore preclude estimations of clustering for
reliable statistical analyses.
previous analyses of rna editing data have proceeded as if
the transcripts were statistically independent of the subject

novel rna editing method: analysis of antipsychotic effects

maas s, patt s, schrey m, and rich a (2001) underediting of  xxxg981xxx 
 xxxg953xxx  mrna in malignant gliomas. proc natl acad sci usa 98:14687–14692.
murphy kr and myors b (2003) statistical power analysis: a simple and general
model for traditional and modern hypothesis tests. lawrence erlbaum, mahwah,
nj.
niswender cm, copeland sc, herrick-davis k, emeson rb, and sanders-bush e
(1999) rna editing of the human serotonin  xxxg1115xxx 
silences constitutive activity. j biol chem 274:9472–9478.
niswender cm, herrick-davis k, dilley ge, meltzer hy, overholser jc, stockmeier
ca, emeson rb, and sanders-bush e (2001) rna editing of the human serotonin
 xxxg1115xxx . alterations in suicide and implications for serotonergic pharmacotherapy. neuropsychopharmacology 24:478 – 491.
raudenbush sw and liu x (2000) statistical power and optimal design for multisite
randomized trials. psychol methods 5:199 –213.
snijders t and bosker r (1999) multilevel analysis: an introduction to basic and
advanced multilevel modeling. sage publications, thousand oaks, ca.
sodhi ms, burnet pw, makoff aj, kerwin rw, and harrison pj (2001) rna editing
of the  xxxg1115xxx  is reduced in schizophrenia. mol psychiatry 6:373–379.
yamanaka s, poksay ks, driscoll dm, and innerarity tl (1996) hyperediting of
multiple cytidines of  xxxg175xxx  mrna by apobec-1 requires auxiliary
protein(s) but not a mooring sequence motif. j biol chem 271:11506 –11510.
yang jh, luo x, nie y, su y, zhao q, kabir k, zhang d, and rabinovici r (2003)
widespread inosine-containing mrna in lymphocytes regulated by adar1 in
response to inflammation. immunology 109:15–23.
yang w, wang q, kanes sj, murray jm, and nishikura k (2004) altered rna
editing of serotonin  xxxg1115xxx  induced by interferon: implications for depression associated with cytokine therapy. brain res mol brain res 124:70 –78.
zou g and donner a (2004) confidence interval estimation of the intraclass correlation coefficient for binary outcome data. biometrics 60:807– 811.

address correspondence to: dr. monsheel sodhi, departments of psychiatry and pharmacology, vanderbilt university, 8148 medical research
building iii, 465 21st avenue south, nashville, tn 37212. e-mail:
monsheel.sodhi@vanderbilt.edu

downloaded from molpharm.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on may 27, 2015

emeson rb (1997) regulation of serotonin-2c receptor g-protein coupling by rna
editing. nature (lond) 387:303–308.
cohen j (1988) statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. erlbaum
associates, hillsdale, nj.
cohen j (1992) a power primer. psychol bull 112:155–159.
dawson tr, sansam cl, and emeson rb (2004) structure and sequence determinants required for the rna editing of adar2 substrates. j biol chem 279:4941–
4951.
dracheva s, elhakem sl, marcus sm, siever lj, mcgurk sr, and haroutunian v
(2003) rna editing and alternative splicing of human serotonin 2c receptor in
schizophrenia. j neurochem 87:1402–1412.
fakhrai-rad h, pourmand n, and ronaghi m (2002) pyrosequencing: an accurate
detection platform for single nucleotide polymorphisms. hum mutat 19:479 – 485.
gott jm (2003) expanding genome capacity via rna editing. c r biol 326:901–908.
gurevich i, tamir h, arango v, dwork aj, mann jj, and schmauss c (2002) altered
editing of serotonin 2c receptor pre-mrna in the prefrontal cortex of depressed
suicide victims. neuron 34:349 –356.
herrick-davis k, grinde e, and niswender cm (1999) serotonin  xxxg1115xxx 
rna editing alters receptor basal activity: implications for serotonergic signal
transduction. j neurochem 73:1711–1717.
hsieh fy (1988) sample size formulae for intervention studies with the cluster as
the unit of randomization. stat med 8:1195–1201.
kawahara y, ito k, sun h, aizawa h, kanazawa i, and kwak s (2004) glutamate
receptors: rna editing and death of motor neurons. nature (lond) 427:801.
kirkwood br and sterne jac (2003a) analysis of clustered data, in essentials of
medical statistics, pp 355–370. blackwell science, oxford.
kirkwood br and sterne jac (2003b) essentials of medical statistics, pp 423– 424.
blackwell science, oxford.
levanon ey, eisenberg e, yelin r, nemzer s, hallegger m, shemesh r, fligelman
zy, shoshan a, pollock sr, sztybel d, et al. (2004) systematic identification of
abundant a-to-i editing sites in the human transcriptome. nat biotechnol 22:
1001–1005.
lomeli h, mosbacher j, melcher t, hoger t, geiger jr, kuner t, monyer h, higuchi
m, bach a, and seeburg ph (1994) control of kinetic properties of  xxxg981xxx 
channels by nuclear rna editing. science (wash dc) 266:1709 –1713.

719

