original contribution

topical  xxxd201xxx  in the diagnosis of suspected
horner syndrome
kenn a. freedman, md and sandra m. brown, md

abstract: topical cocaine is used to confirm the clinical
diagnosis of ocular sympathetic denervation, or horner
syndrome (hs). cocaine blocks re-uptake of norepinephrine (ne) by sympathetic nerve terminals in the iris dilator
muscle, transiently increasing its concentration in the synaptic junction. norepinephrine activates a1 receptors in the
iris dilator to cause pupil dilation. in hs, cocaine fails to
dilate the affected pupil as much as the unaffected pupil, but
its indirect action makes it a weak dilator, and the test can
give equivocal results. cocaine is also a controlled substance
and therefore difficult to obtain. a practical and reliable alternative to cocaine is  xxxd201xxx , an ocular hypotensive
agent that has a weak direct action on a1 receptors and therefore minimal to no clinical effect on the pupils of normal eyes.
patients with hs have denervation supersensitivity of the
a1 receptors in the iris stroma of the affected eye, making
the pupil dilator responsive to  xxxd201xxx . in patients with
hs, reversal of anisocoria occurs after bilateral instillation
of  xxxd201xxx  1% or 0.5%. two cases that demonstrate
this effect are reported.  xxxd201xxx  should be considered
a candidate to replace cocaine in the pharmacologic diagnosis of hs if a gold-standard comparison study confirms
these results.
(j neuro-ophthalmol 2005;25: 83–85)

h

orner syndrome (hs) (1–3) is classically described as
a triad of clinical signs arising from disruption of
sympathetic innervation to the eye and ipsilateral face that
causes miosis, upper lid ptosis, mild elevation of the lower
lid, and anhidrosis of the facial skin. confirmation of a
suspected clinical diagnosis of hs is made by pharmacologic testing of the pupils with cocaine, which will fail
to dilate the pupil of an affected eye.
cocaine is an indirect sympathomimetic agent that
binds to monoamine ne transport proteins (4) on the sym-

department of ophthalmology and visual sciences, texas tech
university health sciences center, lubbock, texas.
address correspondence to s. brown, md, cabarrus eye center, 201
lephillip court ne, concord nc 28025; e-mail: sandra.brown@ttuhsc.edu

j neuro-ophthalmol, vol. 25, no. 2, 2005

pathetic nerve endings in the iris, causing decreased
re-uptake of ne from the synaptic junctions. norepinephrine
stimulates a1 receptors on the iris dilator muscle, causing contraction and an increase in pupil diameter. with complete
sympathetic disruption, no dilation occurs because there is
no tonic release of ne.
a plausible alternative to cocaine in the diagnosis of
hs is  xxxd201xxx  ( xxxd201xxx ; alcon, fort worth, tx), a
direct a-receptor agonist with strong a2 and weak a1 activity
(5). in normal eyes, the a2 activity tends to down-regulate
the production and release of ne. patients with chronic
reduction or elimination of ne in the synaptic junctions have
denervation supersensitivity of the a1 receptors (6). when
 xxxd201xxx  is applied to the eye, the up-regulated smooth
muscle a1 receptors are directly activated by the medication,
causing pupil dilation. the a2 receptors are also activated,
but because there is little ne production and release, further
inhibition does not decrease the pupil diameter.
we have reported the use of  xxxd201xxx  1% (7) and
0.5% (8) to confirm the diagnosis of hs. in these studies,
pupil diameters were first measured in bright and dim illumination to the nearest 0.5 mm using a pocket pupil card.
then  xxxd201xxx  was instilled, and the measurements were
repeated 30 minutes later. reversal of anisocoria occurred,
that is, the hs pupil became larger than the normal pupil.
here we report two additional hs cases confirmed
with topical  xxxd201xxx  to show its practical applicability
and to promote the development of a larger clinical trial.

case reports
case 1
a 37-year-old man underwent a cervical diskectomy
for a c6–c7 disk herniation. he noted left upper lid ptosis
beginning 2 weeks after surgery. the patient was examined
by one of us (kaf) 5 months later. the left upper lid had
2 mm of ptosis. under ordinary indoor illumination, the
right pupil measured 4.0 mm and the left pupil 3.0 mm; in
dim light the right pupil measured 6.0 mm and the left pupil
4.0 mm with obvious dilation lag (fig. 1a).  xxxd201xxx 
0.5% was instilled into both eyes. approximately 30 minutes
later, reversal of anisocoria occurred with the right pupil

83

j neuro-ophthalmol, vol. 25, no. 2, 2005

freedman and brown

fig. 1. case 1. a 37-year-old man noted left upper lid ptosis 2 weeks after cervical disk surgery. this examination took place
5 months later. a. before instillation of  xxxd201xxx  0.5% in room light. pupil od measures 4.0 mm, pupil os measures
3.0 mm. b. thirty minutes after instillation of  xxxd201xxx  0.5% in room light. pupil od measures 3.5 mm, pupil os
measures 5.0 mm. the anisocoria was been reversed. note also the resolution of the left upper lid ptosis and left lower lid
elevation.

measuring 3.5 mm and the left pupil 5.0 mm (fig. 1b). this
test result confirmed the neurosurgeon’s clinical diagnosis
of hs.

increased anisocoria with reduced room illumination, left
upper lid ptosis, and left lower lid elevation. after instillation
of  xxxd201xxx  0.5% into both eyes, the anisocoria reversed
and the ptosis partially resolved (fig. 2b).

case 2
a 5-year-old boy was noted at birth to have unequal
pupil size with the left pupil smaller and an obvious difference in iris color. there was no history of birth trauma or
difficulty moving the left arm in infancy. all findings were
stable and the child’s growth and development were normal.
history regarding decreased sweating of the left forehead
was unclear. the patient was referred to one of us (smb)
for a second opinion. classic findings of congenital hs
were present, including marked iris anisochromia (dark
brown od; light blue os), anisocoria with the left pupil
smaller (fig. 2a), dilation lag of the left pupil, and

discussion
 xxxd201xxx  testing for hs is easily performed
because this compound is a commercially available medication. the endpoint of testing is unequivocal and can be
detected with the naked eye. other clinical signs of denervation supersensitivity, such as resolution of ptosis, serve
to increase the clinician’s confidence in the result.
we have previously reported the effect of  xxxd201xxx  in hs patients (7,8) using both the 1% (n = 6)
and 0.5% (n = 8) concentrations. eleven cases were
pharmacologically confirmed with cocaine (n = 4) or

fig. 2. case 2. a 5-year-old boy with congenital horner syndrome of the left eye. photographs were performed under room
light. a. baseline. note anisocoria with miosis and hypochromia of the iris os. multiple flash photographs were taken to
obtain a clear image. b. thirty minutes after instillation of  xxxd201xxx  0.5% into both eyes. note reversal of anisocoria and
reduction of both left upper lid ptosis and left lower lid elevation. in the photograph taken after  xxxd201xxx , the normal
right pupil appears larger than at baseline because the flash exposure was less, not because it was dilated by  xxxd201xxx .
precise pupil measurements could not be obtained because of the patient’s age.

84

q 2005 lippincott williams & wilkins

suspected horner syndrome

hydroxyamphetamine (n = 7); of these, 10 showed reversal
of anisocoria in response to  xxxd201xxx , yielding
a sensitivity of 0.91 for the  xxxd201xxx  test against these
two customary agents.
the disadvantages of cocaine as a test agent for hs
are many. cocaine is a weak dilator of the pupil. in many
instances, the normal (control) pupil will not dilate at all (9),
raising doubts about the potency of the solution. cocaine
cannot diagnose a partial hs in which ne release is reduced
but not eliminated; blocking reuptake may still cause pupil
dilation. the drops sting when instilled. because of its use
as an illegal recreational drug, patients are often understandably wary of receiving cocaine in any form; urine
metabolites are detectable after systemic absorption of
ophthalmic solutions. because it is a controlled substance,
cocaine is difficult to obtain, and because of its short shelflife, the solution must be compounded for each individual
patient.
if  xxxd201xxx  does not cause reversal of anisocoria
in a patient with strong clinical attributes of hs, the
clinician may proceed to cocaine testing despite the practical
difficulties. because the  xxxd201xxx  test is primarily based
on denervation supersensitivity, a false-negative result may
occur in a very recently acquired hs because the a1 receptors
have not yet up-regulated. presumably in an acute complete
hs, the cocaine test would more likely be positive.
the relatively low frequency of hs in the general
population makes a more extensive study of the sensitivity

j neuro-ophthalmol, vol. 25, no. 2, 2005

and specificity of the  xxxd201xxx  test difficult. however,
the increasing cost and difficulty associated with obtaining
cocaine and hydroxyamphetamine might make a multicenter study worthwhile.

references
1. walton ka, buono lm. horner syndrome. curr opin ophthalmol
2003;14:357–63.
2. thompson hs, miller nr. disorders of pupillary function, accommodation, and lacrimation. in: miller nr, newman nj, eds. walsh and
hoyt’s clinical neuro-ophthalmology. baltimore: williams and
wilkins; 1998:961–1040.
3. wilhelm h, ochsner h, kopycziok e, trauzettel-klosinski s, et al.
horner’s syndrome: a retrospective analysis of 90 cases and recommendations for clinical handling. ger j ophthalmol 1992;1:96–102.
4. ritz mc, cone ej, kuhar mj. cocaine inhibition of ligand binding
at dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin transporters: a structureactivity study. life sci 1990;46:635–45.
5. abrams da, robin al, pollack ip, defaller jm, et al. the safety and
efficacy of topical 1%  xxxd201xxx  ( xxxd201xxx  hydrochloride) in
normal volunteers. arch ophthalmol 1987;105:1205–7.
6. ramsay da. dilute solutions of phenylephrine and pilocarpine in the
diagnosis of disordered autonomic innervation of the iris. observations in normal subjects, and in the syndromes of horner and holmesadie. j  xxxd122xxx  sci 1986;73:125–34.
7. morales j, brown sm, abdul-rahim as, crosson ce. ocular effects
of  xxxd201xxx  in horner syndrome. arch ophthalmol 2000;118:
951–4.
8. brown sm, aouchiche r, freedman ka. the utility of 0.5%
 xxxd201xxx  in the diagnosis of horner syndrome. arch ophthalmol
2003;121:1201–3.
9. bartlett jd, jaanus sd, eds. clinical ocular pharmacology, fourth ed.
boston: butterworth-heinemann; 2001.

85

