pancreas
vol. i , no. 3, pp. 352-351
0 1992 raven press, ltd., new york

the relationship of islet amyloglucosidase activity and
glucose-induced insulin secretion
ingmar lundquist and georgios panagiotidis
department of cell biology, faculty of health sciences, university of linkoping, sweden

summary: we have previously presented evidence for the involvement of islet
acid amyloglucosidase, a lysosomal glycogen-hydrolyzing enzyme, in certain
insulin secretory processes. in the present investigation, we studied whether
differential changes in islet amyloglucosidase activity could be related to the
insulin secretory response to glucose. it was observed that the dose-response
curve for glucose-induced insulin response in vivo was shifted to the left by
pretreatment of mice with purified fungal amyloglucosidase. in enzymepretreated mice, the ed,, was 2.1 mmol/kg glucose as compared with 5.7
mmovkg in saline-pretreated controls (p < 0.005). also, the maximal insulin
response to glucose was enhanced by amyloglucosidase pretreatment. parenteral administration to mice (four injections during 2 days) of the pseudotetrasaccharide acarbose, a recognized inhibitor of intestinal a-glucosidases, surprisingly induced a marked increase in the activities of islet acid amyloglucosidase (+ 120%; p < 0.001) and acid a-glucosidase ( + 45%; p < 0.01) without
affecting the activities of other lysosomal enzymes such as acid phosphatase
and n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase. no effect on the microsomal neutral a-glucosidase was recorded. moreover, in these mice, the insulin secretory response to glucose was enhanced both at a maximal dose of glucose 11.1 mmov
kg and at a dose in the ed,ted,, range, 3.3 mmol/kg (p < 0.005). direct
addition of acarbose to islet homogenates strongly suppressed acid amyloglucosidase activity, the ec,, being approximately 1 pm. acid a-glucosidase
activity was also strongly inhibited, whereas the activities of acid phosphatase
and n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase were unaffected. neutral a-glucosidase was
slightly suppressed. furthermore, addition of 10 mm acarbose to incubated
islets markedly suppressed the insulin response to 16.7 mm glucose. we conclude that there exists a remarkable parallelism between islet acid amyloglucosidase activity and the insulin secretory response to glucose. the data lend
further support to our hypothesis that certain lysosomes or lysosomal enzymes
are involved in insulin secretory processes induced by glucose. key words:
acarbose-amyloglucosidase-insulin
secretion-islet lysosomal enzymesmouse.

of an enzyme or enzymes, which can be characterized as an acid amyloglucosidase. this type of enzyme is known to preferentially act on a-l,4iinked
glucose polymers like glycogen, through the stepwise removal of glucose units from the nonreducing
ends of the molecule. since glycogen is a normal
constituent of islet tissue (4), and since previous
investigations (2,3,5,6) have shown an apparent relation between islet amyloglucosidase activity and
the insulin secretory response to glucose and sulfo-

the physiological significance of lysosomal glycogenolytic hydrolases is largely unknown. in previous investigations (1-3), we have shown that the
pancreatic islets contain an unusually high activity

manuscript received november 26, 1990; revised manuscript
accepted april 26, 1991.
address correspondence and reprint requests to dr. i.
lundquist, department of pharmacology, university of lund,
solvegatan 10, s-22362 lund, sweden.

352

islet amyloglucosidase and insulin secretion
nylureas, we hypothesized that certain lysosomes
or lysosomal enzymes might be directly involved in
certain insulin secretory processes (2,3). such an
effect could be accomplished by means of secretagogue activation of the acid amyloglucosidase. this
enzyme might then attack certain pools of islet vacuolar glycogen and thus produce high local concentrations of glucose, which in turn could act as an
insulin secretory signal. alternatively, activation of
the enzyme might modify membrane glycoproteins
with a-1+linked glucose residues of importance
for exocytosis of the secretory granules.
the aim of the present investigation was to study
in more detail the relation between changes in islet
acid amyloglucosidase activity and glucose-induced
insulin secretion in the mouse. changes in enzyme
activity were accomplished either by injecting purified fungal amyloglucosidase or by the use of acarbose, a pseudotetrasaccharide of microbial origin,
which is known to competitively inhibit amyloglucosidase and other a-glucosidehydrolases of the intestinal mucosa (7,8).
materials and methods
animals
female mice of the nmri strain (anticimex,
stockholm, sweden), weighing 25-30 g, were used
throughout the experiments. they were given a
standard pellet diet (astra-ewos, sodertalje, sweden) and tap water ad libitum before and during the
experiments.
drugs and chemicals
acarbose was kindly supplied by bayer ag (leverkusen, germany). the source of the fungal acid
amyloglucosidase (aspergillus niger) used in injection experiments was agidex (glaxo labs, greenwood, england) purified as previously described to
give a single band on polyacrylamide electrophoresis (9). collagenase (cls) was purchased from
worthington biochemical (freehold, nj, u.s.a.).
methylumbelliferyl-coupled substrates were obtained from sigma (st. louis, mo, u.s.a.). bovine
 xxxg124xxx  was from icn biomedicals (high
wycombe, england). all other drugs and chemicals
were from british drug houses (poole, england).
experimental procedure
preparation of isolated pancreatic islets was performed by retrograde injection of a collagenase solution (10) via the bile-pancreatic duct. islets were

353

collected at 4°c and stored in acetate-edta buffer
(1.1 mm edta and 5 mm acetate, ph 5.0) at
- 20°c. after sonification, islet homogenates were
analyzed for lysosomal enzyme activities. assay of
islet amyloglucosidase activity with glycogen as
substrate at ph 5 .o was performed as previously
described (1l), with the exception that the liberated
glucose was determined according to the method of
bruss and black (12) after precipitation of homogenate proteins. determinations of acid phosphatase,
n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase, acid a-glucosidase,
and neutral a-glucosidase were performed with
4-methylumbelliferyl-coupled substrates as previously described (2,6). protein was determined according to the method of lowry et al. (13).
in the in vivo experiments, d-glucose or the purified fungal amyloglucosidase was dissolved in saline (0.9%  xxxg2020xxx ) and injected into a tail vein. likewise, acarbose was dissolved in saline and injected
four times: at -40 h (i.v.), -24 h (i.p.), - 18 h
(i.v.), and - 2 h (i.p.). each time, the dose of acarbose was 0.62 mmol/kg. control animals were injected with saline. blood sampling was performed
as described previously (14).
in the in vitro experiments, freshly isolated islets
were preincubated for 30 min at 37°c in krebsringer bicarbonate buffer, ph 7.4, supplemented
with 10 mm hepes, 0.1% bovine  xxxg124xxx ,
and 1 mm glucose 10 mm acarbose. each incubation vial contained five islets (100 ~1 buffer per
islet) and was gassed with 95% 0, and 5% co, to
obtain constant ph and oxygenation. after preincubation, the buffer was changed to a medium containing 1 mm or 16.7 mm glucose 2 10 mm acarbose, and the islets were incubated for 45 min. all
incubations were performed at 37°c in an incubation box (30 cpm).
insulin was determined with a radioimmunoassay
(ria) (15) and glucose with a glucose oxidase
method (12). the inter- and intra-assay variability
for the insulin ria is 6 and 3.5%, respectively.
probability levels of random differences between
experimental groups and control groups were determined by the student two-tailed t test.

*

results
effect of amyloglucosidase pretreatment on
glucose-induced insulin response
groups of mice were pretreated with an i.v. injection of purified fungal amyloglucosidase, 0.05
fmol/kg. after 2.5 h, the animals were injected with
pancreas, vol. 7, n o . 3 , 1992

i . lundquist and g. panagiotidis

354

different doses of glucose, and the acute insulin response was recorded and compared with the response in appropriate groups of animals pretreated
with saline (fig. 1). figure 1 shows that the maximal insulin response to glucose was enhanced by
amyloglucosidase pretreatment (169 2 3.9 vs. i37 ?
8.6 fu/ml; p < 0.005). furthermore, the doseresponse curve was shifted to the left by amyloglucosidase pretreatment, the ed,, being 2.1 t 0.04
mmol/kg glucose as compared with 5.7 t 0.09
mmol/kg glucose in saline-pretreated controls (p <
0.005).
effect of parenteral treatment with acarbose on islet
lysosomal enzyme activities
acarbose (0.62 mmol/kg) was given to mice by
four injections during 2 days. two hours after the

- -o=

enzyme

pretreated

.ic- control

effect of parenteral treatment with acarbose on
basal and glucose-induced insulin secretion
mice were injected with acarbose or saline according to the protocol described above. two hours
after the last injection, the animals received an i.v.
injection of d-glucose at two dose levels, and the
acute insulin response was recorded. basal insulin
and glucose levels in plasma were measured after
injection of saline. figure 3 shows that the insulin
secretory response in acarbose-treated mice was
enhanced both at a maximal dose of glucose (180
6.3 vs. 151 + 6.1 pu/ml; p < 0.005) and at a dose in
the ed,,ed,,
range (155 k 6.1 vs. i16 k 9.9 pu/
ml; p < 0.005). basal levels of insulin were not affected by acarbose treatment. however, a slight decrease of the plasma glucose concentration was observed (acarbose treated, 7.7 2 0.4 vs. controls, 9.2
k 0.5 mm; p < 0.05).

*

200

150

100

50

0

last injection, their pancreatic islets were isolated
and analyzed for lysosomal enzyme activities. saline-injected animals served as controls. figure 2
shows that the activities of acid amyloglucosidase
( + 120%; p < 0.001) and acid a-glucosidase (+45%;
p < 0.01) were markedly enhanced after parenteral
treatment with acarbose during 2 days. the activities of the microsomal neutral a-glucosidase as well
as other lysosomal enzymes such as n-acetyl-p-dglucosaminidase or acid phosphatase were not affected by acarbose (fig. 2 ) .

i

i

i

i

i

1,4

23

5,6

11,2

22,4

glucose,

mmol/kg

(log

scale)

fig. 1. effect of pretreatment with acid amyloglucosidase
(0.05 pmoykg) or saline (controls) on in vivo insulin secretory
response to i.v. injections of different doses of glucose. results
are expressed as increases in plasma insulin levels (pu/ml; peak
levels of first phase). there were 7-1 1 mice in each group. means
& sem are shown.
pancreas, vol. 7, n o . 3, 1992

effect of acarbose on lysosomal enzyme activities in
islet homogenates
figure 4 shows the effects of acarbose on the
activities of acid amyloglucosidase, acid a-glucosidase, acid phosphatase, n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase, and neutral a-glucosidase. the lysosomal enzyme activities were analyzed at ph 5.0 and the
neutral a-glucosidase activity at ph 6.5. concentrations of acarbose ranged from 0. i p m to 1.o mm.
acarbose strongly suppressed acid amyloglucosidase activity with an ec,, of approximately 1 pm.
the inhibition of acid a-glucosidase was somewhat
less pronounced, whereas the activity of n-acetylp-d-glucosaminidaseor acid phosphatase was unaffected. a slight inhibition of the neutral a-glucosidase activity at ph 6.5 was observed.
effect of acarbose on insulin secretion from isolated
pancreatic islets
figure 5 shows the effect on insulin secretion
from incubated isolated mouse islets with low (1
mm) or high (16.7 mm) glucose in the presence or

islet am yloglucosidase and insulin secretion

40

30

c

.r

a!

1

355

**
*

y

0

c

k

20

'm

fig. 2. effect of parenteral treatment with
acarbose or saline (controls) on islet activities
of different lysosomal enzymes and neutral
a-glucosidase. enzyme activities are expressed as micromoles of glucose (acid amyloglucosidase) or of 4-methylumbelliferone
(acid phosphatase, n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase, and acid and neutral a-glucosidase) liberated per gram of protein per minute. means
? sem for 12-13 mice (200-300 islets per animal) are shown. asterisks denote probability
level of random difference.

+ -l.5
x

k

e

l

x

10
0

t;z
* e

u
e
t ,

g 50
s

acid amyloglucosidase

acid
phosphatase

1 k - l

control

k l,o
c

e"

2

acarbose

**= p <o-01
***= p <0-001

0.5

0,o
acid kglucosidase

absence of 10 mm acarbose. acarbose was found to
markedly suppress the insulin secretory response to
16.7 mm glucose during a 45-min incubation period.
basal insulin secretion (1 mm glucose) was not affected by acarbose.
discussion

the results of the present investigation provide
further evidence for the implication of islet acid
amyloglucosidase in the insulin secretory processes
-t

n-acetyl-p-dglucosdminidase

neutral k-

glucosidase

induced by glucose. previous studies ( 2 , 3 ) have
shown that injected purified amyloglucosidase is
taken up by the islets and that, 2-3 h after enzyme
injection, the insulin secretory response to glucose
is significantly enhanced. the present data indicate
that the dose-response curve for glucose on firstphase insulin release was shifted to the left by pretreatment with 0.05 p,mol/kg of acid amyloglucosidase; the ed,, for glucose was 2.1 and 5.7 mmol/kg
in amyloglucosidase-pretreated and control animals, respectively. moreover, amyloglucosidase

glucose mrnol/kg i
r 3.3 1

...

r1 1 . 1 1

**

control
acarbose

fig. 3. effect of parenteral treatment
with acarbose or saline (controls) on the in
vivo insulin secretory response to i.v. administration of an approximately halfmaximal or maximal dose of glucose.
basal controls are included. there were
10-12 animals in each group. means t
sem are shown: **p < 0.005.

pancrens, vol. 7, n o . 3 , 1992

i . lundquist and g . panagiotidis

356

*

acid amyloglucosidase ph 5,o

_i_

acid phosphatase ph 5.0

u neutral a -glucosidase ph 6,5

acid a -glucosidase

ph 5,o

n-acetyl- p-d-glucosaminidaseph 5,o
120 1

fig. 4. concentration-dependenteffects of acarbose on activities of acid
arnyloglucosidase, acid phosphatase,
n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase,and
acid and neutral a-glucosidase in islet
hornogenates. results are expressed as
percentages of controls. means 2
sem are shown for three to five separate experiments performed in triplicate.

h

100

-

80

-

60

-

ef!
x
*-

.->
.-v
y

a

20 -

40

0-

pretreatment not only increased the sensitivity of
the p cell to submaximal stimulatory glucose concentrations, but was also able to increase the maximum amount of released insulin (fig. 1).
the use of the pseudotetrasaccharide acarbose
provides a new tool for the study of the influence of
acid amyloglucosidase on insulin secretory mechanisms. acarbose is reported to selectively and competitively inhibit intestinal a-glucosidehydrolases
such as amyloglucosidase ( xxxg1401xxx ), a-glucosidase, and, to a slight extent, a-amylase (7,8,16).
the drug has been used in clinical trials as an orally

200 1

control

acarbose

1-

1 .o

mm glucose

16.7

fig. 5. effect of 10 mm acarbose on insulin secretion from
isolated pancreatic islets. means 2 sem of four to eight experiments are shown: ***p < 0.001.

pancreas, vol. 7, no. 3, 1992

applied agent that, due to its enzyme-inhibiting effects in the intestines, reduces the digestion of
starch and maltose and thus retards monosaccharide absorption. after oral intake, only negligible
amounts of acarbose are absorbed (7). parenteral
injections of acarbose to rats have been shown to
induce hepatic lysosomal glycogenosis as assessed
histochemically and cytochemically (8). this effect
is thought to be achieved by acarbose molecules
being taken up by endocytic mechanisms in the
liver and transferred to the lysosomal apparatus,
where acarbose can inhibit the glycogenolytic hydrolases (8).
quite unexpectedly, we found that parenteral
acarbose treatment in mice induced a large increase
in islet acid amyloglucosidase activity and, although
less pronounced, in acid a-glucosidase activity. in
contrast, the activities of the nonlysosomal neutral
a-glucosidase as well as of the lysosomal acid phosphatase and n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase remained unaffected by acarbose treatment. the large
and selective increase in islet lysosomal acid amyloglucosidase and acid a-glucosidase activities suggests a sensitive and powerful feedback mechanism
for these enzyme activities after acarbose has initiated its inhibiting action within the lysosomal apparatus. such an inhibition is shown in fig. 4, where
acarbose added to islet homogenates induced a very
marked inhibition of islet acid amyloglucosidase
and acid a-glucosidase activities. moreover, in the

357

islet amyloglucosidase a n d ins ulzn secretion

in vivo experiments, the compensatory increase in
islet amyloglucosidase activity after repeated injections of acarbose was accompanied by both an enhanced sensitivity and an enhanced secretory capacity of the p cell to glucose stimulation (fig. 3).
these effects on glucose-induced insulin secretion
are in agreement with the results presented in fig.
1, where islet amyloglucosidase activity was increased by exogenous administration of the purified
fungal enzyme.
during brief (45-min) incubation of isolated islets
in the presence of acarbose, glucose-stimulated insulin release was markedly suppressed. this is in
agreement with the inhibitory effect of acarbose on
the activities of acid amyloglucosidase and acid
a-glucosidase in islet homogenates. it should be
noted that acarbose had a moderate inhibitory e€fect on the nonlysosomal neutral a-glucosidase activity in the in vitro experiments, whereas no effect
on this enzyme activity was observed in vivo. this
may be taken as indirect evidence that the in vivo
effect of acarbose is exerted through action via the
lysosomal apparatus. furthermore, the data from
both the in vivo and the in vitro experiments
showed that acarbose had a selective action on the
a-glucosidase type of lysosomal enzymes since the
activities of n-acetyl-p-d-glucosaminidase and acid
phosphatase were totally unaffected.
in conclusion, there is a remarkable parallelism
between the activity of islet acid amyloglucosidase
and the insulin secretory response to glucose both
in vivo and in vitro. the data strengthen our hypothesis that certain lysosomes or lysosomal enzymes are involved in insulin secretory processes
induced by glucose. the pseudotetrasaccharide
acarbose may be a useful tool €or further studies on
the action of glucose on insulin-releasing mechanisms.
acknowledgment: this study was supported by the
swedish medical research council (14x-4286). the technical assistance of birgit olsson and inga-lill scherling

and the secretarial help of birgitta arnsby are gratefully
acknowledged.

references
1. lundquist i. acid amyloglucosidase and carbohydrate reg-

2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

ulation 11. acid amyloglucosidase activity in the endocrine
pancreas. horm metab res 1972;4:245-9.
lundquist i. lysosomal enzyme activities in pancreatic islets from normal and obese hyperglycemic mice. metabolism 1985;34:1-9.
lundquist i. islet amyloglucosidase activity: some characteristics, and its relation to insulin secretion stimulated by
various secretagogues. diabetes res 1986;3:31-41.
hellman b, idahl l-a. on the functional significance of the
pancreatic p cell glycogen. in: falkmer s, hellman b, taljedal i-b, eds. the structure and metabolism of the pancreatic islets. oxford: pergamon press, 1972:25342.
lundquist i, lovdahl r. islet amyloglucosidase and sulphonylurea-stimulated insulin release in three different strains of
mice. horm metab res 1975;7:&9.
lundquist i. islet lysosomal enzyme activities and plasma
insulin levels in obese hyperglycemic mice following injection of the lysosomotropic drug  xxxd3266xxx . diabetes res 1985;
2:207-12.
puls w , keup u, krause l, muller d, schmidt d. pharmacology of a glucosidase inhibitor. front hormone res 1980;
7:23547.
lullman-rauch r. lysosomal glycogen storage mimicking
the injection of an a-glucosidase inhibitor. virchows arch
[ b ] 198 1 ;38:89- 100.
lundquist i. acid amyloglucosidase and carbohydrate regulation i. effect of exogenous amyloglucosidase on tissue
glycogen, blood glucose, and plasma insulin. horm metab
res 1972;4:1514.
gotoh m, maki t, kiyoizumi t, satomi s, monaco ap. an
improvement method for isolation of mouse pancreatic islets. transplantation 1985;40:437-8.
lundquist i. method for determination of acid amyloglucosidase in isolated islets of the pancreas. enzyme 1971;12:64757.
bruss m, black al. enzymatic microdetermination of glycogen. anal biochem 1978;84:309-12.
lowry oh, rosebrough nj, farr al, randall rj. protein
measurement with the folin phenol reagent. j biol chem
195 1 ;193:265-75.
rerup c, lundquist i. blood glucose level in mice. i. evaluation of a new technique of multiple serial sampling. acra
endocrinol 1966;52:357-67.
heding l. a simplified insulin radioimmunoassay method.
in: donato l, milhaud g, sirchis j , eds. labelledproteins in
tracer studies. brussels: euratom, 1966:345-50.
samulitis bk, goda t, lee sm, koldocsky 0. inhibitory
mechanism of acarbose and 1- xxxd1955xxx  derivatives
on carbohydrases in rat small intestine. drug exp ciin res
1987;8:517-24.

pancreas, vol. 7, n o . 3, 1992

