the  xxxg2149xxx  and attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder
bertha k. madras, gregory m. miller, and alan j. fischman
the high incidence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) and escalating use of adhd medications present a compelling
case for clarifying the pathophysiology of, and developing laboratory or radiologic tests for, adhd. currently, the majority of specific
genes implicated in adhd encode components of catecholamine signaling systems. of these, the  xxxg2149xxx  (dat) is a
principal target of the most widely used antihyperactivity medications (amphetamine and methylphenidate); the dat gene is
associated with adhd, and some studies have detected abnormal levels of the dat in brain striatum of adhd subjects. medications
for adhd interfere with dopamine transport by brain-region- and drug-specific mechanisms, indirectly activating dopamine- and
possibly norepinephrine-receptor subtypes that are implicated in enhancing attention and experiential salience. the most commonly
used dat-selective adhd medications raise extracellular dopamine levels in dat-rich brain regions. in brain regions expressing both
the dat and the norepinephrine transporter (net), the relative contributions of dopamine and norepinephrine to adhd
pathophysiology and therapeutic response are obfuscated by the capacity of the net to clear dopamine as well as norepinephrine. thus,
adhd medications targeting dat or net might disperse dopamine widely and consign dopamine storage and release to regulation
by noradrenergic, as well as dopaminergic neurons.

key words: methylphenidate, atomoxetine, amphetamine, monoamine transporters, brain imaging, norepinephrine transporter

a

ttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) is the most
commonly diagnosed neuropsychiatric disorder in childhood. although adhd wanes with age, symptoms can
persist into adolescence and adulthood. estimates of the prevalence of adhd vary widely, with incidence in children ranging
from 3% to ⬎5% (biederman 1998) but community studies
yielding a prevalence range from 1.7% to 16% (goldman et al
1998). the diagnosis of adhd is currently based on dsm-iv
criteria, structured interviews or a structured questionnaire. the
core symptoms—impulsivity, inattention, and motor restlessness—are either reported by patients and/or observed by contacts of adhd subjects. because attentional difficulties are
frequently encountered with other psychiatric disorders and
brain diseases, under- or overdiagnosis is possible. accordingly,
adhd is diagnosed by exclusion only if social behaviors cannot
be accounted for by other causes. the inconsistent prevalence of
adhd channels into treatment controversies: particularly, whether
adhd is over- or undertreated. the past decade has seen a
significant increase in prescribed stimulants to treat adhd,
fueled by rising awareness of the disorder, recognition of its
persistence into adulthood, and growing acceptance of antiadhd medications. increased prescribing rates magnify the
potential for inappropriate prescriptions and diversion for illicit
use. notwithstanding these concerns, adhd can be comorbid
with substance abuse disorders, and treatment reduces the risk
for continued use of illicit substances (biederman et al 1997;
clure et al 1999; lambert and hartsough 1998; wilens 2004).

from the department of psychiatry (bkm, gmm), harvard medical school,
new england primate research center, southborough; and the department of radiology (ajf), massachusetts general hospital, boston,
massachusetts.
address reprint requests to correspondence to: bertha k. madras, ph.d.,
chair, division of neurochemistry, new england primate research center, harvard medical school, 1 pine hill drive, southborough, ma 017729102; e-mail: bertha_madras@hms.harvard.edu.
received july 22, 2004; revised september 29, 2004; accepted october 25,
2004.

0006-3223/05/$30.00
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.10.011

these considerations provide strong incentives to clarify the
pathophysiology of adhd, associated substance abuse, and
develop biologically based criteria for diagnosis and treatment.

biological basis of adhd
the biological origins of adhd are complicated by heterogenous clinical symptoms, comorbidity (approximately 65%) with
other disorders (conduct, mood, bipolar and anxiety disorders,
tourette’s), and exacerbation by adverse environments and
psychosocial events (for overview of adhd, see solanto et al
2001). nonetheless, assembled neuroanatomic, genetic, and neurophysiologic evidence strongly support a pathophysiologic
basis for adhd. abnormal morphology and function of adhd
brains, detected primarily by magnetic resonance imaging, converge on the catecholamine-rich frontal cortex and subcortical
neural networks (durston 2003; sowell et al 2003). from adoption and twin studies, genetics is estimated to account for more
than 70% of the prevalence (biederman and faraone 2002;
faraone, in press). at present, a majority of specific genes
implicated in adhd encode components of catecholamine
signaling systems and include the  xxxg2149xxx  (dat),
norepinephrine transporter (net), d4 and d5 dopamine receptors, dopamine ␤-hydroxylase, and synaptosomal-associated
protein-25 ( xxxg2182xxx ), which facilitates neurotransmitter release
(figure 1), (faraone, in press; yang et al 2004). the positive
correlation of levels of homovanillic acid, a dopamine metabolite
in cerebrospinal fluid (csf), and adhd symptoms supports the
view that excess dopamine in brain might contribute to hyperactivity (castellanos et al 1996). at a cellular level, catecholamine
neurotransmission is implicated in the etiology and therapeutic
efficacy of adhd, with the dopamine and norepinephrine
transporters functioning as principal targets of anti-adhd drugs.
unfortunately, a survey of all candidate genes in individual
adhd subjects has not been conducted systematically, thereby
impeding the development of an integrated model of how the
different components might interact. on the basis of the following lines of evidence, the dat is one of several lead candidates
for investigating the pathophysiology of adhd and anti-adhd
drug mechanisms: 1) dopamine transport inhibitors indirectly
activate dopamine receptor subtypes; d4 and d5 dopamine
receptors are implicated in adhd, and dopamine receptor
biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409
© 2005 society of biological psychiatry

1398 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409

figure 1. dat is one of several genes implicated in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

activity enhances attention and experiential salience and engenders stimulation; 2) the dat is a selective and principal target of
the most widely used antihyperactivity medications (amphetamine and methylphenidate); 3) the dat gene is associated with
adhd; and 4) in some studies, abnormal levels of the dat have
been detected in brains of adhd subjects.
this review focuses on the dat and its relevance to adhd.

 xxxg2149xxx  function and adhd
monoamine neurotransmitter transporters
effective neuronal communication in the brain requires precise and dynamic regulation of neurotransmitter concentrations.
extracellular neurotransmitter concentrations are regulated, in
part, by monoamine transporters that sequester dopamine
(dat), serotonin (sert), and norepinephrine (net) into neurons. the critical role of monoamine transporters for normal
brain function is underscored by the wide range of drugs that
target monoamine transporters, including medications for depression, adhd, smoking addiction, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and sleep disorders. the majority of these drugs interfere
with transporter-mediated clearance of extracellular neurotransmitters. an ensuing surge of extracellular monoamines activates
monoamine receptors and triggers a cascade of molecular and
cellular events to produce therapeutic benefit. repeated use of
certain transport inhibitors, such as cocaine, can eventually result
in compulsive drug-seeking behavior. all current anti-adhd
drugs modulate dopamine and norepinephrine levels in brain
regions expressing dat and net, suggesting that aberrant
catecholamine signaling might play a significant role in the
pathophysiology of adhd and therapeutic response to antiadhd medications.
the  xxxg2149xxx  (dat)
at the molecular level, the 12-membrane–spanning dat
protein contains a large extracellular loop, with consensus sites
for glycosylation (figure 2) that function to regulate dat trafficking and stability (li et al 2004). similarly, glycosylation of the
net controls stability, trafficking, and transport activity (melikian
et al 1996). potential phosphorylation sites (serine, threonine,
and tyrosine) might also acutely modulate dat trafficking and
activity (for review, see mortensen and amara 2003). dopamine
is released from both dendrites and axons and might activate
receptors locally or remotely through volume transmission. the
dat limits the duration of synaptic activity and diffusion by
sequestering dopamine into neurons (cragg and rice 2004). the
dat is present on cell bodies, dendrites, and axons but apparently is not localized in the immediate active zone of the synapse
(hersch et al 1997; nirenberg et al 1996). accordingly, the dat
might reduce dopamine overflow into perisynaptic regions but
not robustly sequester dopamine within the synapse.
www.sobp.org/journal

b.k. madras et al
the dat is expressed selectively in all dopamine neurons,
including those originating in the substantia nigra and ventral
tegmental area (ciliax et al 1995), with neuronal projections to
the striatum, nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, and hypothalamus. high densities of dat-immunoreactive axons were
recently detected in posterior parietal cortex and dentate gyrus of
the hippocampus, regions not previously thought to receive a
substantial dopamine input (lewis et al 2001). the relative
concentrations of dopamine, dat, and dopamine receptor densities are not consistent in all brain regions. in the caudate–
putamen, nucleus accumbens, and substantia nigra, the ratio of
these three components of dopamine signaling are similar, and
the dat is likely to be a major contributor to dopamine signaling
strength and duration. in other brain regions, the ratio of dat to
dopamine receptor expression levels (e.g., prefrontal cortex dat
and d4 dopamine receptors) is lower, and this mismatch might
permit dopamine clearance by metabolism, diffusion, or by
another transporter (de la garza and madras 2000). accordingly,
dat control of dopamine signaling is contingent on its density,
activity and regulation, and anatomic juxtaposition to dopamine
release sites and dopamine receptors, as well as the capacity of
other transporters to sequester dopamine.
the critical and brain-region–specific role of the dat in regulating dopamine neurotransmission and presynaptic homeostasis is
strikingly borne out by targeted deletion of the dat gene in mice.
in comparison with their wild-type controls, dat mutant mice
present with significant phenotypic transformations, including hyperactivity, small size, skeletal abnormalities, pituitary hypoplasia,
impaired care by females for their offspring, cognitive and sensorimotor gating deficits, and sleep dysregulation. the striatum of the
mutant mice adapts by reducing the dopamine-synthesizing enzyme  xxxg2276xxx , vesicular dopamine stores, stimulated
dopamine release, and d1 and d2 (but not d3) dopamine receptor
densities and function (for review, see gainetdinov and caron
2003). the extreme changes in dopamine-signaling systems of the
striatum are not replicated in the frontal cortex, and indeed, this
brain region retains normal dopamine systems. in normal brain, the
frontal cortex expresses much lower levels of the dat and dopamine autoreceptors, stores less dopamine, and relies more on
dopamine synthesis than on vesicular recycling for dopamine
release. these contrasting cortical and striatal dopamine regulatory
processes have implications for adhd; in particular, dopaminesignaling parameters (e.g., dat) in striatum cannot be liberally
extrapolated to frontal cortex.
beyond functioning as a carrier for dopamine, dat mediates

figure 2. model of dat protein. the trans-membrane (tm)-spanning hydrophobic domains are shown as blue cylinders, linked by amino acid chains.
conserved tms across dat, net, and sert are shown as textured cylinders
(1, 2, 8). dat, dopamine; net, norepinephrine; sert, serotonin.

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1399

b.k. madras et al

table 1. concentration of dopamine (da) transporter (dat) and norepinephrine (ne) transporter (net) in various brain regions and affinities of da or
ne for the dat and nete
parameter
caudate-putamen (fmol/mg)
nucleus accumbens shell (fmol/g)
frontal cortex (fmol/g)
amygdala (fmol/mg)
hippocampus (fmol/mg)
ic50 (nmol/l)
ki (nmol/l)
km (nmol/l)
km (nmol/l)

dat densitya

net densitya

154
54.8
12.3
5.3
da inhibition of [3h]da uptake by dat: 38b
da inhibition of [3h]da uptake by net: 6.63d; 40.3
[3h]da affinity for dat:885c, 2140f; 5,200h
[3h]da affinity for net: 730f; 240h

3.4
16.2
19.5
16
da inhibition of [3h]ne uptake by net: 13,700b; 357c
ne inhibition of [3h]ne uptake by net: 110d; 63.9
[3h]ne affinity for net:539g; 580h
[3h]ne affinity for dat: 17,000h

a

data from donnan et al 1989 (mouse brain).
data from cloned human transporters; eshleman et al 1999 (rat brain).
c
data from rothman and bauman 2003; potency of dopamine or norepinephrine to block [3h]dopamine transport by the dat.
d
data from eshleman et al 1999; potency of dopamine or norepinephrine to block [3h]norepinephrine transport by the net.
e
data from kilty et al 1991; km value (affinity) for dopamine at the dat.
f
data from roubert et al 2001.
g
data from inazu et al 2003.
h
data from gu et al 1994.
b

other processes that add another level of complexity to its potential
role in adhd. in the substantia nigra (and other brain regions?),
dat apparently can regulate dopamine release, previously thought
to be the domain of d2 dopamine autoreceptors. originally discovered in dat-expressing cells, dat produces at least three types of
ion channel-like conductances (ingram et al 2002; sonders et al
1997). in the substantia nigra, substrate transport by the dat
initiates an excitatory dat-mediated current, cell depolarization,
and consequent augmentation of somatodendritic dopamine release (falkenburger et al 2001; ingram et al 2002). dopamine
transporter–mediated regulation of dopamine release differs from
d2 autoreceptor control of release. in the presence of dopamine,
dat promotes dopamine release, whereas the d2 autoreceptor
attenuates release.  xxxg2149xxx –mediated dopamine release is triggered at relatively low dopamine levels, whereas d2
autoreceptor control of dopamine release requires significantly
higher dopamine concentrations (ingram et al 2002). finally, dat
substrate clearance (and associated ion conductances) results in
dopamine–neuron depolarization and increased neuronal firing
rate, even if d2 dopamine receptors are blocked (mortensen and
amara 2003).
dat control of dopamine release is region specific. in the
striatum, dopamine clearance is a primary function of the dat,
whereas in the substantia nigra the dat regulates extracellular
dopamine levels by controlling both clearance and release. the
complexity of region-specific dat function is relevant to the
pharmacologic effects of anti-adhd drugs. the two most commonly prescribed medications, methylphenidate and amphetamine, increase extracellular dopamine levels in the basal ganglia and frontal cortex. methylphenidate blocks dopamine
transport, whereas amphetamine is a substrate for the dat and
presumably can trigger dopamine release in the substantia nigra.
do these contrasting drug effects on dat-function in substantia
nigra contribute to reports of subject-specific response to adhd
medications (faraone et al 2001)?
adhd medications: role of the dat
therapeutic doses of the psychostimulants methylphenidate and
amphetamine effectively attenuate adhd symptoms. another therapeutic agent, the net-selective drug atomoxetine, is rapidly gaining recognition as an alternative, nonstimulant treatment (michelson
et al 2001; spencer and biederman 2002; spencer et al 2002). the

pharmacologic effects of these adhd medications are governed, to
some extent, by the relative densities of dat and net in various
brain regions and the affinities of dopamine and norepinephrine for
dat and net. in the frontal cortex, dat density is low and net
density is higher, whereas in the striatum, dat density is high and
net density is vanishingly low (table 1). the effects of methylphenidate, amphetamine, and atomoxetine converge in the frontal
cortex but diverge in the striatum and nucleus accumbens (bymaster et al 2002; shoblock et al 2003a, 2003b, 2004). all three drugs
raise extracellular dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the
frontal cortex, regardless of their differing affinities, selectivities, and
mechanisms at monoamine transporters (figure 3, tables 1 2, and
3). these findings are predictable, because methylphenidate and
amphetamine have nanomolar affinity for the dat and net and
micromolar affinity for the sert (table 2). in contrast with methylphenidate and amphetamine, atomoxetine produces a sharp increase in extracellular dopamine and norepinephrine levels in
rodent frontal cortex but not in the nucleus accumbens or striatum
(bymaster et al 2002) (tables 3 and 4). elevated dopamine or
norepinephrine (or trace amine) levels in the frontal cortex might
increase activity of d4 and d5 dopamine or adrenergic receptors
and possibly others (e.g., trace amine receptors; see adhd medications: role of trace amines, trace amine receptors). in the
striatum, the methylphenidate-induced surge in extracellular dopa-

figure 3. dopamine (da) transporter (dat) distribution in human brain by
positron emission tomography with [11c]altropane. net, norepinephrine
(ne) transporter.

www.sobp.org/journal

1400 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409

b.k. madras et al

table 2. affinities of adhd medications for dat, net, and sert
dat
ki or ic50
(nmol/l)

adhd
medication
methylphenidate
d-amphetamine
 xxxd163xxx 
atomoxetine

1
2
2
2
1
2

34a
200b
34c; 41d
138d
1451a
1600e

net
ki or ic50
(nmol/l)

sert
ki or ic50
(nmol/l)
⬎10,000a

339a
38.9c; 23.2d
30.1d
5a
2.6f

3830c; 11,000d
57,000d
77a
48f

adhd, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; dat, dopamine (da)
transporter; net, norepinephrine (ne) transporter; sert, serotonin; 1, binding affinities: dat: [3h] win 35,428; net: [3h]nisoxetine; sert: [3h]paroxetine; 2, transport affinities: dat: [3h]dopamine; net[3h]norepinephrine;
sert: [3h]serotonin.
a
data from bymaster et al 2002 (human).
b
data from hyttel 1978 (rodent).
c
data from rothman and bauman 2003 (rodent).
d
data from eshleman et al 1999 (human).
e
data from wong et al 1982.
f
data from gehlert et al 1995.

mine levels has been confirmed in living human brain striatum with
positron emission tomography (pet) (volkow et al 2002a, 2002b).
oral methylphenidate achieves peak concentrations in the brain
60 –90 min after administration, blocks more than 50% of the dat,
and significantly enhances extracellular dopamine levels in the
basal ganglia (volkow et al 2002b). comparable and essential data
with atomoxetine in human brain have not been reported, reflecting
the need for creative noninvasive imaging approaches to verify this
significant observation.
on the basis of region-specific differences in pharmacologic
effects, adhd medications that modulate dat would raise extracellular levels of dopamine several-fold, activating autoreceptors
and possibly reducing catecholamine transmission. the relatively
reduced amplitude of impulse-associated dopamine release could
result in diminished activation of postsynaptic dopamine receptors,
which drives psychomotor activity (seeman and madras 1998,
2002). the hypothesis is not sustained by electrophysiologic activity
that demonstrates no autoreceptor-preferring dose range of methylphenidate or amphetamine (ruskin et al 2001).
at the cellular level, methylphenidate (100 nmol/l) blocks the
dat and increases dat density 21% after 24-hour exposure in a
dat-n2a cell line (little et al 2002). although not described in
this report, methylphenidate might also increase cell-surface
expression of the dat, in parallel with cocaine under these
experimental conditions. because peak blood levels of methylphenidate range from 18 to 74 nmol/l (low to high doses) and
fall back to normal within 4 – 6 hours (swanson and volkow
2003), the in vitro findings might be more relevant to the

development of tolerance to high and continuous doses, rather
than to standard doses/dosing regimens. in vivo, dat imaging
does not reveal parallel increases in dat density shortly after
methylphenidate administration, either because methylphenidate occupies dat sites to prevent ligand binding or because a
short burst of methylphenidate exposure at clinically relevant
doses does not lead to dat upregulation.
amphetamine modulates dopamine levels with greater complexity than methylphenidate. in parallel with methylphenidate,
amphetamine robustly raises extracellular dopamine levels in the
striatum, nucleus accumbens, and both dopamine and norepinephrine in the frontal cortex (shoblock et al 2003b, 2004) (table 3). a
potent dat substrate, amphetamine competes with dopamine for
dat transport and raises extracellular dopamine concentrations by
attenuating dopamine transport (heikkila et al 1975). it also acutely
promotes internalization of the dat (at comparatively high doses),
rendering the dat inactive in the face of continued dopamine
accumulation (fleckenstein et al 1999; saunders et al 2000). upon
entry into neurons via the dat (or via diffusion), amphetamine is
sequestered into synaptic vesicles by the vesicular monoamine
transporter (or via diffusion) and promotes release of dopamine
from vesicles into the cytoplasm (sulzer and rayport 1990). cytoplasmic dopamine is also increased by amphetamine-mediated
inhibition of monoamine oxidase (green and el hait 1978). the
surge of cytoplasmic dopamine leads to dopamine release via
reverse dat transport (raiteri et al 1979). amphetamine also
stimulates release of dopamine by increasing dat-mediated ca⫹⫹
influx and ion conductances and promoting dopamine neuron
excitability (gnegy et al 2004; ingram et al 2002). accordingly,
amphetamine can raise extracellular dopamine levels by at least six
mechanisms, whereas methylphenidate blocks dopamine transport,
can increase dat density and cell-surface expression with continuous exposure, and facilitates sequestration of dopamine by the
vesicular  xxxg2099xxx  (see adhd medications: role of
the vesicular  xxxg2099xxx ). the contrasting effects of
methylphenidate and amphetamine are underscored in mice with
null mutations of the dat. both methylphenidate and amphetamine are ineffective in raising dopamine levels in these mice, but
the vesicle-depleting effect of amphetamine is retained (gainetdinov and caron 2003). another intriguing distinction between the
two drugs is their potential influence on the endogenous trace
amine system (see adhd medications: role of trace amines, trace
amine receptors). amphetamine, but not methylphenidate, activates trace amine receptors, and these divergent responses are of
unknown significance.
adhd medications: role of the net
the noradrenergic system modulates attention, alertness,
arousal, and vigilance. for the past three decades, proponents
have postulated that dysregulation of noradrenergic systems was

table 3. methylphenidate, amphetamine, and atomoxetine have distinct effects on extracellular levels of
dopamine or norepinephrine levels in various regions of rat brain, as measured by microdialysis
brain region
striatum
prefrontal cortex
nucleus accumbens
a

neurotransmitter

methylphenidatea

amphetamineb

atomoxetinea

dopamine
norepinephrine
dopamine
norepinephrine
dopamine
norepinephrine

increase

increase

increase
increase
increase

increase
increase
increase

no effect
no effect
increase
increase
no effect

data from bymaster et al 2002.
data from shoblock et al 2003a, 2003b, 2004.

b

www.sobp.org/journal

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1401

b.k. madras et al

table 4. dopamin transporter imaging in human subjects with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd),
compared with matched control subjects
study

adhd subjects

probe

results

dougherty et al 1999

6 adults

[123i]altropane

barkley 2001
dresel et al 2000

adult
17 adults

[123i]altropane
[99mtc]trodat

cheon et al 2003
van dyck et al 2002

9 children
9 adults

[123i]ipt
[123i]cit

70% increase
p ⫽ .001
30% increase
17% increase
p ⬍ .001
⬃40%–51% increase
no difference

trodat-1: [2-[[2-[[[3-(4-chlorophenyl)-8-methyl-8-azabicyclo [3.2.1]oct-2-yl]methyl](2-mercaptoethyl)amino]ethy] amino]ethanethiolato-(3-)n2,n2=,s2,s2=] oxo-[1r-(exo-exo)]- [99mtc]technetium,[99mtc].

critical to the pathophysiology of adhd and/or mechanisms of
anti-adhd drugs (biederman and spencer 1999; kornetsky
1970; shekim et al 1982; zametkin and rappaport 1987). the
advent of the effective therapeutic drug atomoxetine, with an
approximately 300-fold selectivity for the net over the dat
(table 2), again catapulted net and noradrenergic systems into
prominence for adhd (bymaster et al 2002; spencer and
biederman 2002). to complicate the “either-dopamine-or-norepinephrine” paradigm, atomoxetine, which has very low affinity
for the dat, raises extracellular dopamine as well as norepinephrine levels in rodent frontal cortex (bymaster et al 2002)
(table 3). (atomoxetine effects are not unique, because the
net-selective antidepressant and adhd medication desipramine also raises extracellular dopamine levels in the frontal
cortex [biederman and spencer 1999; carboni et al 1990; moron
et al 2002].) because dat density in the frontal cortex is low and
dopamine (da) uptake proceeds normally in frontal cortex of
dat knockout mice (table 1), it is unlikely that blockade of the
dat is a significant contributor to elevated dopamine levels in
the prefrontal cortex; however, dopamine affinity for the net is
higher compared with its affinity for the dat, and net density in
this brain region is higher than dat density (eshleman et al 1999;
giros et al 1994; horn 1973; moron et al 2002) (table 1). by
blocking the net, atomoxetine most likely blocks sequestration
of dopamine into norepinephrine neurons (bymaster et al 2002).
to underscore the net as a dopamine carrier in frontal cortex,
mice with null mutations of the net do not effectively clear
dopamine in frontal cortex (moron et al 2002), and amphetamine
reportedly releases dopamine from noradrenergic neurons in the
prefrontal cortex (shoblock et al 2004). because the net is
poorly expressed in the striatum and robustly expressed in the
frontal cortex (table 1), a selective net inhibitor can raise
dopamine levels in frontal cortex, but not in the striatum. thus,
dat/net ratios in discrete brain regions are likely to govern
selective drug effects on catecholamine transport.
accordingly, transporter-selective inhibitors are not necessarily transmitter-selective inhibitors, and selectivity of transport
inhibitors for blocking transport of a single neurotransmitter
cannot be predicted solely on the basis of their affinities for
da/dat or norepinephrine (ne)/net. when viewed from the
perspective of promiscuous neurotransmitters and parsimonious
(selective) drugs, nonselective transport of catecholamines (or
other monoamines?) by monoamine transporters might be a
more critical determinant of therapeutic benefit than selectivity of
adhd medications for monoamine transporters. overall, the
pharmacologic properties of transport inhibitors are influenced
by expression levels of transporters in various brain regions,
substrate affinities for transporters, as well as localized production and release of transporter substrates and their diffusion

distance. accordingly, the relative contributions of dopamine or
norepinephrine to the pathophysiology of adhd should be
considered from the perspective of common therapeutic effects
of adhd medications.
from this vantage, different biochemical scenarios elicited by
adhd medications might be necessary or sufficient to alleviate
adhd symptoms: 1) increased extracellular dopamine levels in
the frontal cortex, via net- and/or dat-modulation are essential,
whereas increased norepinephrine levels are superfluous; 2)
increased norepinephrine levels in the frontal cortex are essential, whereas increased dopamine levels are superfluous; 3)
elevation of both dopamine and norepinephrine levels are
essential to activate, in their respective fields, dopaminergic and
noradrenergic receptors; and 4) adhd medications might reorganize dopamine distribution in frontal cortex and other brain
regions that express dat and net. clearance of excess dopamine by the net would insert it into noradrenergic neurons;
subsequent dopamine release by noradrenergic neurons could
fall under the rubric of noradrenergic regulation. if so, dopamine
and norepinephrine might be co-released from noradrenergic
neurons (devoto et al 2004; shoblock et al 2004) and crossactivate dopamine and noradrenergic receptor subtypes in frontal cortical areas. of relevance to adhd medications, the netselective atomoxetine effectively raises extracellular dopamine
levels in the frontal cortex by blocking the net, which transports
dopamine efficiently. in the striatum, net expression levels are
vanishingly small, rendering atomoxetine ineffective in this brain
region. although highly speculative, all current adhd medications might disperse dopamine throughout the frontal cortex (or
other net-rich regions, such as thalamus, hypothalamus, amgydala, mammillary nuclei), eventually leading to dopamine sequestration nonselectively into catecholamine neurons. under
these conditions, adhd medications targeting dat or net
might disperse dopamine widely and consign dopamine storage
and release to regulation by noradrenergic, as well as dopaminergic neurons, particularly because medications do not fully
saturate transporters. the consequent reorganization of dopamine distribution and regulation might be relevant to adhd
pathophysiology and therapeutic effect. for example, will dopamine dispersion via the net permit higher dopamine levels to be
in proximity to d4 or d5 dopamine or adrenergic receptors? to
test this hypothesis, it is necessary to compare the therapeutic
potential of compounds that are highly dat- but not netselective with dat-net or net-selective compounds. nevertheless, it is premature to craft a comprehensive model of therapeutic mechanisms until a systematic study of the effects of adhd
medications on extracellular monoamine levels in multiple brain
regions is completed and detailed comparisons are made bewww.sobp.org/journal

1402 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409
tween therapeutic responses elicited by the three major drug
therapies.
drugs acting at the dat and net are highly effective in
adhd, as summarized by a comprehensive review of the
efficacy of adhd medications (wilens 2003).  xxxg2149xxx –selective (methylphenidate), dat/net-selective (amphetamine), or net-selective (atomoxetine) adhd medications
have one pharmacologic effect in common: to elevate extracellular dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the frontal cortex. is
this mechanism necessary and sufficient to account for therapeutic response, or can other transporters or other dat and net
substrates contribute to the pathophysiology of adhd and
adhd therapeutic effects?
adhd medications: role of the vesicular monoamine
transporter
the vesicular  xxxg2099xxx -2 ( xxxg2099xxx -2), located on
intracellular vesicular membranes of monoaminergic neurons,
sequesters cytoplasmic dopamine and norepinephrine into vesicles, and controls their storage and release. methylphenidate
and amphetamine differentially modulate  xxxg2099xxx -2 function. a
single administration of methylphenidate rapidly and reversibly
increases vesicular dopamine transport by the  xxxg2099xxx -2 and raises
 xxxg2099xxx -2 densities associated with vesicles (sandoval et al 2002).
in contrast, methamphetamine, a close analogue of amphetamine, rapidly and reversibly decreases vesicular uptake of
dopamine and promotes loss of  xxxg2099xxx -2 function (brown et al
2001; johnson-davis et al 2004). to summarize, methylphenidate
promotes sequestration of dopamine into vesicles for future
release, whereas amphetamine interferes with dopamine storage.
the implications of these contrasting effects of methylphenidate
and amphetamine in adhd are unknown.
adhd medications: role of trace amines, trace amine
receptors
trace amines are substrates for monoamine transporters
(madras et al, unpublished data) and activate a newly cloned
family of trace amine receptors. for more than 20 years, endogenous trace amines have been implicated in adhd. the trace
amine ␤-phenethylamine (pea) is significantly lower in urines of
children with adhd, whereas amphetamine and methylphenidate normalize, or boost above normal, concentrations of urinary
pea in boys diagnosed with adhd, or only in responders (baker
et al 1991; kusaga et al 2002; zametkin et al 1983, 1984).
endogenous trace amines are synthesized from amino acid
precursors, stored with biogenic amines in neurons (but not in
vesicles), released quantally, and affect transport or release of
catecholamines (branchek and blackburn 2003). with the cloning of trace amine receptor subtypes from human brain
(borowsky et al 2001), the barriers to elucidating the relevance of
trace amines and trace amine receptors to adhd are fading.
unexpectedly, amphetamine acts as an agonist in stimulating rat
trace amine receptor-1–mediated cyclic  xxxd81xxx  formation at pharmacologically relevant concentrations
(bunzow et al 2001; madras et al, unpublished data). a tantalizing conjecture is that amphetamine might exert therapeutic
effects, in part, by activating trace amine receptors. genetics
variants of these receptors warrant investigation. in contrast,
methylphenidate does not activate the trace amine receptor-1 but
might do so indirectly by blocking trace amine transport by
monoamine transporters or orphan transporters (madras et al,
unpublished data).
www.sobp.org/journal

b.k. madras et al
adhd medications: comparison of therapeutic response
the transport inhibitors methylphenidate and atomoxetine
and the transport substrate amphetamine all raise extracellular
dopamine and norepinephrine levels in frontal cortex but might
elicit different biochemical responses at monoamine transporters
and receptors. do the two drug categories produce different
therapeutic outcomes? in an earlier study of 48 boys with adhd,
d-amphetamine, methylphenidate, and placebo were compared
in a double-blind crossover study. both drugs were highly and
equally efficacious for the group as a whole, but frequently one
drug or the other was superior for an individual child, or adverse
effects occurred with only one of the stimulants (elia et al 1990,
1991), highlighting the critical need to incorporate discrete
case-by-case drug response and pharmacogenetic data into the
analysis. in a more recent study of methylphenidate, amphetamine, and placebo to address differences in efficacy of medications, faraone et al (2001) reported that the efficacy of
amphetamine to improve functioning was seen throughout the
full range of improvement scores, whereas methylphenidate
showed a substantial effect for “mildly” and “much improved”
but not for “very much improved.” both drugs prevented worsening of symptoms. is this reported higher efficacy of amphetamine attributable to its more complex effects on amine transporters than that of methylphenidate? do pharmacogenetics
contribute to different therapeutic responses? as the clinical
therapeutic data on atomoxetine matures, will it reveal subtle or
significant differences compared with more conventional medications? is high net-selectivity critical for nonstimulant adhd
medications, or will a nonselective dat-net inhibitor be as or
more effective?

dat regulation and adaptation
regulation of dat density and function is of core interest to
the pathophysiology of adhd and anti-adhd drug mechanisms
and is of potential diagnostic value. physiologic turnover of the
dat protein in rodent brain is approximately 2–3 days (kimmel
et al 2000), but the dat is also dynamically regulated. ion
gradients, phosphorylation activity, and other agents can modify
dat activity transiently or for extended periods, even after the
agents are cleared from dat (gulley and zahniser 2003;
mortensen and amara 2003). adaptive changes are reflected in
density, activity, and cellular localization.
dat regulation: transient effects
the dat can be regulated acutely by a range of physiologic,
pharmacologic, and activity-dependent mechanisms. under normal conditions, the dat is trafficked constitutively from the cell
membrane to the intracellular milieu and then degraded or
recycled to the cell surface (daniels and amara 1999; loder and
melikian 2003). activation of protein kinase c pathways by
phorbal esters reduces dopamine transport capacity and the
number of binding sites on the cell surface (for reviews, see
gulley and zahniser 2003; mortensen and amara 2003). acute
exposure to substrates or inhibitors can also rapidly and reversibly modify dat function. of relevance to adhd medications,
amphetamine acutely reduces dopamine transport capacity in
rodent brain or cultured cells within 1 hour of administration by
promoting dat trafficking to the cell interior and internalization
(fleckenstein et al 1999; saunders et al 2000). whether this
process subsequently alters dat function is not known, but it
might constitute an important mechanism for raising extracellular
dopamine levels. in contrast, the dat-inhibitor cocaine produces the opposite effect by promoting upregulation of dat

b.k. madras et al
density, function, mobilization of the dat to the cell surface and
increased cell-surface expression in dat cell lines, as well as in
the striatum (daws et al 2002; little et al 2002). whether this
cocaine–dat interaction extends to methylphenidate, or to the
net, is unknown.
dopamine itself regulates the dat, directly by downregulating surface expression, or indirectly by upregulating the dat via
d2 dopamine autoreceptors (for review, see gulley and zahniser
2003). if excess extracellular dopamine levels persist after adhd
medications clear, dopamine-mediated dat regulation could be
amplified.  xxxg2149xxx  function is also regulated by
 xxxd208xxx , ethanol, and  xxxd2738xxx  (lonart and johnson
1994; mayfield et al 2001; zhang and reith 1996).
the dat can act as a single unit, self-associate, or bind to
other proteins. oligomers of the dat exist, but again, their
functional significance is not known (sorkina et al 2003; torres et
al 2003). certain intracellular proteins (pick1 [protein1 that
interacts with c-kinase], ␣-synuclein) also interact with the dat
to stabilize its cell-surface expression (sidhu et al 2004; torres et
al 2001). in the context of adhd, the relevance of acute dat
regulation by association with substrates, drugs, and other
proteins is unknown. the development of tolerance to adhd
medications is controversial. intermittently administered methylphenidate reportedly produces no significant tolerance (safer
and allen 1989), but tolerance can develop with high doses,
steady blood levels, or in individuals (ross et al 2002; swanson
et al 1999, 2003). the development of tolerance to performance
in response to a single, high daily dose compared with two,
lower daily doses of amphetamine was also postulated in a
recent study, but in the absence of a placebo control or subjective reports, the investigators were unwilling to draw firm
conclusions (greenhill et al 2003). overall, the development of
tolerance is likely to depend on dose and whether plasma drug
concentrations are maintained at constant levels over long
periods of time.
dat regulation: repeated exposure to adhd medications
more than 150 studies have documented the safety and
efficacy of stimulant medications for adhd, which have been
the mainstay of treatment for at least 50 years (spencer et al
1996). the medications are prescribed for years, yet there is
limited information on the neurochemical and behavioral consequences of long-term exposure during development. concerns
about the use of stimulant drugs need to be balanced by their
known efficacy and the associated social, functional, and behavioral risks of not treating adhd.
do anti-adhd medications promote neuroadaptation in
brain dopamine systems, with consequences to behavior, or
response to other drugs? rats chronically exposed to methylphenidate have altered brain dopamine systems, enhanced sensitivity to stressful stimuli, decreased response to natural reinforcers, decreased threshold for helplessness, and increased or
decreased cocaine-induced reinforcement (bolanos et al 2003;
brandon and steiner 2003; carlezon et al 2003). extrapolation of
these data to adhd subjects is limited by differences in dose and
dosing regimen, the use of normal animals, the context and
method of drug administration, and contradictory findings in
human subjects with adhd (e.g., wilens et al 2003), among
other reasons. investigation of these changes in a naturalistic,
albeit tentative, model of adhd in nonhuman primates might be
more clinically relevant (goulet et al 2000). although restricted
by interpretational challenges, preclinical research can provide

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1403
some guidance for developing clinical research protocols in
adhd.
neuroadaptation in response to drugs can occur at multiple
levels of organization in brain. in cell lines transfected with the
dat or net, methylphenidate and amphetamine induce expression of the immediate early gene c-fos, implicated in neuroadaptation (yatin et al 2002). it is conceivable that dat regulates
gene expression by triggering a cascade of biochemical events or
by enabling access of dopamine to an intracellular receptor
signaling system. a similar, possibly indirect, c-fos response is
elicited in rodent striatum after acute exposure to methylphenidate but declines with repeated dosing (brandon and steiner
2003; chase et al 2003). methylphenidate also directly promotes
dat density downregulation in rodent striatum but not in the
nucleus accumbens or substantia nigra (izenwasser et al 1999;
moll et al 2001). the mechanism underlying the persistent dat
downregulation is unknown but might represent an adaptive
decrease in carrier function to compensate for reduced dopamine release. the contrasting adaptive responses in striatum,
nucleus accumbens, and substantia nigra might reflect differences in dat function or regulation in these brain regions: in the
striatum dat primarily transports dopamine, whereas in the
substantia nigra dat promotes dopamine release as well (ingram et al 2002). before drawing further inferences from these
findings, it is necessary to replicate these findings, conduct
comparable studies in the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal
cortex, and above all, determine whether downregulation occurs
in human brain.
the ability of therapeutic doses of methylphenidate to produce a sustained decrease in dat density, even after drug
cessation, has not been adequately studied in human subjects.
brain imaging of the dat in adult striatum after repeated
methylphenidate administration revealed a decline in dat density; however, because imaging was conducted 90 min after the
last of three daily doses, it is impossible to distinguish between
methylphenidate-mediated dat occupancy and dat downregulation (krause et al 2000). in another study, 3– 4 months of
methylphenidate treatment in boys with adhd resulted in a
27%–75% decrease in dat binding potential (a measure of
density). it is unclear whether methylphenidate was withdrawn
for any period before the imaging study, and the apparent
reduction might again reflect competition between methylphenidate and the radioligand probe for dat binding sites (vles et al
2003). on the basis of these studies, it is not clear whether
methylphenidate changes dat density in human subjects after
withdrawal from the drug, and if so, how much time is required
for reversal. the effects of repeated, therapeutic doses of amphetamine on dat density in living human brain are unknown.
from a clinical vantage, adhd medications do not seem to
induce neuroadaptative changes that are reflected by robust
nontherapeutic behavioral or pharmacologic responses or withdrawal symptoms, except with higher-than-usual doses (ross et al
2002). in contrast to the days or weeks required for antidepressant or antipsychotic drug response, methylphenidate has a rapid
onset, and the effects are short-lived. adhd symptoms return
quickly when the drug is cleared and discontinued, and no
significant tolerance or sensitization is evident in the majority of
subjects, if given in 2–3 daily doses over extended periods.
dat regulation: brain imaging of dat in adhd
it is important to inquire whether dat, a principal target of
anti-adhd drugs in brain, is normal in brains of adhd subjects.
if not, do abnormal levels reflect a state or trait of the disorder? it
www.sobp.org/journal

1404 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409

figure 4. dat gene variants.

is feasible to visualize and quantify the dat in living brain by
radioligand probes that actively bind the transporter. all current
agents for pet or single-photon emission computed tomography
(spect) imaging of the dat are based on a phenyltropane
analogue of cocaine (canfield et al 1990; fischman et al 2001;
madras et al 1989). although discovered fortuitously, more than
eight compounds in this chemical class have been introduced
into clinical studies of the dat (madras 1998).
in the first study of dat density in brains of adults with
adhd, dougherty et al (1999) reported increased dat binding
potential, an index of dat density (table 4). the study was
subsequently confirmed in adhd adults (dresel et al 2000;
krause et al 2000) and adhd children (cheon et al 2003), with
an important exception (van dyck et al 2002). each center used
a different phenyltropane analogue probe for imaging. probes
with different lipophilic properties might measure different dat
populations if a portion of dat sites are nonfunctional and
localized internally. divergent results might also reflect different
population samples and other experimental parameters. it is
essential to verify this potentially significant finding in a much
larger cohort, in multiple centers using similar techniques, and in
combination with detailed documentation of presenting symptoms. increased dat densities might not be unique to adhd;
higher densities were reported in a population with depression
(brunswick et al 2003), in normal subjects with higher scores of
verbal memory (mozley et al 2001), and possibly in subjects with
tourette’s disorder, of which approximately 50% also present
with adhd symptoms (malison et al 1995; muller-vahl et al
2000; singer et al 1991; stamenkovic et al 2001). notwithstanding
these unconfirmed reports, dat density is depleted in the
majority of pathologic states examined thus far with pet or
spect imaging of brain (e.g., parkinson’s disease; fischman et al
1998). if elevated dat densities in adhd are confirmed in larger
populations, dat will present a unique molecular target for
investigating the pathophysiology of adhd.
brain imaging of the net is also warranted. the long-standing
view that norepinephrine contributes to adhd pathology and
therapeutic benefit (biederman and spencer 1999; pliszka et al
1996) was sustained by the discovery of a net-selective drug,
atomoxetine, as an effective medication for adhd. atomoxetine
clears norepinephrine and dopamine in the frontal cortex via the
net (bymaster et al 2002; michelson et al 2001; spencer et al
2002).
notwithstanding the need to replicate the findings in a larger
cohort, the increased levels of the transporter might constitute a
trait or state of adhd. if the increase reflects a “trait” of adhd,
elevated dat density might represent “hypertrophy” of dendritic
trees or dopaminergic neurons, a result of inadequate pruning
during neurodevelopment. this possibility was raised by singer
et al (1991) to account for elevated dat levels in tourette’s
disorder.
www.sobp.org/journal

b.k. madras et al
dat regulation and density: the dat gene
 xxxg2149xxx  density might also be altered by genetic
abnormalities, but currently there are no candidate polymorphisms
that correlate with dat density. the 3=-untranslated region of the
dat gene has a fixed length–repeat sequence, which varies by
number of repeats from 3 to 11 (vandenbergh et al 1992) (figure 4).
although the 10-repeat sequence is the most common form of the
gene, inheritance of this repeat length in both alleles is associated
with adhd in some studies but accounts for less than 4% of the
variance (cook et al 1995; faraone, in press; madras et al 2002;
waldman et al 1998;). the repeat number in this region of the gene
is not clearly associated with dat density. one study demonstrated
a higher dat density with the 10/10 repeat genotype (heinz et al
2000), another study found a lower density in the 10/10 than in the
9/10 repeat (jacobsen et al 2000), and a third study found no
difference in dat density (martinez et al 2001). the variable
number of tandem repeats (vntr) region of the dat gene has
been associated with adhd and methylphenidate response in
some studies (cook et al 1995; chen et al 2003; daly et al 1999;
gill et al 1997; kirley et al 2003; loo et al 2003; oh et al 2003; roman
et al 2002; waldman et al 1998; winsberg and comings 1999) but
not in others (holmes et al 2000; kahn et al 2003; palmer et al 1999;
qian et al 2003; roman et al 2001; todd et al 2001); curran et al
(2001) reported both association and no association. the polygenic
nature of adhd (comings et al 1996; reviewed in dimaio et al 2003;
galili-weisstub and segman 2003) suggests that the contribution of
the dat gene is limited and might be of greater or lesser influence
depending on the constellation of alleles of other contributing
genes. whereas discrepancies between association studies might
relate to the statistical power of individual samples, there is evidence that multiple haplotypes of the dat gene might contain
10-repeat vntr alleles (barr et al 2001; miller and madras 2002;
rubie et al 2001). because the diversity of dat alleles might extend
beyond the length of the vntr region, specific dat haplotypes
might have differential contributions. a number of studies have
demonstrated that variation of length or of sequence in the 3=untranslated region of the dat gene might affect dat expression
(fuke et al 2001; inoue-murayama et al 2002; michelhaugh et al
2001; mill et al 2002; miller et al 2002; miller et al 2001). because
particular alleles of the dat gene might differentially contribute to
altered levels of dat protein, it is important to further define and
analyze the function of specific dat haplotypes and to recognize
that the functional consequence of a particular polymorphism is
context dependent. intragenic allelic interactions might distinguish
haplotype functional diversity, and association studies might inadvertently group haplotypes of different function together on the
basis of vntr length. accordingly, there is a need to define
haplotypes on a functional level and group together those haplotypes that share similar function, to clarify the validity of association
studies and progress toward a fuller understanding of the contribution of the dat gene to adhd. aside from potential mechanisms,
overexpression of the dat might lead to compensatory increases in
dopamine release, a reduction in extracellular dopamine levels, or
altered cellular distribution of the dat.
dat density regulation: neuroadaptation
elevated dat expression might reflect a state, not a trait, of
adhd and arise from neuroadaptive processes that compensate
for increased (or decreased) neurotransmission mediated by
dopamine or other transmitters in brain. one variable not
considered in the majority of imaging studies was the potential
influence of smoking on dat density. in a comparison of
nonmedicated smoking patients with adhd with nonsmoking

b.k. madras et al
but medication-naïve adults with adhd, the smokers subgroup
presented with higher clinical scores, yet dat densities were
significantly lower than those of the nonsmoking adhd cohort
(krause et al 2003). notwithstanding these intriguing findings,
postmortem analysis of dat density in smokers and nonsmokers
failed to reveal an association (court et al 1998).
elevated dat density might also reflect an adaptive response
to increased clearance of excess dopamine, mediated by high
levels of production and release, altered synaptic activity (e.g.,
 xxxg2182xxx ), vesicular storage, or flawed activity of d1–d5 dopamine receptor subtypes, or receptor– effector coupling. several
of these hypotheses are amenable to investigation in living brain
by pet imaging (madras et al 2002). if confirmed in a large
multicenter trial in adults, it is reasonable to investigate dat
density in a broader age range. childhood adhd might progress
through adolescence into adulthood, and the presenting symptoms, although context dependent, are similar in children and
adults. if consistent across studies and ages, this discovery offers
a lead to investigate the pathophysiology of adhd and the
mechanism of anti-adhd drugs.
elevated dat density in the striatum might promote excessive
clearance of dopamine in this brain region and in the frontal
cortex (dat or net), leading to hypodopaminergic (and noradrenergic) tone. introduction of dat/net inhibitors would normalize basal dopamine (and noradrenergic) tone in the frontal
cortex to compensate for increased dopamine clearance. hyperdopaminergic tone in the unmedicated striatum is also a possible
etiologic cause of hyperactivity. testing these postulates will
require monitoring dat and net densities and extracellular
dopamine and norepinephrine levels with greater anatomic
precision than has been done previously.

overview
at present, the most effective medications for adhd affect
dat and net. from the vantage of medications and pathophysiology of adhd, a unifying mechanism of methylphenidate,
amphetamine, and atomoxetine that raises extracellular dopamine and norepinephrine in frontal cortex, has broad implications:
first, drug screening procedures should focus not only on
transporter selectivity and affinity of a candidate therapeutic but
also on the potency of a compound to block transport of various
neurotransmitters by transporters (madras et al, unpublished
data), with a parallel approach applied to screening of compounds at receptors activated by dopamine and norepinephrine.
for example, norepinephrine, dopamine, and the trace amine
phenylethylamine are effective substrates for the net, yet their
relative contributions to therapeutic benefit are unknown (madras et al, unpublished data). nevertheless, transporter affinity
data will not be fully predictive of pharmacologic effects, because brain region–specific transporter expression levels and
ratios contribute significantly to carrier capacity. for example,
methylphenidate has modest affinity at the net but effectively
raises dopamine levels in net-rich and dat-poor frontal cortex.
it is equally important to verify data from rodent brain in primate
brain because their relative transporter densities, neurotransmitter levels, neural projections, and anatomy differ.
second, the relative advantages of net-, dat-, or dat–netselective compounds are not fully understood. is the surge in
dopamine in the basal ganglia, mediated by amphetamine and
methylphenidate, essential for overall therapeutic efficacy? atomoxetine’s selective blockade of dopamine transport in the

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1405
frontal cortex and not in striatum or nucleus accumbens supports
the need to fully assess adhd medications with variable activities at the dat or net. is selective dat blockade essential or
affinity for net (or sert) necessary? reduced potency at the
dat in the basal ganglia could diminish associated stimulant
effects and potential abuse liability. more research is needed with
other drugs, with a broad range of pharmacologic effects at
monoamine transporters (e.g., highly selective dat inhibitors,
nonselective dat and net inhibitors).
third, methylphenidate, amphetamine, and atomoxetine all
elevate extracellular dopamine and norepinephrine levels in the
frontal cortex but not in striatum or nucleus accumbens. accordingly, for therapeutic response, rectification of catecholamine
tone might be more critical in the frontal cortex than in the
striatum. this view is tempered by limited clinical comparisons
of atomoxetine with methylphenidate or amphetamine and our
imperfect knowledge of how the frontal cortex and other brain
regions process dopamine and norepinephrine (and possibly
trace amines) in adhd and subsequent to adhd medications.
fourth, in the frontal cortex, the relative contributions of
dopamine and norepinephrine (or their respective transporters) to therapeutic response is not known. atomoxetine or
other net-selective compounds increase extracellular levels
of both norepinephrine and dopamine, indicating that dopamine diffuses into the vicinity of noradrenergic neurons at
sufficiently high levels to register, by microdialysis, netmediated dopamine transport blockade. because dopamine
can be incorporated into norepinephrine neurons in the
frontal cortex, co-release of both dopamine and norepinephrine is possible. although highly speculative, blockade of the
net and dat by adhd medications might disperse dopamine widely throughout the cortex, activating a range of
catecholamine receptors for which dopamine has relatively
high affinity. blockade of dopamine transport by dat and
net might also seed noradrenergic neurons with dopamine as
the transport inhibitor levels decline. upon release from
noradrenergic neurons, dopamine could activate both dopamine and norepinephrine receptors. accordingly, dopamine
might function in noradrenergic circuits, at ␣-adrenergic receptors, and dopamine release in the frontal cortex might be
regulated by noradrenergic neuron signaling in the locus
coeruleus, as well as dopaminergic neurons in the ventral
tegmental area. it is intriguing to speculate whether dopamine
storage, release, and activation within noradrenergic signaling
systems produces effects divergent from those elicited by
norepinephrine and whether these differences contribute to
therapeutic response. equally interesting is whether dopamine tone is deficient in brain regions expressing d4 and d5
dopamine receptors and whether these regions are juxtaposed
to the net.
fifth, differences in the pharmacology of adhd medications in a region-specific manner might also be relevant to
therapeutic response. comparison of adhd medication effects in striatum with effects in substantia nigra (or ventral
tegmental area, locus coeruleus, hippocampus, amygdala, or
other brain regions?) are warranted. in the substantia nigra,
amphetamine triggers a different presynaptic physiologic cascade than it does in the striatum, whereas there is no evidence
that methylphenidate affects each brain region differently.
this difference should be explored in the context of variable
therapeutic response to the two classes of medications.
sixth, trace amines and their receptors are implicated in
adhd. it is of fundamental interest: to develop selective comwww.sobp.org/journal

1406 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409
pounds for assessing trace amine receptor function; to assess the
therapeutic potential of compounds that act at trace amine
receptors and trace amine transporters in models of adhd; and
to genotype trace amine receptor (or transporter) subtypes in
adhd subjects. by virtue of the intronless nature of trace amine
receptor genes, receptor structure in brain is likely to be relatively constant compared with proteins generated by exon
splicing.
seventh, the dat interacts with several regulatory proteins,
including ␣-synuclein and pick, and this association should
be explored in the context of adhd and drug response.
in summary, the high incidence of adhd and escalating use
of adhd medications provide a compelling case to clarify the
pathophysiology of adhd and anti-adhd mechanisms. the
strong genetic component, proven effectiveness of anti-adhd
medications, morphologic and functional anomalies observed in
brains of adhd subjects are strong indicators that adhd has a
biological basis. the hunt for pathologic processes is complicated by the heterogenous clinical symptoms, comorbidity with
other disorders, and influence of adverse environments and
psychosocial events. nevertheless, comorbidity and heterogeneity in symptoms and response to adhd medications should be
exploited as leads for pathophysiologic mechanisms, pharmacogenetics, pathophysiogenetics, and drug discovery. (spencer et
al., 1999)
this work was supported by national institutes of health–
national institute on drug abuse grants da06303 (bkm),
da15305 (bkm), da11558 (bkm), and rr00168 (neprc).
boston life sciences (boston) has licensed altropane for
brain imaging of the  xxxg2149xxx . bkm et al have an
issued patent on altropane for  xxxg2149xxx  imaging.
bkm and ajf have a patent application for  xxxg2149xxx  imaging in adhd. both patents are licensed by boston
life sciences.
aspects of this work were presented at the conference “advancing the neuroscience of adhd,” february 28, 2004 in
boston, massachusetts.the conference was sponsored by the
society of biological psychiatry through an unrestricted educational grant from mcneil consumer & specialty pharmaceuticals.
baker gb, bornstein ra, rouget ac, ashton se, van muyden jc, coutts rt
(1991): phenylethylaminergic mechanisms in attention-deficit disorder.
biol psychiatry 29:15–22.
barkley ra (2001): the adhd report non-archival newsletter; vol. 9. new york:
guilford publications.
barr cl, xu c, kroft j, feng y, wigg k, zai g, et al (2001): haplotype study of
three polymorphisms at the  xxxg2149xxx  locus confirm linkage to attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. biol psychiatry 49:333–
339.
biederman j (1998): attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a life-span perspective. j clin psychiatry 59(suppl 7):4 –16.
biederman j, faraone sv (2002): current concepts on the neurobiology of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. j atten disord 6(suppl 1):s7–
s16.
biederman j, spencer t (1999): attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(adhd) as a noradrenergic disorder. biol psychiatry 46:1234 –1242.
biederman j, wilens t, mick e, faraone sv, weber w, curtis s, et al (1997): is
adhd a risk factor for psychoactive substance use disorders? findings
from a four-year prospective follow-up study. j am acad child adolesc
psychiatry 36:21–29.
bolanos ca, barrot m, berton o, wallace-black d, nestler ej (2003): methylphenidate treatment during pre- and periadolescence alters behavioral
responses to emotional stimuli at adulthood. biol psychiatry 54:1317–
1329.

www.sobp.org/journal

b.k. madras et al
borowsky b, adham n, jones ka, raddatz r, artymyshyn r, ogozalek kl, et al
(2001): trace amines: identification of a family of mammalian g proteincoupled receptors. proc natl acad sci usa 98:8966 – 8971.
branchek ta, blackburn tp (2003): trace amine receptors as targets for novel
therapeutics: legend, myth and fact. curr opin pharmacol 3:90 –97.
brandon cl, steiner h (2003): repeated methylphenidate treatment in adolescent rats alters gene regulation in the striatum. eur j neurosci 18:
1584 –1592.
brown jm, hanson gr, fleckenstein ae (2001): regulation of the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx -2: a novel mechanism for cocaine and other
psychostimulants. j pharmacol exp ther 296:762–767.
brunswick dj, amsterdam jd, mozley pd, newberg a (2003): greater availability of brain dopamine transporters in major depression shown by
[99m c]trodat-1 spect imaging [erratum in am j psychiatry. 2004;161:
384]. am j psychiatry 160:1836 –1841.
bunzow jr, sonders ms, arttamangkul s, harrison lm, zhang g, quigley di,
et al (2001): amphetamine, 3,4- xxxd2611xxx ,  xxxd2527xxx , and metabolites of the catecholamine neurotransmitters are agonists of a rat trace amine receptor. mol pharmacol
60:1181–1188.
bymaster fp, katner js, nelson dl, hemrick-luecke sk, threlkeld pg, heiligenstein jh, et al (2002): atomoxetine increases extracellular levels of
norepinephrine and dopamine in prefrontal cortex of rat: a potential
mechanism for efficacy in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. neuropsychopharmacology 27:699 –711.
canfield dr, spealman rd, kaufman mj, madras bk (1990): autoradiographic localization of cocaine receptors by [3h]cft in monkey brain.
synapse 5:189 –195.
carboni e, tanda gl, frau r, di chiara g (1990): blockade of the noradrenaline carrier increases extracellular dopamine concentrations in the prefrontal cortex: evidence that dopamine is taken up in vivo by noradrenergic terminals. j neurochem 55:1067–1070.
carlezon wa jr, mague sd, andersen sl (2003): enduring behavioral effects
of early exposure to methylphenidate in rats. biol psychiatry 54:1330 –
1337.
castellanos fx, elia j, kruesi mj, marsh wl, gulotta cs, potter wz, et al (1996):
cerebrospinal fluid homovanillic acid predicts behavioral response to
stimulants in 45 boys with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. neuropsychopharmacology 14:125–137.
chase td, brown re, carrey n, wilkinson m (2003): daily methylphenidate
administration attenuates c-fos expression in the striatum of prepubertal rats. neuroreport 14:769 –772.
chen ck, chen sl, mill j, huang ys, lin sk, curran s, et al (2003): the
 xxxg2149xxx  gene is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a taiwanese sample. mol psychiatry 8:393–396.
cheon ka, ryu yh, kim yk, namkoong k, kim ch, lee jd (2003): dopamine
transporter density in the basal ganglia assessed with [123i]ipt spet in
children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. eur j nucl med mol
imaging 30:306 –311.
ciliax bj, heilman c, demchyshyn ll, pristupa zb, ince e, hersch sm, et al
(1995): the  xxxg2149xxx : immunochemical characterization
and localization in brain. j neurosci 15:1714 –1723.
clure c, brady kt, saladin me, johnson d, waid r, rittenbury m (1999):
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and substance use: symptom
pattern and drug choice. am j drug alcohol abuse 25:441– 448.
comings de, wu s, chiu c, ring rh, gade r, ahn c, et al (1996): polygenic
inheritance of tourette syndrome, stuttering, attention deficit hyperactivity, conduct, and oppositional defiant disorder: the additive and subtractive effect of the three dopaminergic genes— xxxg656xxx , d beta h, and
 xxxg2149xxx . am j med genet 67:264 –288.
cook eh jr, stein ma, krasowski md, cox nj, olkon dm, kieffer je, leventhal
bl (1995): association of attention-deficit disorder and the dopamine
transporter gene. am j hum genet 56:993–998.
court ja, lloyd s, thomas n, piggott ma, marshall ef, morris cm, et al (1998):
dopamine and nicotinic receptor binding and the levels of dopamine
and homovanillic acid in human brain related to tobacco use. neuroscience 87:63–78.
cragg sj, rice me (2004): dancing past the dat at a da synapse. trends
neurosci 27:270 –277.
curran s, mill j, tahir e, kent l, richards s, gould a, et al (2001): association
study of a  xxxg2149xxx  polymorphism and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in uk and turkish samples. mol psychiatry 6:425–
428.

b.k. madras et al
daly g, hawi z, fitzgerald m, gill m (1999): mapping susceptibility loci in
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: preferential transmission of parental alleles at  xxxg2149xxx , dbh and  xxxg659xxx  to affected children. mol psychiatry
4:192–196.
daniels gm, amara sg (1999): regulated trafficking of the human  xxxg2149xxx . clathrin-mediated internalization and lysosomal
degradation in response to phorbol esters. j biol chem 274:35794 –
35801.
daws lc, callaghan pd, moron ja, kahlig km, shippenberg ts, javitch ja,
galli a (2002): cocaine increases dopamine uptake and cell surface expression of dopamine transporters. biochem biophys res commun 290:
1545–1550.
de la garza r ii, madras bk (2000): [(3)h]pnu-101958, a d(4) dopamine
receptor probe, accumulates in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of
non-human primate brain. synapse 37:232–244.
devoto p, flore g, pira l, longu g, gessa gl (2004):  xxxg831xxx -adrenoceptor
mediated co-release of dopamine and noradrenaline from noradrenergic neurons in the cerebral cortex. j neurochem 88:1003–1009.
dimaio s, grizenko n, joober r (2003): dopamine genes and attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder: a review. j psychiatry neurosci 28:27–38.
donnan ga, kaczmarczyk sj, mckenzie js, kalnins rm, chilco pj, mendelsohn fa (1989): catecholamine uptake sites in mouse brain: distribution
determined by quantitative [3h] xxxd2546xxx  autoradiography. brain res
504:64 –71.
dougherty dd, bonab aa, spencer tj, rauch sl, madras bk, fischman aj
(1999):  xxxg2149xxx  density in patients with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. lancet 354:2132–2133.
dresel s, krause j, krause kh, lafougere c, brinkbaumer k, kung hf, et al
(2000): attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: binding of [99mtc]trodat-1 to the  xxxg2149xxx  before and after methylphenidate
treatment. eur j nucl med 27:1518 –1524.
durston s (2003): a review of the biological bases of adhd: what have we
learned from imaging studies? ment retard dev disabil res rev 9:184 –
195.
elia j, borcherding bg, potter wz, mefford in, rapoport jl, keysor cs (1990):
stimulant drug treatment of hyperactivity: biochemical correlates. clin
pharmacol ther 48:57– 66.
elia j, borcherding bg, rapoport jl, keysor cs (1991): methylphenidate and
dextroamphetamine treatments of hyperactivity: are there true nonresponders? psychiatry research. 36:141–155.
eshleman aj, carmolli m, cumbay m, martens cr, neve ka, janowsky a
(1999): characteristics of drug interactions with recombinant biogenic
amine transporters expressed in the same cell type. j pharmacol exp ther
289:877– 885.
falkenburger bh, barstow kl, mintz im (2001): dendrodendritic inhibition
through reversal of dopamine transport. science 293:2465–2470.
faraone sv, pliszka sr, olvera rl, skolnik r, biederman j (2001): efficacy of
adderall and methylphenidate in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a reanalysis using drug-placebo and drug-drug response curve
methodology. j child adolesc psychopharmacol 11:171–180.
fischman aj, bonab aa, babich jw, livni e, alpert nm, meltzer pc, madras bk
(2001): [11c, 127i]altropane: a highly selective ligand for pet imaging of
 xxxg2149xxx  sites. synapse 39:332–342.
fischman aj, bonab aa, babich jw, palmer ep, alpert nm, elmaleh dr, et al
(1998): rapid detection of parkinson’s disease by spect with altropane:
a selective ligand for dopamine transporters. synapse 29:128 –141.
fleckenstein ae, haughey hm, metzger rr, kokoshka jm, riddle el, hanson
je, et al (1999): differential effects of psychostimulants and related
agents on dopaminergic and serotonergic transporter function. eur
j pharmacol 382:45– 49.
fuke s, suo s, takahashi n, koike h, sasagawa n, ishiura s (2001): the vntr
polymorphism of the human  xxxg2149xxx  ( xxxg2149xxx ) gene affects
gene expression. pharmacogenomics j 1:152–156.
gainetdinov rr, caron mg (2003): monoamine transporters: from genes to
behavior. annu rev pharmacol toxicol 43:261–284.
galili-weisstub e, segman rh (2003): attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorder: review of genetic association studies. isr j psychiatry relat sci
40:57– 66.
gehlert dr, schober da, hemrick-luecke sk, krushinski j, howbert jj,
robertson dw, et al (1995): novel halogenated analogs of tomoxetine
that are potent and selective inhibitors of norepinephrine uptake in
brain. neurochem int 26:47–52.

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1407
gill m, daly g, heron s, hawi z, fitzgerald m (1997): confirmation of association between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and a dopamine
transporter polymorphism. mol psychiatry 2:311–313.
giros b, wang ym, suter s, mcleskey sb, pifl c, caron mg (1994): delineation
of discrete domains for substrate, cocaine, and tricyclic antidepressant
interactions using chimeric dopamine-norepinephrine transporters.
j biol chem 269:15985–15988.
gnegy me, khoshbouei h, berg ka, javitch ja, clarke wp, zhang m, galli a
(2004): intracellular ca2⫹ regulates amphetamine-induced dopamine
efflux and currents mediated by the human  xxxg2149xxx . mol
pharmacol 66:137–143.
goldman ls, genel m, bezman rj, slanetz pj (1998): diagnosis and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. council on scientific affairs, american medical association. jama
279:1100 –1107.
goulet m, mathews p, madras bk (2000): chronic methylphenidate treatment suppresses activity in more active juvenile monkeys and induces
sleep disturbances. soc neurosci abstracts 26:2177.
green al, el hait ma (1978): inhibition of mouse brain monoamine oxidase
by (⫹)-amphetamine in vivo. j pharm pharmacol 30:262–263.
greenhill ll, swanson jm, steinhoff k, fried j, posner k, lerner m, et al (2003):
a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study comparing a single morning dose of adderall to twice-daily dosing in children with adhd. j am
acad child adolesc psychiatry 42:1234 –1241.
gu h, wall sc, rudnick g (1994): stable expression of biogenic amine transporters reveals differences in inhibitor sensitivity, kinetics, and ion dependence. j biol chem 269:7124 –7130.
gulley jm, zahniser nr (2003): rapid regulation of  xxxg2149xxx 
function by substrates, blockers and presynaptic receptor ligands. eur
j pharmacol 479:139 –152.
heikkila re, orlansky h, cohen g (1975): studies on the distinction between
uptake inhibition and release of (3h)dopamine in rat brain tissue slices.
biochem pharmacol 24:847– 852.
heinz a, goldman d, jones dw, palmour r, hommer d, gorey jg, et al (2000):
genotype influences in vivo  xxxg2149xxx  availability in human
striatum. neuropsychopharmacology 22:133–139.
hersch sm, yi h, heilman cj, edwards rh, levey ai (1997): subcellular localization and molecular topology of the  xxxg2149xxx  in the
striatum and substantia nigra. j comp  xxxd122xxx  388:211–227.
holmes j, payton a, barrett jh, hever t, fitzpatrick h, trumper al, et al
(2000): a family-based and case-control association study of the  xxxg658xxx  gene and  xxxg2149xxx  gene in attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. mol psychiatr 5:523–530.
horn as (1973): structure-activity relations for the inhibition of catecholamine uptake into synaptosomes from noradrenaline and dopaminergic neurones in rat brain homogenates. br j pharmacol 47:332–338.
hyttel j (1978): inhibition of [3h]dopamine accumulation in rat striatal
synaptosomes by psychotropic drugs. biochem pharmacol 27:1063–
1078.
inazu m, takeda h, matsumiya t (2003): functional expression of the norepinephrine transporter in cultured rat astrocytes. j neurochem 84:136 –
144.
ingram sl, prasad bm, amara sg (2002):  xxxg2149xxx -mediated
conductances increase excitability of midbrain dopamine neurons. nat
neurosci 5:971–978.
inoue-murayama m, adachi s, mishima n, mitani h, takenaka o, terao k, et al
(2002): variation of variable number of tandem repeat sequences in the
3’-untranslated region of primate  xxxg2149xxx  genes that affects reporter gene expression. neurosci lett 334:206 –210.
izenwasser s, coy ae, ladenheim b, loeloff rj, cadet jl, french d (1999):
chronic methylphenidate alters locomotor activity and dopamine transporters differently from cocaine. eur j pharmacol 373:187–193.
jacobsen lk, staley jk, zoghbi ss, seibyl jp, kosten tr, innis rb, gelernter j
(2000): prediction of  xxxg2149xxx  binding availability by genotype: a preliminary report. am j psychiatry 157:1700 –1703.
johnson-davis kl, truong jg, fleckenstein ae, wilkins dg (2004): alterations in vesicular dopamine uptake contribute to tolerance to the neurotoxic effects of methamphetamine. j pharmacol exp ther 309:578 –
586.
kahn rs, khoury j, nichols wc, lanphear bp (2003): role of dopamine
transporter genotype and maternal prenatal smoking in childhood hyperactive-impulsive, inattentive, and oppositional behaviors. j pediatr
143:104 –110.

www.sobp.org/journal

1408 biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409
kilty je, lorang d, amara sg (1991): cloning and expression of a cocainesensitive rat  xxxg2149xxx . science 254:578 –579.
kimmel hl, carroll fi, kuhar mj (2000):  xxxg2149xxx  synthesis and
degradation rate in rat striatum and nucleus accumbens using rti-76.
neuropharmacology 39:578 –585.
kirley a, lowe n, hawi z, mullins c, daly g, waldman i, et al (2003): association of the 480 bp  xxxg2149xxx  allele with methylphenidate response in a
sample of irish children with adhd. am j med genet 121b:50 –54.
kornetsky c (1970): psychoactive drugs in the immature organism. psychopharmacologia 17:105–136.
krause kh, dresel sh, krause j, kung hf, tatsch k (2000): increased striatal
 xxxg2149xxx  in adult patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: effects of methylphenidate as measured by single photon emission computed tomography. neurosci lett 285:107–110.
krause kh, dresel sh, krause j, la fougere c, ackenheil m (2003): the  xxxg2149xxx  and neuroimaging in attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. neurosci biobehav rev 27:605– 613.
kusaga a, yamashita y, koeda t, hiratani m, kaneko m, yamada s, matsuishi
t (2002): increased urine phenylethylamine after methylphenidate
treatment in children with adhd. ann  xxxd122xxx  52:372–374.
lambert nm, hartsough cs (1998): prospective study of tobacco smoking
and substance dependence among samples of adhd and non-adhd
subjects. j learn disability 31:533–544.
lewis da, melchitzky ds, sesack sr, whitehead re, auh s, sampson a (2001):
 xxxg2149xxx  immunoreactivity in monkey cerebral cortex: regional, laminar, and ultrastructural localization. j comp  xxxd122xxx  432:119 –
136.
li lb, chen n, ramamoorthy s, chi l, cui xn, wang lc, reith me (2004): the
role of n-glycosylation in function and surface trafficking of the human
 xxxg2149xxx . j biol chem 279:21012–21020.
little ky, elmer lw, zhong h, scheys jo, zhang l (2002): cocaine induction
of  xxxg2149xxx  trafficking to the plasma membrane. mol pharmacol 61:436 – 445.
loder mk, melikian he (2003): the  xxxg2149xxx  constitutively
internalizes and recycles in a protein kinase c-regulated manner in stably transfected pc12 cell lines. j biol chem 278:22168 –22174.
lonart g, johnson km (1994): inhibitory effects of  xxxd2738xxx  on the uptake
of [3h]dopamine and [3h]glutamate by striatal synaptosomes. j neurochem 63:2108 –2117.
loo sk, specter e, smolen a, hopfer c, teale pd, reite ml (2003): functional
effects of the  xxxg2149xxx  polymorphism on eeg measures in adhd. j am acad
child adolesc psychiatry 42:986 –993.
madras, bk (1998): imaging the  xxxg2149xxx : a window on dopamine neurons. in: marwah j, teitelbaum h, editors. advances in neurodegenerative disorders, volume 1. scottsdale, arizona: prominent press,
229 –253.
madras bk, miller gm, fischman aj (2002): the  xxxg2149xxx : relevance to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd). behav brain res
130:57– 63.
madras bk, spealman rd, fahey ma, neumeyer jl, saha jk, milius ra (1989):
cocaine receptors labeled by [3h]2␤-carbomethoxy-3␤-(4-fluorophenyl)tropane. mol pharmacol 36:518 –524.
malison rt, mcdougle cj, van dyck ch, scahill l, baldwin rm, seibyl jp, et al
(1995): [123i]beta-cit spect imaging of striatal  xxxg2149xxx 
binding in tourette’s disorder. am j psychiatry 152:1359 –1361.
martinez d, gelernter j, abi-dargham a, van dyck ch, kegeles l, innis rb,
laruelle m (2001): the variable number of tandem repeats polymorphism of the  xxxg2149xxx  gene is not associated with significant change in  xxxg2149xxx  phenotype in humans. neuropsychopharmacology 24:553–560.
mayfield rd, maiya r, keller d, zahniser nr (2001): ethanol potentiates the
function of the human  xxxg2149xxx  expressed in xenopus
oocytes. j neurochem 79:1070 –1079.
melikian he, ramamoorthy s, tate cg, blakely rd (1996): inability to nglycosylate the human norepinephrine transporter reduces protein stability, surface trafficking, and transport activity but not ligand recognition. mol pharmacol 50:266 –276.
michelhaugh sk, fiskerstrand c, lovejoy e, bannon mj, quinn jp (2001): the
 xxxg2149xxx  gene ( xxxg2149xxx ) variable number of tandem repeats domain enhances transcription in dopamine neurons. j neurochem 79:1033–1038.
michelson d, faries d, wernicke j, kelsey d, kendrick k, sallee fr, spencer t
(2001): atomoxetine adhd study group. atomoxetine in the treatment

www.sobp.org/journal

b.k. madras et al
of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: a randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. pediatrics 108:e83.
mill j, asherson p, browes c, d’souza u, craig i (2002); expression of the
 xxxg2149xxx  gene is regulated by the 3’ utr vntr: evidence
from brain and lymphocytes using quantitative rt-pcr. am j med genet
114:975–979.
miller gm, de la garza rd, novak ma, madras bk (2001): single nucleotide
polymorphisms distinguish multiple  xxxg2149xxx  alleles in
primates: implications for association with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and other neuropsychiatric disorders. mol psychiatry 6:50 –
58.
miller gm, madras bk (2002): polymorphisms in the 3’-untranslated region of
human and monkey  xxxg2149xxx  genes affect reporter gene
expression. mol psychiatry 7:44 –55.
moll gh, hause s, ruther e, rothenberger a, huether g (2001): early methylphenidate administration to young rats causes a persistent reduction
in the density of striatal dopamine transporters. j child adolesc psychopharmacol 11:15–24.
moron ja, brockington a, wise ra, rocha ba, hope bt (2002): dopamine
uptake through the norepinephrine transporter in brain regions with
low levels of the  xxxg2149xxx : evidence from knock-out mouse
lines. j neurosci 22:389 –395.
mortensen ov, amara sg (2003): dynamic regulation of the dopamine
transporter. eur j pharmacol 479:159 –170.
mozley lh, gur rc, mozley pd, gur re (2001): striatal dopamine transporters
and cognitive functioning in healthy men and women. am j psychiatry
158:1492–1499.
muller-vahl kr, berding g, brucke t, kolb h, meyer gj, hundeshagen h, et al
(2000):  xxxg2149xxx  binding in gilles de la tourette syndrome,
j  xxxd122xxx  247 514 –520.
nirenberg mj, vaughan ra, uhl gr, kuhar mj, pickel vm (1996): the  xxxg2149xxx  is localized to dendritic and axonal plasma membranes
of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. j neurosci 16:436 – 447.
oh ks, shin dw, oh gt, noh ks (2003):  xxxg2149xxx  genotype
influences the attention deficit in korean boys with adhd. yonsei med j
44:787–792.
palmer cg, bailey jn, ramsey c, cantwell d, sinsheimer js, del’homme
m, et al (1999): no evidence of linkage or linkage disequilibrium between
 xxxg2149xxx  and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a large sample.
psychiatr genet 9:157–160.
pliszka sr, mccracken jt, maas jw (1996): catecholamines in attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder: current perspectives. j am acad child adolesc psychiatry 35:264 –272.
qian q, wang y, li j, yang l, wang b, zhou r (2003): association studies of
 xxxg658xxx  gene and  xxxg2149xxx  gene polymorphisms in han chinese patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. beijing da xue xue bao 35:412– 418.
raiteri m, cerrito f, cervoni am, levi g (1979): dopamine can be released by
two mechanisms differentially affected by the dopamine transport inhibitor  xxxd2746xxx . j pharmacol exp ther 208:195–202.
roman t, schmitz m, polanczyk g, eizirik m, rohde la, hutz mh (2001):
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a study of association with both
the  xxxg2149xxx  gene and the  xxxg658xxx  gene.
am j med genet 105:471– 478.
roman t, szobot c, martins s, biederman j, rohde la, hutz mh (2002):
 xxxg2149xxx  gene and response to methylphenidate
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. pharmacogenetics 12:
497– 499.
ross dc, fischhoff j, davenport b (2002): treatment of adhd when tolerance to methylphenidate develops. psychiatric services 53:102.
rothman rb, bauman mh (2003): monoamine transporters and psychostimulant drugs. eur j pharmacol 479:23–30.
roubert c, cox pj, bruss m, hamon m, bonisch h, giros b (2001): determination of residues in the norepinephrine transporter that are critical for
tricyclic antidepressant affinity. j biol chem 276:8254 – 8260.
rubie c, schmidt f, knapp m, sprandel j, wiegand c, meyer j, et al (2001):
the human  xxxg2149xxx  gene: the 5’-flanking region reveals
five diallelic polymorphic sites in a caucasian population sample. neurosci lett 297:125–128.
ruskin dn, bergstrom da, shenker a, freeman le, baek d, walters jr (2001):
drugs used in the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

b.k. madras et al
affect postsynaptic firing rate and oscillation without preferential
dopamine autoreceptor action. biol psychiatry 49:340 –350.
safer dj, allen rp (1989): absence of tolerance to the behavioral effects of
methylphenidate in hyperactive and inattentive children. j pediatr 115:
1003–1008.
sandoval v, riddle el, hanson gr, fleckenstein ae (2002): methylphenidate
redistributes vesicular  xxxg2099xxx -2: role of dopamine receptors. j neurosci 22:8705– 8710.
saunders c, ferrer jv, shi l, chen j, merrill g, lamb me, et al (2000): amphetamine-induced loss of human  xxxg2149xxx  activity: an internalization-dependent and cocaine-sensitive mechanism. proc natl acad
sci u s a 97:6850 – 6855.
seeman p, madras b (2002): methylphenidate elevates resting dopamine
which lowers the impulse-triggered release of dopamine: a hypothesis.
behav brain res 130:79 – 83.
seeman p, madras bk (1998): anti-hyperactivity medication: methylphenidate and amphetamine. mol psychiatry 3:386 –396.
shekim wo, javaid j, dekirmenjian h, chapel jl, davis jm (1982): effects of
d-amphetamine on urinary metabolites of dopamine and norepinephrine in hyperactive boys. am j psychiatry 139:485– 488.
shoblock jr, maisonneuve im, glick sd (2003a): differences between
 xxxd2589xxx  and d-amphetamine in rats: working memory,
tolerance, and extinction. psychopharmacology (berl) 170:150 –156.
shoblock jr, maisonneuve im, glick sd (2004): differential interactions of
desipramine with amphetamine and methamphetamine: evidence that
amphetamine releases dopamine from noradrenergic neurons in the
medial prefrontal cortex. neurochem res 29:1437–1442.
shoblock jr, sullivan eb, maisonneuve im, glick sd (2003b): neurochemical
and behavioral differences between  xxxd2589xxx  and d-amphetamine in rats. psychopharmacology (berl) 165:359 –369.
sidhu a, wersinger c, vernier p (2004): alpha-synuclein regulation of the
dopaminergic transporter: a possible role in the pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease. febs lett 565:1–5.
singer hs, hahn ih, moran th (1991): abnormal dopamine uptake sites in
postmortem striatum from patients with tourette’s syndrome. ann  xxxd122xxx  30:558 –562.
solanto mv, arnsten ft, castellanos x (2001): stimulant drugs and adhd,
basic and clinical neuroscience. new york: oxford university press.
sonders ms, zhu sj, zahniser nr, kavanaugh mp, amara sg (1997): multiple
ionic conductances of the human  xxxg2149xxx : the actions of
dopamine and psychostimulants. j neurosci 17:960 –974.
sorkina t, doolen s, galperin e, zahniser nr, sorkin a (2003 ): oligomerization of dopamine transporters visualized in living cells by fluorescence
resonance energy transfer microscopy. j biol chem 278:28274 –28283.
sowell er, thompson pm, welcome se, henkenius al, toga aw, peterson bs
(2003): cortical abnormalities in children and adolescents with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. lancet 362:1699 –1707.
spencer t, biederman j (2002): non-stimulant treatment for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. j atten disord 6(suppl 1):s109 –s119.
spencer t, biederman j, wilens t (1999): attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and comorbidity. pediatr clin north am 46:915–927.
spencer t, biederman j, wilens t, harding m, o’donnell d, griffin s (1996):
pharmacotherapy of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder across the
life cycle. j am acad child adolesc psychiatry 35:409 – 432.
spencer tj, biederman j, wilens te, faraone sv (2002): novel treatments for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children. j clin psychiatry
63(suppl 12):16 –22.
stamenkovic m, schindler sd, asenbaum s, neumeister a, willeit m,
willinger u, et al (2001): no change in striatal dopamine re-uptake site
density in psychotropic drug naive and in currently treated tourette’s
disorder patients: a [(123)i]-beta-cit spect study. eur neuropsychopharmacol 11:69 –74.
sulzer d, rayport s (1990): amphetamine and other psychostimulants reduce ph gradients in midbrain dopaminergic neurons and chromaffin
granules: a mechanism of action. neuron 5:797– 808.
swanson j, gupta s, guinta d, flynn d, alger d, lerner m, et al (1999): acute
tolerance to methylphenidate in the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children. clin pharmacol ther 66:295–305.
swanson j, gupta s, lam a, guinta d, shoulson i, lerner m, et al (2003):
development of a new once-a-day formulation of methylphenidate
for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: proofof-concept and proof-of-product. arch gen psychiatry 60:204 –211.

biol psychiatry 2005;57:1397–1409 1409
swanson jm, volkow nd (2003): serum and brain concentrations of methylphenidate: implications for use and abuse. neurosci biobehav reviews
27:615– 621.
todd rd, jong yj, lobos ea, reich w, heath ac, neuman rj (2001): no
association of the  xxxg2149xxx  gene 3’ vntr polymorphism
with adhd subtypes in a population sample of twins. am j med genet
105:745–748.
torres ge, carneiro a, seamans k, fiorentini c, sweeney a, yao wd, caron
mg (2003): oligomerization and trafficking of the human dopamine
transporter. mutational analysis identifies critical domains important
for the functional expression of the transporter. j biol chem 278:
2731–2739.
torres ge, yao wd, mohn ar, quan h, kim km, levey ai, et al (2001):
functional interaction between monoamine plasma membrane transporters and the synaptic pdz domain-containing protein pick1. neuron
30:121–134.
vandenbergh dj, persico am, uhl gr (1992): a human  xxxg2149xxx  cdna predicts reduced glycosylation, displays a novel repetitive
element and provides racially-dimorphic taqi rflps. brain res mol brain
res 15:161–166.
van dyck ch, quinlan dm, cretella lm, staley jk, malison rt, baldwin rm, et al
(2002): unaltered  xxxg2149xxx  availability in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. am j psychiatry 159:309 –312.
vles js, feron fj, hendriksen jg, jolles j, van kroonenburgh mj, weber we
(2003): methylphenidate down-regulates the dopamine receptor and
transporter system in children with attention deficit hyperkinetic disorder (adhd). neuropediatrics 34:77– 80.
volkow nd, fowler js, wang g, ding y, gatley sj (2002b): mechanism of
action of methylphenidate: insights from pet imaging studies. j atten
disord 6(suppl 1): xxxg1111xxx –s43.
volkow nd, wang gj, fowler js, logan j, franceschi d, maynard l, et al
(2002a): relationship between blockade of dopamine transporters by
oral methylphenidate and the increases in extracellular dopamine: therapeutic implications. synapse 43:181–187.
waldman id, rowe dc, abramowitz a, kozel st, mohr jh, sherman sl, et
al (1998): association and linkage of the  xxxg2149xxx  gene
and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children: heterogeneity owing to diagnostic subtype and severity. am j hum genet 63:
1767–1776.
wilens te (2003): drug therapy for adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder. drugs 63:2395–2411.
wilens te (2004): attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the substance
use disorders: the nature of the relationship, subtypes at risk, and treatment issues. psychiatr clin north am 27:283–301.
wilens te, faraone sv, biederman j, gunawardene s (2003): does stimulant
therapy of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder beget later substance
abuse? a meta-analytic review of the literature. pediatrics 111:179 –185.
winsberg bg, comings de (1999): association of the  xxxg2149xxx 
gene ( xxxg2149xxx ) with poor methylphenidate response. j am acad child
adolesc psychiatry 38:1474 –1477.
wong dt, threlkeld pg, best kl, bymaster fp (1982): a new inhibitor of
norepinephrine uptake devoid of affinity for receptors in rat brain.
j pharmacol exp ther 222:61–5.
yang l, wang, y-u, li j, faraone sv (2004): association of norepinephrine
transporter gene with methylphenidate response. j am acad child adolesc psychiatry 43:1154 –1158.
yatin sm, miller gm, norton c, madras bk (2002): dopamine transporterdependent induction of c-fos in hek cells. synapse 45:52– 65.
zametkin aj, brown gl, karoum f, rapoport jl, langer dh, chuang lw,
wyatt rj (1983): urinary phenethylamine response to d-amphetamine in
12 boys with attention deficit disorder. am j psychiatry 141:1055–1058.
zametkin aj, karoum f, rapoport jl, brown gl, wyatt rj (1984): phenylethylamine excretion in attention deficit disorder. j am acad child psychiatry
23:310 –314.
zametkin aj, rapoport jl (1987): neurobiology of attention deficit disorder
with hyperactivity: where have we come in 50 years? j am acad child
adolesc psychiatry 26:676 – 686.
zhang l, reith me (1996): regulation of the functional activity of the human
 xxxg2149xxx  by the  xxxd208xxx  pathway. eur j pharmacol
315:345–354.

www.sobp.org/journal

