neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

similarities between csf–brain extracellular transfer
and neurofibrillary tangle invasion in alzheimer’s disease
mátyás i. papp ∗ , sámuel komoly, imre g. szirmai, tibor kovács
semmelweis university, department of neurology, balassa u. 6, 1083 budapest, hungary
received 16 november 2004; received in revised form 9 february 2005; accepted 8 march 2005

abstract
using the in vivo enzyme protection-enzyme inhibition method, we visualized the distribution of the intraventricularly and cisternally
(cisterna magna) injected  xxxd137xxx  chloride (am) bound reversibly to the extracellular acetylcholinesterase enzyme (ache) in the rabbit
brain in order to describe the extracellular flow pathways from the cerebrospinal fluid (csf). we found that the distribution of am-protected
ache (indicating the am itself) is similar to tracers having no intracerebral binding sites. the topographical distribution after both ways
of application indicates a preferential penetration of am into the limbic structures of the cerebral hemispheres in a predictable topographic
sequence starting from the corticoid areas, allo- and periallo cortices followed by the mesocortical regions and then, in a limited extent, to
the isocortex. the lentiform nuclei and the central part of diencephalic halves are inaccessible to am. the hierarchic order in the sequence of
diffusion from the csf into the hemispheric subpial regions and the distribution pattern of am resemble the stereotypic topographic expansion
pattern and the predominantly limbic distribution of neurofibrillary tangles (nfts) in alzheimer’s disease and related conditions.
© 2005 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: extracellular transfer; acetylcholinesterase; limbic system; subarachnoid cisterns; volume transmission; neurofibrillary tangle; alzheimer’s
disease

1. introduction
it has been shown that the intraventricularly injected
extracellular tracer 14 c-inulin enters the ventral forebrain,
hypothalamus and brain stem with a caudal-to-rostral and
ventral-to-dorsal gradients of intracerebral distribution, while
the ventral and posterior thalamus, dorsolateral cortical areas,
caudate-putamen (with the exception of its periventricular
portions) are mainly excluded [45]. the distribution pattern
has been explained by the proximity of the inuline-accessible
regions to the ventral cisterns and to be suggestive of a
channeled movement, providing preferential access to certain anatomical sites and exclusion from others. in spite of
the heterogeneous physicochemical and physiological properties of several tracers injected into the cerebrospinal fluid
(csf) (such as trypan blue, radioactive bovine albumin, adriamycin, tritiated methotrexate and iron containing pigments)
∗

corresponding author. tel.: +36 1 210 0337; fax: +36 1 210 1368.
e-mail address: matyi@ xxxg1507xxx .sote.hu (m.i. papp).

0197-4580/$ – see front matter © 2005 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.03.023

in different species (rabbit, cat, dog, mice) [4,18,25,27,51],
their topographic distribution is similar to the 14 c-inulin in
the rat.
to answer the question whether substances with intracerebral binding sites would enter the same regions as inert tracers
with no intracerebral binding sites, we applied the in vivo
enzyme protection–enzyme inhibition method [21,22] using
extracellularly spreading  xxxd137xxx  chloride (am), bound
reversibly to the extracellular acetylcholinesterase enzyme
(ache) of the brain. am (win 8077,  xxxd137xxx , winthrop
co., uk; molecular weight 608.5) is a water soluble, highly
specific reversible ache inhibitor, used in the therapy of
myasthenia gravis [26,28]. am does not cross the plasma
membrane or the blood brain barrier and binds temporarily
to the ache, protecting it from being irreversibly inhibited by the lipid soluble  xxxd2393xxx  (dfp,
l. light and co., uk) administered after the am injection
[21,22]. the residual ache activity indicates those enzyme
sites to which the extracellularly spreading am gained access
and formed a reversible linkage before the administration

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

403

of the lipid soluble dfp. with this method, am-protected
enzyme sites and not the am itself are visualized. the
enzyme-bound am is not degraded by clearance mechanisms
during penetration. this method can demonstrate those protected enzyme sites which are comparable to the in vivo
distribution of am and visualize the sequence of penetration from the csf into the brain. comparing the distribution
of am-protected ache with the ache activity in control
rabbit brains we can answer the question whether the distribution of the am binding sites (ache) determines the
distribution of am or not. the am-bound enzyme sites are
localized in the intercellular and intersynaptic spaces, around
the axolemma, inside the basal lamina and the transendothelial vesicles and also between the membrane profiles of the
endothelial cells [40]. these extracellular sites are identical
to the sites accessed by other extracellular tracers [9,57].
drugs, as exogenous volume transmission signals diffuse
in the cerebral extracellular spaces and are constrained there
by the same factors that influence the migration of endogenous volume transmission signals [60]. volume transmission
is thought to be a pronounced feature in limbic structures
where extracellular spaces are structurally and chemically
different from cognitive-somatic regions [38,46]. recently,
the site of early appearance, the sequence of invasion and the
predominantly limbic distribution of neurofibrillary tangles
(nfts) in alzheimer’s disease (ad) were established and
expressed in the braaks’ staging [1–3,5–7,44].
the aim of this study was to define the sequence of spreading and the regional distribution of am in the rabbit brain and
to compare these patterns with that of nfts in ad. though
the main routes of csf drainage and the clearance of the
interstitial fluid in the rabbit and human brains are similar,
but not identical [10,58], the similar intracerebral distribution of tracers in various vertebrates [4,18,25,27,51] suggests
similar basic mechanisms.
in our study, we have shown a preferential transfer of
am from the csf into the limbic system of the cerebral hemispheres and hierarchic sequence of this from the
allo/periallocortical to mesocortical, then – in a limited extent
– to the isocortical areas. the initial sites and the sequence
of am-penetration are similar to the early appearance and
spreading of the neurofibrillary degeneration (nfd) in ad
and related conditions.

the right coronal suture and 6.5 mm to the right from the midline for fastening the guide tube which served the insertion
and fixation of the injector canula and the sealing of the csfspace. the dura was pierced at the very moment of the insertion of the injector canula into the guide tube. experiments
were carried out without leakage of csf. for the cisterna
magna (cm) injections, a 25-gague canula was used. am was
dissolved in artificial csf (na+ 150 mmol/l, k+ 3 mmol/l,
mg2+ 1.6 mmol/l, cl− 131 mmol/l, hco3 − 25 mmol/l, ca2+
2.3 mmol/l, glucose 1 g/l) and was injected (during 15 s) into
the right lateral ventricle (lv) or into the cm. before the
injection of am, 1 mg/kg bw of  xxxd247xxx  ( xxxd2908xxx ,
hungary) was administered intravenously. the volume of
am-solution was 0.1 ml for both ventricular and cm injections. animals were in prone position during penetration
time. additionally, am was given in a dose of 0.001 mg in
5 ␮l solution using a hamilton syringe inserted through the
guide tube into the deep central part of the right diencephalon
followed by the in vivo enzyme protection–enzyme inhibition
process. different subgroups of the experimental animals are
shown in table 1. at the end of penetration time, the highly
lipid soluble irreversible enzyme inhibitor dfp (0.1 mg/kg
bw) was injected intravenously to inhibit all cholinesterases
not bound to the water soluble am. the final injection solution was prepared immediately before use from isopropyl
alcohol-dissolved dfp (1%) adding physiological saline to
make up a 2 ml final volume. five minutes after dfp injection
(and the control animals as well) were deeply anesthetized
with an overdose of sodium pentobarbital and the brain was
fixed by transcardiac cannulation of the ascending aorta with
a perfusion of saline followed by formaldehyde (10%) delivered at a standard (1 m height) pressure. the brains were
removed and after cryoprotection in 20% sucrose solution
for 24 h, 40 ␮m thick cryostate sections were prepared and
processed for ache histochemistry. sections were incubated for 4–12 h in acetylthiocholine iodide (atch, fluka
ag, germany), according to koelle and friedenwald [23]
and modified by shute and lewis [50]. the distribution of
ache activity in two untreated rabbits was used as a control. sections were preincubated for 30 min in 6 × 10−8 m
ro-2-0683 (2-hydroxy-5-phenyl-benzyltrietthyl-ammonium
bromide dimethyl carbonate, hoffmann-la roche), to inhibit
 xxxg248xxx  activity, and then for 2 h in the mixture
of atch + 6 × 10−8 m ro-2-0683, as described previously

2. methods

table 1
experimental animals in different groups

the animal experiments were in agreement with the ethical regulations of the semmelweis university, budapest,
hungary. experiments were made on new zealand white
rabbits of both sexes, weighing between 2.5 and 4.0 kg.
anesthesia was initiated with sodium-pentobarbital (sanofi,
hungary) 30 mg/kg body weight (bw), administered via an
ear vein and was maintained by further doses. the head of the
animals were fixed in a stereotactic holder and a hole 3 mm in
diameter was trephined into the skull at the point 7 mm behind

dose of am (mg)

injection site

penetration
time (min)

number of
animals

0.05
0.05
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.001
–

lv
cm
lv
lv
cm
lv
diencephalic
control

60
60
5
15
15
60
15
–

5
3
5
8
3
5
3
2

404

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

[40]. the borders of the am-protected ache activity were
drawn on schematic sections of representative rabbit brains
(figs. 2 and 3). the anatomical structures were identified
from the textbooks of winkler and potter [59], rose and
woolsey [47] and monier and gangloff [36]. for identification of the basal telencephalic structures and the medial
hemispheric regions, we applied the terminology of paxinos
and watson [41], and of vogt et al. [54,56], respectively.

3. results
the penetration of am into the subependymal regions was
regular and of similar depth at various levels of the neuraxis,
while in the telencephalic subpial regions it was uneven. the
greater part of its subependymal path was covered during
the first 5 min. after 5 min, its spreading slowed down in the
subependymal matter and continued in the subpial regions
where it reached its maximum in 15 min. the penetration was
deeper on the side of the lv injection. the topography of the
am-protected ache did not correlate with the ache activity
in control rabbit brain. the sharp borders of the am-protected
ache staining did not follow the borders of the anatomical
structures or the brodmann’s areas. the interindividual variations (observed mainly in isocortical regions) did not alter the
main pattern of distribution. the white matter did not impede
the spreading of am neither from the ventricles (e.g. through
the hemispheric deep white matter into the deep layers of
cerebral cortex) (arrows in figs. 1c, d, h, and 3b–h), nor from
the subarachnoid cisterns (e.g. from the ambient cistern (cb)
through the corona radiata (cr) into the caudal diencephalon)
(figs. 1h, 2h and 3h).
low dose am (0.05 mg) injected into the lv during
60 min penetration reached about 1.0–1.5 mm depth both
in the periventricular gray and white matter (arrows in
figs. 1c, d and 2a–h). in contrast, am in the telencephalon
penetrated 1.0–1.5 mm deep only into subpial regions bordering or close to the subarachnoid cisterns [cistern of the lamina
terminalis (cl), basal cisterns (bc), cistern of the transverse
cerebral fissure (cft), interhemispheric (cih) and ambient
(cb) cisterns] (figs. 1c, d and 2a–h). am-accessible cortical regions were mostly allocortices and just a few of them
[part of the anterior cingulate (aci), retrosplenial (rs) and
insular (ai) cortices] belonged to the mesocortex. approximate borders between the allo- and mesocortex are labelled
in fig. 1a and b. no penetration was seen into the isocortical regions from the subarachnoidal space except around the
lateral sagittal fissure (fs) and the splenial sulcus (ss) on the
injected side (fig. 1d).
low dose am (0.05 mg) administered into the cm during
60 min penetration entered the same depth of the same subpial
regions as it did after lv injection (fig. 1c and d) in the neighborhood of the basal cisterns (bc) but not or only in a very
limited extent into the subependymal substance (fig. 1e).
high dose am (0.5 mg) injected into the lv during 5 min
penetration resulted in a deep (2.0–2.5 mm) penetration into

the subependymal brain matter at various levels of the ventricular system (fig. 1f). in the subpial regions of the cerebral hemispheres, the depth and the extension of the amaccessible brain matter increased around the subarachnoid
cisterns but the penetration into the mesocortical and dorsolateral isocortical areas was absent or very limited (fig. 1f).
high dose am (0.5 mg) injected into the lv during 15 min
penetration resulted in an uneven deepening of the subpial
am-accessible brain matter compared to the 5 min penetration of the same dose. am-accessible regions were deep in
the ventral part of the cerebral hemispheres, which is occupied by allo- and mesocortex and phylogenetically old noncortical structures (figs. 1g, h and 3a–h). the subependymal
and subpial structures around the cistern of the lamina terminalis (cl) and basal cisterns (bc) in the basal forebrain
were penetrated [septal regions (ls, ms), olfactory tubercle
(tu), diagonal band and nucleus of broca (td), substantia innominata (si), preoptic area (po), stria terminalis and
nucleus (ns), nucleus accumbens (a), hypothalamus (hy),
amygdaloid body (am), hippocampal formation (hi), subicular regions (su), entorhinal cortex (ae), insular (ai) and
perirhinal (prc) cortices]. am also entered the medial cortical areas in the vicinity of the interhemispheric cistern (cih)
and its caudal continuation, the ambient cistern (cb) [anterior cingulate (aci), retrosplenial (rs) and postsubicular (not
shown) areas], and into the structures bordering the cistern
of the transverse cerebral fissure (dorsal part of the hippocampal formation and of the diencephalons, see below).
subpial am-accessible cortical regions extended from the
cisterns towards isocortical regions, but am-accessibility
of the dorsolateral cortical regions remained very limited
(figs. 1g, h and 3a–h). ventricular am crossed the hemispheric deep white matter [corona radiata (cr), centrum
semiovale (co)] and reached the deep layers of the lateral
cerebral cortex (arrows in figs. 1h and 3c–h). with the exception of the neighborhood of the lateral sagittal fissure (fs) and
splenial sulcus (ss) on the injected side, the access of am
from the dorsolateral subarachnoideal space into the outer
layers of the dorsolateral cortical areas was absent or very
limited (figs. 1g, h and 3a–h).
in the basal ganglia, am penetrated the full length of the
caudate nucleus (ca), the caudalmost and -in two cases- the
lateral and medial peripheral parts of the lentiform nucleus
(ln), while the larger part of the putamen (pu) and pallidum (pa) were inaccessible to lv or cm administered am
(figs. 1g, h and 3a–g).
in the diencephalon, am entered the structures bordering
the basal cisterns (bc), the cistern of the transverse cerebral fissure (velum interpositum) (cft) and the lateral (lv)
and third ventricles (iii), i.e. the whole hypothalamus (hy)
[except the infundibulum (if)], the dorsal and the medial
part of the thalamus [anterior (at), rostral reticular (re),
midline (mi), medial part of the medial (mt), ventral (vt),
dorsal part of the lateral thalamic nuclei (lt) and habenular
regions (h)] (figs. 1h and 3d–h). from the ambient cistern
(cb) am crossed the optic radiation (ro) and the cerebral

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

405

406

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

peduncles (pec) and entered the lateral geniculate body (cgl)
and other peripheral structures of the caudal diencephalon
(figs. 1h and 3g, h). in contrast to the periventricular and pericisternal diencephalic regions, am failed to reach the central

zone of both halves of the diencephalon, i.e. centrum medianum (cm), major part of the ventral (vt), medial (mt) and
reticular (re) nuclear groups, the lateral thalamic (lt) nuclei
and subthalamic region (sr) (figs. 1h and 3d–h).

fig. 1 distribution of ache activity in control animals (a, b) and of am-protected ache activity in treated animals (c–i) at the rostral level (caudate head) (a,
c, f, g) and the mid-thalamic level (b, d, e, h, i). (a, b) control rabbit brains. with the exception of the white matter, the whole transverse section shows high
ache activity. ache activity is higher in the cortical and subcortical limbic regions, caudate nucleus (ca), putamen (pu) and pallidum (pa) than in isocortical
regions. there is a gradual increase of ache activity from the isocortical areas towards the more primitive hemispheric regions. approximate borders between
the allo- and mesocortical regions are shown by red lines, while borders between the meso- and isocortical regions by blue. (c) after 60 min of lv injection,
low dose (0.05 mg) am penetrated 1.0–1.5 mm deep into the periventricular gray matter [lateral septal area (ls), caudate (ca) and accumbent (a) nuclei] and
the ventromedial part of the internal capsule (ci), and through the deep white matter (semioval center, co) entered the deep layers of the dorsolateral isocortex
and the anterior cingulate cortex (aci) (arrows). from the cistern of the lamina terminalis (cl) and the basal cisterns (bc), am entered the basal forebrain
[medial septal area (ms), diagonal band and nucleus (td), olfactory tubercle (tu) and piriform cortex (pi)] nearly the same depth as in the subependymal brain
matter, but cortical regions (meso- and isocortical areas) located dorsally from the rhinal fissure were not penetrated (the figure corresponds to the level seen in
fig. 2a). (d) after lv injection of low dose (0.05 mg) am and 60 min penetration, at the mid-thalamic level am reached the deepest layer of the dorsolateral
isocortex through the deep white matter (semioval center, co) (arrow), but no penetration occurred into the subpial layers of these cortical areas. am spread
much deeper on the side of injection than the contralateral side, except for the structures around the 3rd ventricle. from the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle
(lv) and the basal cisterns (bc), am entered a portion of the amygdaloid body (am), subicular regions (su), hippocampal formation (hi), hypothalamus (hy),
and a thin subpial layer of the perirhinal cortex (prc). around the cistern of the transverse cerebral fissure (cft), am penetrated more than 1.0 mm deep into the
dorsal hippocampal formation and the dorsal diencephalon. the retrosplenial cortex (rs) – bordered by the interhemispheric cistern (cih) – was also penetrated
on both sides. around the splenial sulcus (ss) on the injected side, am-protected ache activity was the result of the leakage of am from the canula into the
cerebral cortex or the splenial sulcus, and from the dorsal sac of the lateral ventricle (asterisk). the same was seen in (h) and (i). the figure corresponds to the
level seen in (b) and fig 2f. (e) at the same level as in (d) after cm injection of low dose (0.05 mg) am and 60 min penetration, the subependymal penetration
was restricted to a narrow stripe (0.2–0.3 mm) around the third ventricle (iii), but the subpial distribution (except for the dorsal hemispheric regions) was nearly
the same as after lv injection (d). (f) after lv injection of high dose (0.5 mg) am and 5 min, am penetration increased significantly in the caudate head
(ca), ventromedial half of the internal capsule (ci) and the structures of the basal forebrain bordering or lying near to the ependymal lining and basal cisterns
[diagonal band and nucleus of broca (td), septal regions (ls, ms), olfactory tubercle (tu), accumbent nucleus (a), nucleus of terminal stria (ns)]. cortical
penetration was restricted to a 0.2–0.3 mm thin subpial stripe of the piriform (pi) and perirhinal (prc) cortices and the small ventral part of the mesocortical
anterior cingulate region (aci) bordered by the interhemispheric cistern (cih). no am-protected ache staining was seen in the cerebral cortex dorsally from
the perirhinal cortex (prc). the level of the figure corresponds to that of figs. 2a and 3a. (g) after lv injection of high dose (0.5 mg) am and 15 min penetration,
the whole hemisphere on both sides was penetrated at the rostral level, except for the putamen (pu) on both sides and the pallidum (pa) and the dorsolateral
isocortex on the contralateral side. the figure corresponds to the level seen in fig. 3a. concerning the am-protected ache activity around the lateral sagittal
fissure on the injected side see (d). (h) after lv injection of high dose (0.5 mg) am and 15 min penetration, nearly the whole ventral half of the cerebral
hemispheres [occupied mostly by limbic structures, dorsal and ventral parts of the caudate nucleus (ca), the claustrum (cs), and the caudal end of the lentiform
nucleus (ln) (visible on the injected side)] were bilaterally penetrated. the right side of the figure corresponds to fig. 3f and the left side to fig. 3g. in the
dorsal half of the brain, the am-protected ache activity was mainly localized around the cistern of the transverse cerebral fissure (cft) (the whole dorsal
segments of the hippocampal formation (hi) and diencephalic regions) and the interhemispheric cistern (cih) (superficial layer of the retrosplenial (rs) cortex).
nearly half of the isocortex on the injected side and almost the whole dorsolateral cortex on the contralateral side remained inaccessible. the distribution of
am-protected ache activity in the deep layers of the lateral and dorsolateral cerebral cortex (arrows) suggests a penetration from the lateral ventricle through
the deep white matter [centrum semiovale (co), corona radiata (cr)]. (concerning the am-protected ache activity around the splenial sulcus (ss) on the
injected side see (d). am entered the diencephalic structures bordering the 3rd ventricle, basal cisterns (bc), cistern of the transverse cerebral fissure (cft) and
the ambient cistern (cb) [the whole hypothalamus (hy), midline (mi) and medial half of medial (mt) thalamic nuclei, habenular region (h), dorsomedial half
of the lateral thalamic nucleus (lt) and through the optic radiation (ro) the lateral geniculate body (cgl)]. on the contrary, am did not penetrate into the deep
central part of the diencephalic halves composed mainly of regions accessible only by local injection of am [lateral part of the medial thalamic nuclei (mt),
centrum medianum (cm), ventral (vt) and reticular (re) thalamic nuclei, the ventral part of the lateral (lt) thalamic nuclei and the subthalamic region (sr)].
compare with (i). (i) distribution of am-protected ache activity at the same level as the right side of (h) after injection of 0.001 mg am into the deep central
zone of the right diencephalon (die: diencephalic injection) and 15 min penetration. compare with (h). the needle track is located in the middle of the right
diencephalic half (asterisk). am entered the centrum medianum (cm), the medial (mt), ventral (vt) and lateral (lt) thalamic nuclei and most of the diencephalic
structures remained inaccessible to the ventricularly injected am in (h). am-protected ache in regions bordered by the cistern of the transverse cerebral fissure
(cft) [dorsal hippocampus (hi), habenular region (h), dorsal part of the thalamus], and the basal cisterns (bc) [hypothalamus (hy), ventral hippocampus (hi),
subicular regions (su)] on the injected side, resulted from the leakage of am from the canula into the csf. concerning the am-protected ache activity around
the splenial sulcus (ss) on the injected side see (d). bars represent 2 mm. list of abbreviations (for figs. 2 and 3 too): a: nucleus accumbens; ac: anterior
commissure; aci: anterior cingulate cortex; ae: entorhinal cortex; ai: insular cortex; am: amygdaloid body; at: anterior thalamic nuclei; ate: temporal cortex;
bc: basal cisterns; ca: caudate nucleus; cb: ambient cistern; cc: callosal body; cft: cistern of the transverse fissure (velum interpositum); cgl: lateral geniculate
body; ch: optic chiasm; ci: internal capsule; cih: interhemispheric cistern (cistern of the callosal body); cl: cistern of the lamina terminalis; cm: centrum
medianum; co: centrum semiovale; cr: corona radiata; cs: claustrum; die: diencephalic injection; f: fornix; fi: fimbria fornicis; fr: rhinal fissure; fs: lateral
sagittal fissure; h: habenular region; hi: hippocampal formation; hy: hypothalamus; if: infundibulum; ln: lentiform nucleus; ls: lateral septal area; lt: lateral
thalamic nuclei; lv: lateral ventricle; m: mammillothalamic tract; ma: mammillary body; mi: midline thalamic nuclei; ms: medial septal area; mt: medial
thalamic nuclei; ns: nucleus of the stria terminalis; ol: olfactory tract; ot: optic tract; pa: pallidum; pc: parietal cortex; pi: piriform area; pec: cerebral peduncle;
po: preoptic area; poc: postcentral cortex; pra: paracentral cortex; prc: perirhinal cortex; pre: precentral cortex; pu: putamen, re: thalamic reticular nucleus,
ro: optic radiation; rs: retrosplenial area; si: substantia innominata; spl: splenium of the corpus callosum; sr: subthalamic region; ss: splenial sulcus; st:
stria terminalis; su: subicular regions; ta: tapetum; td: diagonal band of broca; tu: olfactory tubercle; vc: visual (calcarine and occipital) cortex; vt: ventral
thalamic nuclei; iii: 3rd ventricle.

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

407

fig. 2. schematic distribution of am-protected ache activity after lv injection and 60 min penetration of low dose am (0.05 mg) in rostrocaudal coronal
sections of representative rabbit brain. heavy line: pial surface; broken line: ependymal surface. abbreviations: see fig. 1.

408

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

fig. 3. schematic distribution of am-protected ache activity after lv injection and 15 min penetration of high dose am (0.5 mg) in rostrocaudal coronal
sections of representative rabbit brain. heavy line: pial surface; broken line: ependymal surface. abbreviations: see fig. 1.

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

0.001 mg am injected into the deep central zone of the
right diencephalon after 15 min penetration resulted in the
entrance of am into the central zone of the diencephalon,
which were inaccessible to am in the ventricularly injected
rabbits (fig. 1i compared to figs. 1h and 3f–h).
high dose am (0.5 mg) injected into the cm after 15 min
penetration time resulted in the distribution of the amaccessible regions similar to that of the lv injection of the
same dose, but the depth of the subependymal penetration
was significantly smaller (not shown).
high dose am (0.5 mg) injected into the right lv during 60 min penetration resulted in a similar distribution to
that seen after 15 min penetration time of the same dose in
figs. 1g, h and 3a–h. the entry into the dorsolateral isocortical regions remained absent or very limited and the lentiform
nucleus, central part of the diencephalic halves preserved
their resistance against am-penetration (not shown).

4. discussion
in this study, there was a successive increase of amaccessible hemispheric subpial regions in the three groups of
experimental animals with increasing dose and penetration
time (low dose, then high dose am with short penetration
time, and finally high dose am with long penetration time).
the penetration began from the allo- and periallocortex,
corticoid and non-cortcoid structures bordering the subarachnoid cisterns, followed by mesocortical regions. then it
propagated over the whole mesocortex towards the isocortical
regions, but am penetration into the lateral and dorsolateral
cortical regions (isocortex) remained very limited or absent
even after high dose am and long penetration time as were
the central part of diencephalic halves and the lentiform
nucleus. the main pattern was the same after lv or cm
injection.
we found that the distribution of the am-protected ache
was different from that of the ache in our control rabbits and
from that of the cholinergic neuronal systems or regions with
high ache activity in control animals [29,31,33,34,50] but
similar to that of the inert, high molecular weight 14 c-inulin
without intracerebral binding sites [45].
our study proved that the deep central zone of the diencephalon was inaccessible from the csf for both am (with
intracerebral binding sites) and for 14 c-inulin (without intracerebral binding sites) [45]. the protection of ache against
the irreversible inhibitor in this deep central zone of the
diencephalon after local injection of am (but not after lv
injection) proves that am fails to enter from the csf into
this part of the diencephalon. consequently, it is not the distribution of the binding sites that might play a decisive role in
the intracerebral distribution of am and other tracers administered into the csf.
we have demonstrated a preferential penetration of am
from the csf into the limbic regions and into the subependymal brain matter. compared to other tracers [18,27,45] am

409

penetration was very fast, but the access of am into the
dorsolateral isocortical regions was very limited, and the central part of the diencephalic halves and the lentiform nuclei
remained inaccessible even after a long penetration time and
high dose administration. am-accessibility of the dorsolateral isocortex on the side of the lv injection – as seen with
other tracers [18,45] – can be due to the leakage of the tracer
from the canula straight into the neighboring isocortex or into
the lateral sagittal fissure and splenial sulcus, and then into
the dorsolateral isocortex.
following lv injection of 14 c-sucrose, radioactivity
appeared in cisterns and velae within the first 5–7.5 min
and the amount increased during the next 25 min, while
no radioactivity was detected in the cortical subarachnoid
space in the first 20 min [14]. human studies applying magnetic resonance imaging techniques have shown that pulsatile
movements during the cardiac cycle contribute to csf flow
formation [17]. the directed flow of the substances injected
into the csf is also proved by the fact that the subpial distribution of radioactive inulin [18,45] and am (present study)
is the same after intraventricular or suboccipital injection.
even repeated injection of tracers (red blood cells and ironcontaining pigments) over a period of several months resulted
in a similar intracerebral distribution [24,25].
the limbic ring consists of an outer cortical and an inner
subcortical ring. while the constituents of the subcortical
ring are in the vicinity of the ventricular csf, the cortical
limbic rings composed of allocortical and corticoid areas
and the mesocortical belt [15,30,32,54–56] or paralimbic
areas [30] are surrounded by the interconnected network of
subarachnoid cisterns. the wide mesocortical belt separates
the allocortex from the isocortex located furthest from the
subarachnoid cisterns. our study demonstrates that am
accessibility of various telencephalic subpial structures is
influenced by the distance from the subarachnoid cisterns
and also by their phylogenetic age and not by the presence or
distribution of its intracerebral binding sites. am-accessible
hemispheric subpial regions (after low dose administration
compared to high dose administration and short time penetration compared to long time penetration) have a sequence
of penetration starting from the allo- periallocortical and
corticoid areas, followed by the mesocortical and then, in a
limited extent (if any), to the isocortical areas.
the access and the spreading of am takes place in the
extracellular spaces of the brain, which is the site of nonsynaptic communication [37,53,60]. there are indications
that extracellular spaces of the limbic regions differ structurally, chemically as well as functionally from that of
the cognitive-sensory-motor systems with compact and well
myelinated fiber connections mainly with synaptic nerve endings. the presence of an enormous amount of thin, sparsely
myelinated and unmyelinated axons with varicose endings
communicating with the extracellular space, and participating in the formation of “open-line” conduction channels make
the limbic regions suitable for the non-synaptic, or volume
transmission [7,37,38,46]. these circumstances might favor

410

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

the preferential diffusion of the extracellularly spreading am
between the csf and the limbic structures.
neurofibrillary degeneration—nfts and neurit threads
in ad and in related conditions have a predominantly limbic distribution [1–3,5–7,11,16]. the am accessibility along
the allo-meso-isocortical continuum correlates well with the
hierarchic order of the nfd in ad as expressed in the braaks’
staging ([1,5,6]; for comparison with the schematic figures of
braak’s staging, see figs. 1 and 4 in [6]). like the penetration
of am from the csf into the hemispheric subpial brain matter in rabbits, the invasion of the nfts in ad begins in the
periallo/allocortical areas facing the basal cisterns (braaks’
stages i–ii, i.e. entorhinal stages) [5–7]. further spreading of
the nfd (stages iii–iv, limbic stages) results in their accumulation in the basal and medial temporal, frontal allo- and
mesocortical regions and corticoid structures lying around
the basal, insular and interhemispheric cisterns and cistern of
laminae terminalis. nfd spreads in the dorsolateral direction
and eventually reaches the isocortical regions lying far from
the subarachnoid cisterns only during the late stages of the
disease (stages v–vi, isocortical stages). we assume that in
quantitative and semiquantitative studies on the topography
of the nfts [1,5,43,44,52] the early appearance, sequence
of spreading and density of nfts is related to the distance
from the subarachnoid cisterns. the highest density of nfts
in the orbitofrontal cortex is in the posterior and medial
orbitofrontal mesocortical regions (areas 13, 14 and dysgranular 47) [20,39,52] bordering or being in the vicinity of
the insular, chiasmatic and interhemispheric cisterns and the
cisterna laminae terminalis. moving away from the cisterns
towards the frontopolar regions, the mean number of nfts
dramatically decreases in the granular cytoarchitectoral areas
10, 11 and anterior 47, with the lowest number in the polar
parts [52]. in our opinion, the contour of the supracallosal
cortex where nfd first appears (in the limbic stages of ad)
and reaches the highest density in later stages [5] is similar to
that of the interhemispheric cistern created by the undeveloped anteroventral segment of the falx cerebri and, at the same
time, with that of the periallo- and mesocortical cytoarhitectural areas of the anterior cingulate cortex and cingulofrontal
transition area [54,55]. the more differentiated subregions
located more dorsally and posteriorly outside the interhemispheric cistern (posterior cingulate areas, retrosplenial areas)
[55] are saved from nft invasion until the late stages of ad
[5].
no studies have discussed why the subarachnoid cisterns
and their vicinity are the sites where nfts in ad appear
first and reach the highest density. the csf circulation in the
subarachnoid cisterns and the extracellular pathways in the
juxtaposed limbic regions differ from those in the dorsolateral hemispheric csf spaces and its surrounding isocortex,
respectively. in the subarachnoid space, cisterns are the sites
where lv and cm injected tracers appear first, reach their
highest concentration and retain it for a long time [14], the
sites where extracellular transfer of tracers from the csf into
the juxtaposed limbic structures begins, and spreads most

deeply in experimental animals (am in the present study,
45) through extracellular spaces characteristic of volume
transmission [37,38,46]. the subarachnoid cisterns are the
sites where the immune response (c-fos mrna expression
in neuronal and non-neuronal cells at the csf–brain interface) evolves after systemic administration of interleukin-1␤
[8,19,45] and the sites of initiation and the highest density
of nfts [1,3,5,6,43,44,52], paralleled by the topography of
activated microglia [48,49] in ad brain. in our study, the
sequence of extracellular tracer accessibility along the allomeso-isocortical continuum correlates with the hierarchic
order of nft invasion in ad. recently, argyrophilic inclusions (immunoreactive with antibodies against hyperphosphorilated tau protein and containing densely packed straight
and paired helical filaments) resembling nfts and neuropil
threads were demonstrated in ependymal and choroid plexus
cells in a large number of consecutive autopsy cases with various ad-type changes [35]. the highly significant correlation
between the occurrence of ad-type intracerebral changes in
the cerebral cortex and the nft-like inclusions in the ependymal and plexus cells is suggestive of a pathogenic relationship
[35]. in addition to the theory of axonal spreading of nfd
between neuronal populations [12,13,42] our observations
and the nft-like inclusions in the ependymal and choroidal
cells (bordering the csf–brain and csf-blood interfaces,
respectively) raise the possibility of the role of csf and/or
the extracellular pathways between the brain tissue and csf
in the spreading of nfts. further studies are necessary to provide better insight into the csf–brain transfer (non-synaptic
or volume transmission) to answer the question whether the
csf–brain preferential transfer and/or its pathways into the
limbic regions plays any role in the invasion of nfts in ad.

acknowledgements
we would like to thank professor emeritus peter l. lantos (department of neuropathology, institute of psychiatry,
london, uk) for reading the manuscript and for many helpful
suggestions. the artwork of mr. dániel kovács is gratefully
acknowledged. the work of t.k. is supported by the bolyai
fellowship of the hungarian academy of sciences.

references
[1] arnold se, hyman bt, flory j, damasio ar, van hoesen gw.
the topographical and neuroanatomical distribution of neurofibrillary
tangles and neuritic plaques in the cerebral cortex of patients with
alzheimer’s disease. cereb cortex 1991;1:103–16.
[2] arriagada pv, marzloff k, hyman bt. distribution of alzheimertype pathological changes in nondemented elderly individuals matches the pattern in alzheimer’s disease. neurology
1992;42:1681–8.
[3] bancher c, jellinger ka. neurofibrillary tangle predominant form
of senile dementia of alzheimer type: a rare subtype in very old
subjects. acta neuropathol 1994;88:565–70.

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412
[4] bigotte l, olsson y. cytofluorescence localization of adriamycin
in the nervous system. iii. distribution of the drug in the brain of
normal adult mice after intraventricular and arachnoidal injections.
acta neuropathol 1982;58:193–202.
[5] braak h, braak e. neuropathological staging of alzheimer-related
changes. acta neuropathol 1991;82:239–59.
[6] braak h, braak e. staging of alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes. neurobiol aging 1995;16:271–84.
[7] braak h, braak e. development of alzheimer-related neurofibrillary
changes in the neocortex inversely recapitulates cortical myelogenesis. acta neuropathol 1996;92:197–201.
[8] brady ls, lynn ab, herkenham m, gottesfeld z. systemic
interleukin-1 induced early and late patterns of c-fos nrna expression in brain. j neurosci 1994;14:4951–64.
[9] brightman mw, reese ts. junctions between intimately opposed
cell membranes in the vertebrate brain. j cell biol 1969;4:648–77.
[10] cserr hf, harling-berg jc, knopf pm. drainage of brain extracellular fluid into blood and deep cervical lymph and its immunological
significance. brain pathol 1992;2:269–76.
[11] davis dg, schmitt fa, wekstein dr, markesbery wr. alzheimer
neuropathologic alterations in aged cognitively normal subjects. j
neuropathol exp  xxxd122xxx  1999;58:376–88.
[12] delacourte a, david jp, sergeant n, buée l, wattez a, vermesch
p, et al. the biochemical pathway of neurofibrillary degeneration in
aging and alzheimer’s disease. neurology 1999;52:1158–65.
[13] german dc, white cl, sparkman dr. alzheimer’s disease: neurofibrillary tangles in nuclei that project to the cerebral cortex.
neuroscience 1987;21:305–12.
[14] ghersi-egea j-f, finnegan w, chen j-l, fenstermacher jd. rapid
distribution of intraventricularly administered sucrose into cerebrospinal fluid cisterns via subarachnoid velae in rat. neuroscience
1996;75:1271–88.
[15] gloor p. the temporal lobe and limbic system. oxford: oxford university press; 1997.
[16] green ms, kaye ja, ball mj. the oregon brain aging study.
neuropathology accompanying healthy aging in the oldest old. neurology 2000;54:105–13.
[17] greitz d. cerebrospinal fluid circulation and associated intracranial dynamics. a radiological investigation using mr imaging and
radionucleide cisternography. acta radiol 1993;386(suppl.):1–23.
[18] grossman s, reinhard cs, loats hl. the intracerebral penetration of intraventricularly administered methotrexate: a quantitative
autoradiographic study. j neurooncol 1989;7:319–28.
[19] herkenham m, lee hy, baker ra. temporal and spatial patterns
of c-fos mrna induced by intravenous interleukin-1: a cascade of
non-neuronal cellular activation at the blood-brain barrier. j comp
 xxxd122xxx  1998;400:175–96.
[20] hof pr, mufson ej, morrison jh. human orbitofrontal cortex:
cytoarchitecture and quantitative immunohistochemical parcellation.
j comp  xxxd122xxx  1995;359:48–68.
[21] koelle gb. histochemical demonstration of reversible anticholinesterase action at selective cellular sites in vivo. j pharamcol
exp ther 1957;120:488–503.
[22] koelle gb. cytological distribution and physiological function of
cholinesterases. in: koelle gb, editor. handbuch der experimentellen
pharmakologie. berlin: springer; 1963. p. 189–98.
[23] koelle gb, friedenwald fs. a histochemical method for localizing cholinesterase activity. proc soc exp biol (ny) 1949;70:617–
22.
[24] koeppen ah, borke rc. experimental superficial siderosis of the
central nervous system. i. morphological observations. j neuropathol
exp  xxxd122xxx  1991;50:579–94.
[25] koeppen ah, dickson ac. tin-protoporphyrin prevents experimental superficial siderosis in rabbits. j neuropathol exp  xxxd122xxx 
2002;61:689–701.
[26] lands am, karczmar ag, howard jw, arnold a. an evaluation of
the pharmacological actions of some bis-quaternary salts of basically

[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

411

substituted oxamides (win 8077) and analogs. j pharmacol exp
ther 1955;115:185–98.
lee jc, olszewski j. penetration of radioactive bovine albumin from
cerebrospinal fluid into brain tissue. neurology 1960;14:814–22.
lehrer g. cholinergic mechanisms. part iii/a. ann n y acad sci
1967;144:660–2.
lewis pr, shute ccd. the cholinergic limbic system. projection to
the hippocampal formation, medial cortex, nuclei of the ascending
cholinergic reticular system, and the subfornical organ and supraoptic
crest. brain 1967;90:521–40.
mesulam mm. patterns in behavioural neuroanatomy: association
areas, the limbic system, and hemispheric specialization. in: mesulam mm, editor. principles of behavioral neurology. philadelphia:
davis; 1985. p. 1–70.
mesulam mm, elliott jm, levey ai, wainer bh. cholinergic innervation of cortex by the basal forebrain: cytochemistry and cortical
connections of the septal area, diagonal band nuclei, nucleus basalis
(substantia innominata), and hypothalamus in the rhesus monkey. j
comp  xxxd122xxx  1983;214:70–197.
mesulam mm, mufson e. insula of the old world monkey. i. architectonics in the insulo-orbito-temporal component of the paralimbic
brain. j comp  xxxd122xxx  1982;212:1–22.
mesulam mm, mufsom ej, levey ai, wainer bh. atlas of
cholinergic neurons in the forebrain and upper brainstem of the
macaque based on monoclonal  xxxg440xxx  immunohistochemistry and acetylcholinesterase histochemistry. neuroscience
1984;12:669–86.
mesulam mm, volicer l, markuis jk, mufson ej, green rc.
systemic regional differences in the cholinergic inervation of the
primate cerebral cortex: distribution of enzyme activities and some
behavioural implications. ann  xxxd122xxx  1986;19:144–51.
miklossy j, kraftsik r, pillevuit o, lepori d, genton c, bosman ft.
curly fiber and tangle-like inclusions in the ependyma and choroid
plexus—a pathogenic relationship with the cortical alzheimer-type
changes. j neuropathol exp  xxxd122xxx  1998;57:1202–12.
monier m, gangloff h. atlas for stereotaxic brain research on conscious rabbit. london: elsevier; 1961.
nicholson c. signals that go with the flow. trends neurosci
1999;22:143–5.
nieuwenhuys r. the greater limbic system, the emotional motor
system and the brain. prog brain res 1996;107:551–80.
öngür d, price jl. the organization of networks within the orbital
and medial prefrontal cortex of rats, monkeys and humans. cereb
cortex 2000;10:206–19.
papp mi. fine structural analysis of the localization of acetylcholinesterase accessible to intraventricular  xxxd137xxx  chloride in
rabbit brain. neuroscience 1979;4:825–36.
paxinos g, watson c. the rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. new
york: academic press; 1982.
pearson rca, esiri mm, hiorns rw, wilcock gk, powel tps.
anatomical correlates of the distribution of pathological changes
in the neocortex in  xxxg178xxx . proc natl acad sci usa
1985;82:4531–4.
price jl, davis pb, morris jc, white dl. the distribution of tangles, plaques and related immunohistochemical markers in healthy
aging and alzheimer’s disease. neurobiol aging 1991;12:295–
312.
price jl, morris jc. tangles and plaques in nondemented aging
and “preclinical” alzheimer’s disease. ann  xxxd122xxx  1999;45:358–
68.
proescholdt mg, hutto b, brady ls, herkenham m. studies of
cerebrospinal fluid flow and penetration into brain following lateral
ventricle and cisterna magna injections of the tracer 14 c inulin in
rat. neuroscience 2000;95:577–92.
ricardo ja, koh et. anatomical evidence of direct projections from
the nucleus of solitary tract to the hypothalamus, amygdala, and other
forebrain structures in the rat. brain res 1978;153:1–26.

412

m.i. papp et al. / neurobiology of aging 27 (2006) 402–412

[47] rose je, woolsey cn. structure and relations of limbic cortex
and anterior thalamic nuclei in rabbit and cat. j comp  xxxd122xxx 
1948;89:279–340.
[48] sheffield lg, marquis jg, berman nej. regional distribution of cortical microglia parallels that of neurofbrillary tangles in alzheimer’s
disease. neurosci lett 2000;285:165–8.
[49] sheng jg, mark re, griffin wst. glial-nuronal interactions in
alzheimer’s disease: progressive association of il-1alfa+ microglia
and  xxxg2007xxx + astrocytes with neurofibrillary tangles. j neuropathol
exp  xxxd122xxx  1997;56:285–90.
[50] shute ccd, lewis pr. the ascending cholinergic reticular system: neocortical, olfactory and subcortical projections. brain
1967;90:497–520.
[51] spatz h. die bedeutung der vitalen faerbung für die lehre vom
stoffaustausch zwischen dem centralnervensystem und dem übrigen
körper. arch nervenkrankh 1933;101:267–358.
[52] van hoesen gw, parvizi j, chu chch. orbitofrontal cortex pathology in alzheimer’s disease. cereb cortex 2000;10:243–51.
[53] vizi es. role of high-affinity receptors and membrane transporters
in nonsynaptic communication and drug action in the central nervous
system. pharmacol rev 2000;52:63–89.
[54] vogt ba. structural organization of cingulate cortex: areas, neurons, and somatodendritic transmitter receptors. in: vogt ba, gabriel

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]
[60]

m, editors. neurobiology of cingulate cortex and limbic thalamus: a comprehensive handbook. boston: borhauser; 1993. p.
19–70.
vogt ba, nimchinsky ea, vogt lj, hof pr. human cingulate cortex: surface features, flat maps, and cytoarchitecture. j comp  xxxd122xxx 
1995;359:490–506.
vogt ba, sikes rw, swadlow ha, weyand tg. rabbit cingulate
cortex: cytoarchitecture, physiological border with visual cortex, and
afferent cortical connections of visual, motor, postsubicular, and
intracingulate origin. j comp  xxxd122xxx  1986;248:74–94.
wagner hj, pilgrim ch, brandl j. penetration and removal of
horseradish peroxidase injected into the cerebrospinal fluid: role of
cerebral perivascular spaces, endothelium and microglia. acta neuropathol 1974;27:299–315.
weller ro. pathology of cerebrospinal fluid and interstitial fluid
of the cns: signifance for  xxxg178xxx , prion disorders
and multiple sclerosis. neuropathol exp  xxxd122xxx  1998;57:885–
94.
winkler a, potter a. an anatomical guide to experimental researches
on the rabbit’s brain. amsterdam: w versluys; 1911.
zoli m, janson a, sykova e, agnati lf, fux k. volume transmission
in the cns and its relevance for neuropsychopharmacology. trends
pharmacol sci 1999;20:142–50.

