journal of dermatological treatment. 2005; 16: 75–78

original article

hidradenitis suppurativa treated with finasteride

m. a. joseph, e. jayaseelan, b. ganapathi & john stephen
department of dermatology, st john’s medical college hospital, bangalore, india

abstract
background: hidradenitis suppurativa (hs) is a distressing condition for which no satisfactory treatment is available. studies
on hormonal mechanisms responsible for hs point towards altered end-organ sensitivity, probably related to the enzyme 5a
reductase that converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. finasteride, an inhibitor of type ii 5a reductase, has been
reported to be effective in recalcitrant hs. aim: to study the effectiveness and tolerability of finasteride in patients with hs
in a preliminary trial . methods: seven patients (five women and two men) with hs that was not responding well to
antibiotics were treated with finasteride at a dose of 5 mg/day as monotherapy. clinical response was assessed at regular
intervals. patients were followed up for periods varying from 8 months to 2 years. results: six patients improved significantly
and three of them had complete healing of lesions. two patients who were followed up for more than 1 year experienced
remissions lasting 8–18 months. the drug was generally well tolerated; however, two women complained of breast
enlargement. conclusion: the results of this preliminary study suggest that finasteride is an effective therapeutic option in
hs.

key words: finasteride, hidradenitis suppurativa

introduction
hidradenitis suppurativa (hs) is a chronic suppurative and cicatricial disease of the apocrine glandbearing skin, which causes significant morbidity
and psychological stress. although the early stage
of the disease responds to antibiotics, especially
long-term tetracycline or erythromycin, recurrences
are frequent.  xxxd1786xxx  in combination
with estrogen has been found to be beneficial in
some patients (1). however, it was associated with
side effects such as weight gain, headache and breast
tenderness. successful treatment with  xxxd71xxx  has
been reported (2) but this drug is expensive and
not readily available in india. isotretinoin has been
found to be effective only in mild to moderate disease (3). besides, retinoids continue to be teratogenic for months after discontinuation of the drug.
therefore, these drugs are less suitable for women in
the reproductive age group.
recalcitrant hs may ultimately require surgery.
conservative surgical interventions are of limited
value as recurrences are common. radical surgery is locally curative but is not always cosmetically acceptable. therefore, the possibility of an

effective pharmacological therapy needs to be
explored.
although increases in circulating androgens have
been proposed in patients with hs, when compared
with age-, weight-, and hirsuties-matched controls,
no evidence of biochemical hyperandrogenism
has been noticed (4). therefore, altered end-organ
sensitivity could be considered as an etiological
factor in hs. histopathological studies on patients
with hs suggest that hidradenitis is a disease of the
follicular epithelium rather than a primary apocrinitis (5). hair follicles contain types i and ii of the
enzyme 5a reductase, which converts testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone (dht) (6). normal apocrine
glands also contain 5a reductase (6).
finasteride is a selective inhibitor of type ii 5a
reductase. this drug is being used effectively for
androgenetic alopecia in men, as well as for
hirsutism in women. logically finasteride should
be beneficial in hs also. successful treatment
of recalcitrant hs with finasteride at a dose of
5 mg/day has been reported (7). we used this drug
in a preliminary trial to assess its effectiveness and
tolerability in men and women with moderate to
severe hs.

correspondence: mary augustine joseph, assistant professor, department of dermatology, st john’s medical college hospital, sarjapur road, bangalore –
560 034, karnataka, india. tel: 91 80 22065015; 91 80 25276141. fax: 91 80 2553 0070. e-mail: maryjoseph1@rediffmail.com
(received 18 august 2004; accepted 20 january 2005)
issn 0954-6634 print/issn 1471-1753 online # 2005 taylor & francis group ltd
doi: 10.1080/09546630510031403

76

m. a. joseph et al.

methods
seven patients (five women and two men) with hs
attending the dermatology outpatient clinic were
selected for this trial. all of them had been previously treated with different antibiotics but had
failed to achieve clinical remission. excluded patients were those: (i) who were responding well to
antibiotics; (ii) with clinical or biochemical evidence
of hyperandrogenism; and (iii) women who were
planning to conceive.
the severity of the disease was graded as mild
(one to two active lesions), moderate (three to
four active lesions) and severe (five or more active
lesions). the frequency of recurrence did not
correlate with the extent of involvement as all the
patients experienced exacerbations every 2–4 weeks.

the women included in the trial were informed
about the need to avoid conception until cessation of
the drug, and written consent was taken. pregnancy
was ruled out before and during treatment. liver
function tests were done prior to finasteride therapy
and were normal in all patients.
all previous drugs were stopped for 1 week
followed by finasteride at a dose of 5 mg/day as
monotherapy. two patients (4 and 5) were given
additional antibiotics at the beginning for 1 week to
treat active infection. one of them (patient 4), who
had severe disease with extensive scarring, also
underwent aspiration of pus from an abscess in the
first week. patients were reviewed fortnightly for
8 weeks and monthly thereafter. progress was
assessed based on the number of new inflammatory

table i. results of treatment with finasteride.
patient
no.
1

2

age/sex
36/f (figure 1)

28/f

duration and
extent of hs

response to finasteride (5 mg/day)

7 years

2 weeks:

no new lesions

axillae
moderate disease

8 weeks:
12 weeks:

5 years

6 weeks:

no erythema/pain
lesions healed
(figure 2)
few new lesions, but
no suppuration;
stopped treatment
because of breast
enlargement

side effects
breast enlargement
and tenderness

recurrence after 18
months of remission

breast
enlargement

continued to improve
without any further
medication until active
inflammation subsided

axillae/pubic area

3

4

5

6

7

33/m

16/f (figure 3)

recurred after 8
months

severe disease
1 year

8 weeks:

lesions smaller but
discharge persists;
stopped treatment
because of pruritus

axillae
moderate disease
1 year
axillae/groin

4 weeks:
12 weeks:

referred for surgery

nil

recurrence 4 weeks
later; improved with
finasteride again but
discontinued after 4
weeks

nil

9 months: no
recurrence

generalized pruritus controlled with
without rash
antibiotics and
isotretinoin

severe disease
scars ++
3 years

1 year:

no new lesions
nil
no inflammation
(figure 4); discharge
much less but persists
under scars
no further improvement

4 weeks:

no new lesions

axillae

8 weeks:

no pain/discharge;
stopped treatment

35/f

moderate disease
4 years

4 weeks:

lesions healed

28/f

axillae
moderate disease
3 years

6 weeks:

new lesions +; however, nil
smaller in size with
shorter healing time

12 weeks:

lesions healed

35/m

follow-up

axillae
moderate disease

recurrence 1 month
after stopping
finasteride, but mild
and healed with
finasteride again

hidradenitis suppurativa treated with finasteride

77

or suppurative lesions, a reduction in pain and
erythema of the existing lesions, the amount of
purulent discharge and healing of sinuses. finasteride was continued for 1 month after healing of
lesions in those patients who completed treatment.
patients were followed up for periods varying from 8
months to 2 years after stopping the drug.

results (table i)
six of our patients improved significantly. three of
them had complete healing of hs lesions while signs
of active inflammation and suppuration subsided in
the others. short courses (6–16 weeks) of finasteride
led to prolonged remissions (8–18 months), without
any other form of treatment, in two of them (patients
1 and 2). two patients (5 and 7) had recurrences
1 month after stopping finasteride. however, they
responded well to a reintroduction of the drug. one
patient (patient 4) had extensive ‘bridging’ scars
with pockets of pus under them, which prevented
complete healing despite control of active disease.
therefore, she was referred for surgical excision of
axillary skin and grafting. one patient complained
of moderate generalized pruritus without any rash
in the second month of treatment. this subsided
after stopping the drug. however, he was not willing
for drug challenge to confirm the role of finasteride
as the cause. enlargement of breasts associated with
premenstrual tenderness was seen in two women and
this persisted for almost 1 year in one of them.

figure 2. patient no. 1, 12 weeks later.

this drug proved to be effective in controlling the
activity of hs, in our study. this correlates with the
previous report by farrell et al. (7). most of our
patients were young women, as has been observed
previously (4).
finasteride is extensively metabolized in the liver
and is eliminated in bile (56.8%) as well as urine
(39.1%) (t1/2 – 4.8 hours) (8). no dosage adjustment is needed in renal impairment (8). it has an
excellent safety profile in men (9). the most

discussion
hs appears to be an androgen-dependant disorder,
although there is no biochemical hyperandrogenism
in most patients. therefore, blocking the conversion
of testosterone to the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone could be an effective method of treating
this disease. finasteride, a selective inhibitor of type
ii 5a reductase that converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, was tried in the treatment of hs.

figure 1. patient no. 1, before treatment.

figure 3. patient no. 4, before treatment.

78

m. a. joseph et al.
(14), breast enlargement in women has not been
reported to the best of our knowledge.
the beneficial effects of finasteride as a monotherapy, as observed in this preliminary study, suggest that this drug is effective in hs. finasteride also
appears to be a safe alternative as well as a potential
disease-modifying drug, as concluded from reviewing the literature.
references

figure 4. patient no. 4, 12 weeks later.

common side effects reported in men are decreased
libido and erectile dysfunction which have been
observed to be almost comparable with placebo, not
dose-related and reversible (9). finasteride also
causes decreased ejaculatory volume without affecting sperm concentration and motility (10). no
clinically significant changes in hormone levels or
lipid profile has been observed with this drug in men
or women (8). it does not prevent ovulation or cause
menstrual irregularities (11). finasteride is exceptionally well tolerated by women, unlike the antiandrogens (12). it is contraindicated in women who
are pregnant or likely to become pregnant, due to the
risk of hypospadias in the male fetus (8). however,
because of its rapid and almost complete elimination, finasteride may be safer than retinoids in
women of childbearing age. in general, finasteride
appears to be a suitable option for young women, in
whom hs is more common.
two of our patients who had complete healing of
hs lesions with finasteride had recurrences only
after 8–18 months. in patients with hirsutism, the
effect of finasteride has been found to be sustained
for 1 year after cessation of treatment (13). the
severity of hs in our patients did not correlate with
the duration of disease. finasteride was effective
irrespective of the duration of hs, although the
improvement was seen earlier in those having
limited and less severe disease. for the severely
scarred lesions this drug proved to be an effective
adjuvant to surgical therapy as it controlled inflammation. the women showed a better response
than men but the significance of this difference
cannot be commented upon as the sample size is
small. breast enlargement was observed in two
women. although gynecomastia is known to occur

1. mortimer ps, dawber rpr, gales ma, moore ra. a
double–blind controlled cross-over trial of cyproterone
acetate in females with hidradenitis suppurativa.
br j dermatol. 1986;115:263–8.
2. hogan dj, light mj. successful treatment of hidradenitis
suppurativa with  xxxd71xxx . j am acad dermatol. 1998;19:
355–6.
3. boer j, van gemert mjp. long-term results of isotretinoin in
the treatment of 68 patients with hidradenitis suppurativa.
j am acad dermatol. 1999;40:73–6.
4. barth jh, layton am, cunliffe wj. endocrine factors in preand postmenopausal women with hidradenitis suppurativa.
br j dermatol. 1996;134:1057–9.
5. carmen cw, cook mg. hidradenitis suppurativa: a disease
of follicular epithelium, rather than apocrine glands.
br j dermatol. 1990;122:763–9.
6. eicheler w, dreher m, hoffmann r, happle r, aumuller g.
immunohistochemical evidence for differential distribution of
5a-reductase isoenzymes in human skin. br j dermatol.
1995;133:371–6.
7. farrell am, randall va, vafaee t, dawber rpr. finasteride
as a therapy for hidradenitis suppurativa (letter).
br j dermatol. 1999;141:1138–9.
8. mcclellan kj, markham a. finasteride: a review of its use in
male pattern hair loss. drugs. 1999;57(i):111–26.
9. roberts jl, fiedler v, imperato-mcginley j, whiting d,
olsen e, shupack j, et al. clinical dose ranging studies with
finasteride, a type 2 5a-reductase inhibitor, in men with male
pattern hair loss. j am acad dermatol. 1999;41:555–63.
10. james wo, vivan lf, john g, stuart sh. chronic treatment
with finasteride daily does not affect spermatogenesis or semen production in young men. j urol.
1999;162:1295–300.
11. hershlag a, peterson cm. endocrine disorders. in:
jonathan sb, editor. novak’s gynecology. 13th ed.
philadelphia: lippincott williams & wilkins; 2002. p
871–930.
12. venturoli s, marescalchi o, colombo fm, macrelli s,
ravaioli b, bagnoli a, et al. a prospective randomized trial
comparing low dose  xxxd2143xxx , finasteride, ketoconazole and
 xxxd1786xxx -estrogen regimens in the treatment of
hirsutism. j clin endocrinol metab. 1999;84:1304–10.
13. smith cg, franks s. hirsutism in: john ahw, stephen ms,
editors. oxford textbook of endocrinology and diabetology.
new york: oxford university press; 2002. p 1148–59.
14. lanh g, diane kw, jean lf. gynecomastia and breast
cancer during finasteride therapy (letter). n engl j med.
1996;335:823.

