 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease
(review)
turnbull k, caslake r, macleod a, ives n, stowe r, counsell c

this is a reprint of a cochrane review, prepared and maintained by the cochrane collaboration and published in the cochrane library
2005, issue 3
http://www.thecochranelibrary.com

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

table of contents
header . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
plain language summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
figure 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
authors’ conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
characteristics of studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
data and analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.1. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 1 deaths at end of follow up (fu).
analysis 1.2. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 2 parkinsonian impairment - mean
change in updrs motor score from baseline to 1 year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.3. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 3 parkinsonian impairment updrs motor scores at 1 year fu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.4. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 4 parkinsonian disability - mean
change in updrs adl score from baseline to 1 year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.5. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 5 parkinsonian disability - updrs
adl scores at 1 year fu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.6. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 6 mean change in updrs total
score from baseline to end of washout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.7. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 7 participants requiring levodopa.
analysis 1.8. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 8 development of motor
fluctuations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.9. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 9 development of dyskinesias.
analysis 1.10. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 10 subjects with adverse events.
analysis 1.11. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 11 nausea. . . . . . .
analysis 1.12. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 12 withdrawals due to adverse
events. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
analysis 1.13. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 13 total withdrawals.
. .
additional tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
what’s new . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
contributions of authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
declarations of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
sources of support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
index terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

1
1
2
2
3
3
5
8
11
12
13
13
18
39
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
56
59
59
59
60
60
60

i

[intervention review]

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease
kristian turnbull1 , robert caslake1 , angus macleod2 , natalie ives3 , rebecca stowe3 , carl counsell1
1 division of applied health sciences, university of aberdeen, aberdeen, uk. 2 institute of neurological sciences, southern general
hospital, glasgow, uk. 3 birmingham clinical trials unit, university of birmingham, birmingham, uk

contact address: carl counsell, division of applied health sciences, university of aberdeen, polwarth building, foresterhill, aberdeen,
ab25 2zd, uk. carl.counsell@abdn.ac.uk.
editorial group: cochrane movement disorders group.
publication status and date: new search for studies and content updated (no change to conclusions), published in issue 1, 2012.
review content assessed as up-to-date: 8 november 2011.
citation: turnbull k, caslake r, macleod a, ives n, stowe r, counsell c.  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s
disease. cochrane database of systematic reviews 2005, issue 3. art. no.: cd004898. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd004898.pub2.
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

abstract
background
 xxxg1358xxx  (mao-b) inhibitors slow disease progression in parkinson’s disease (pd) but clinical trials have produced
conflicting results.
objectives
to assess the evidence from randomised controlled trials for the effectiveness and safety of long-term use of mao-b inhibitors in early
pd.
search methods
we searched the following electronic databases: cochrane central register of controlled trials (central) (the cochrane library
issue 11, 2011), medline (last searched 8th november 2011) and embase (last searched 8th november 2011); and handsearched
neurology and movement disorders conference proceedings, checked reference lists of relevant studies and contacted other researchers.
selection criteria
we included all unconfounded randomised controlled trials that compared a mao-b inhibitor with control, in the presence or absence
of levodopa or dopamine agonists, in patients with early pd where treatment and follow up lasted at least one year.
data collection and analysis
two reviewers independently selected trials for inclusion, assessed the methodological quality, and extracted the data. some additional
data were provided by the original authors. random-effects models were used to analyse results, where appropriate.
main results
twelve trials were included (2514 patients, average follow-up six years), 11 using selegiline. the methodological quality was reasonable
although concealment of allocation was definitely adequate in only five trials. mao-b inhibitors were not associated with a significant
increase in deaths (odds ratio (or) 1.12; 95% confidence interval (ci) 0.90 to 1.41). they provided small benefits over control in
impairment (weighted mean difference (wmd) for change in motor updrs score 3.79 points less with mao-b inhibitors; 95% ci
2.27 to 5.30) and disability (wmd for change in updrs adl score 1.49 less; 95% ci 0.49 to 2.49) at one year which may not be
clinically significant. there was a levodopa-sparing effect with mao-b inhibitors, which was associated with a significant reduction
in motor fluctuations (or 0.73; 95% ci 0.58 to 0.91) but not dyskinesia (or 0.96; 95% ci 0.76 to 1.22). the reduction in motor
 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

1

fluctuations was, however, not robust in sensitivity analyses. there was a trend to more withdrawals due to adverse events with  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors (or 1.72; 95% ci 0.98 to 3.01).
authors’ conclusions
mao-b inhibitors (more specifically selegiline which contributes most of the data) do not appear to delay disease progression in terms
of improved survival but may reduce later motor fluctuations. at present, we do not feel these drugs can be recommended for routine
use in the treatment of early parkinson’s disease.

plain language summary
 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease
parkinson’s disease is a disabling condition of the brain characterized by slowness of movement, shaking, stiffness, and in the later stages,
loss of balance. many of these symptoms are due to the loss of certain nerves in the brain, which results in the lack of a chemical called
dopamine. current treatments for parkinson’s are designed to increase dopamine by using levodopa ( xxxd2471xxx  or madopar), which
is converted in the brain into dopamine, or drugs that mimic dopamine (dopamine agonists). although useful, these treatments do
not slow the progression of the disease and can be associated with side-effects e.g. after a while levodopa use can cause involuntary
movements (dyskinesia), painful leg cramps (dystonia) and a shortened response to each dose (motor fluctuations). monoamine oxidase
b (mao-b) inhibitors such as selegiline (eldepryl or selgene) boost the levels of dopamine by a different mechanism, which may
reduce the risk of these complications and slow disease progression. we reviewed 11 controlled trials with a total of 2514 patients
that compared giving mao-b inhibitors with not giving them in people with early parkinson’s to see if it was safe and effective. the
results show that, although mao-b inhibitors do improve symptoms of parkinson’s and delay the need for levodopa by a few months,
they are too weak to have a major effect and do not seem to delay the progression of the condition. they may, however, reduce motor
fluctuations although more information is needed to be certain of this. although they can cause some side-effects, these are generally
mild.

background
parkinson’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by a combination of bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity
and postural instability. in most cases the cause remains unknown
but there are characteristic changes in the brain including loss of
dopaminergic neurons in regions of the brainstem and neuronal
inclusions called lewy bodies. the incidence (twelves 2003) and
prevalence (tanner 1992) of parkinson’s disease increases dramatically with age and so its impact is set to increase as the population
ages.
since its introduction in 1967, the mainstay of treatment for
parkinson’s disease has been levodopa, a dopamine precursor,
which replenishes the depleted dopamine and alleviates many of
the symptoms and signs (watts 1997). however, after several years
of treatment with levodopa many patients develop unpleasant and
potentially disabling motor fluctuations (“wearing-off ” and “onoff ” phenomena) and dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements). these adverse effects occur in approximately 40% of patients after five years of levodopa treatment (ahlskog 2001), and

are more common in patients with early-onset parkinson’s disease
(lang 1998). this, and the fact that levodopa probably does not
alter the underlying disease progression have led researchers to
look for alternative treatments that actually delay the pathogenesis
of the disease and cause fewer long-term side-effects.
 xxxg1358xxx  (mao-b) inhibitors block one of the enzymes that breaks down dopamine in the brain and so enhance its
effects. interest in their use in early parkinson’s disease arose from a
retrospective observational study which showed improved survival
of patients with parkinson’s disease when treated with the  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitor selegiline (birkmayer 1985). around the same time,
a group of californian heroin addicts developed severe parkinsonism, due to a heroin contaminant, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine (mptp), that was metabolised by mao-b to a
substance that was neurotoxic to dopaminergic neurons (langston
1983). mao-b inhibitors were shown to protect against mptp
toxicity in animal models of parkinson’s disease (heikkila 1984). it
has, therefore, been proposed that a similar mechanism of neurotoxicity may exist in parkinson’s disease due to an, as yet, uniden-

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

2

tified environmental toxin against which mao-b inhibitors may
be effective. furthermore, mao-b inhibitors may be neuroprotective in parkinson’s disease by reducing the oxidative stress that
exists in dopaminergic neurons (olanow 1996) and some may
have anti-apoptotic effects that are independent of inhibition of
mao-b (maruyama 2002).
the potential benefit of the early use of mao-b inhibitors was
supported by initial clinical trials that showed a delay in the need
for levodopa in patients started on selegiline (psg 1989). this
was initially interpreted as a delay in disease progression but was
later thought to be simply due to a symptomatic response from the
weak dopaminergic activity of selegiline (calne 1995). the pendulum swung against the early use of mao-b inhibitors following
the publication of another trial that showed worse survival (lees
1995), although this may have been a chance finding (breteler
1998). with such conflicting evidence, a systematic review of all
relevant trials is required to establish the efficacy and safety of
mao-b inhibitors in early parkinson’s disease. this review updates our previous cochrane review (macleod 2005), which was
itself based on a published review of all trials of mao-b inhibitors
in early disease (ives 2004).

objectives
the objective of this review was to review the evidence from randomised controlled trials for the efficacy and safety of long-term
use of mao-b inhibitors in patients with early parkinson’s disease.

methods

criteria for considering studies for this review

types of studies
we sought to identify all truly randomised, properly concealed,
controlled trials comparing mao-b inhibitors with control interventions in early parkinson’s disease. we also included studies
in which the method of randomisation or concealment was unknown. cross-over studies were excluded as they are not designed
to assess long-term effects.

types of participants
we included trials that recruited patients with early parkinson’s
disease, that is trials in which patients were starting parkinsonian
treatment for the first time or had started treatment within the
last 12 months and where the majority of patients were classified
as hoehn-yahr stage ii or less (i.e. no impairment of balance).

trials including a significant proportion of patients with motor
fluctuations (greater than 10%) were excluded. no strict diagnostic
criteria for parkinson’s disease were set but the definition used in
each trial was recorded.

types of interventions
we included long-term unconfounded trials comparing any dose
of mao-b inhibitor (currently selegiline, rasagiline, lazabemide
and  xxxd3158xxx ) with no treatment or placebo. thus, trials comparing mao-b inhibitor and levodopa versus levodopa, or  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitor and a dopamine agonist versus a dopamine agonist,
were included. trials in which additional levodopa or dopamine
agonist could be introduced into both arms according to clinical
need as the disease progressed were also included. trials of  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors in a head-to-head comparison with another drug (for
example, mao-b inhibitor alone versus levodopa alone) were excluded. trials with treatment or follow up of less than one year’s
duration were also excluded because we were interested in the longterm effects of treatment rather than short-term symptomatic effects.

types of outcome measures
1. to evaluate the effectiveness of mao-b inhibitors we
collected data at the final available follow up on the following
outcome measures in each treatment group.
i) number of patients who were either dead or disabled
(that is, needed help with activities of daily living) from any
cause (for example, disease progression, motor fluctuations or
dyskinesias). patients who became disabled and subsequently
died were counted only once in this analysis.
ii) number of deaths.
iii) disease progression in terms of:
a) severity of parkinsonian impairment, disability
and quality of life provided that data were reported for the same
duration of follow up and the same clinical condition (that is, on
or off medication) in the treatment and control groups and data
were available for >75% of those randomised;
b) levodopa requirements including mean levodopa
dose and numbers of patients requiring levodopa;
c) time to introduction of levodopa or dopamine
agonist.
iv) number of patients with motor fluctuations including
wearing off, on/off fluctuations and early morning dystonia.
v) number of patients with dyskinesias.
2. to assess the safety of mao-b inhibitors, we collected data
at final follow up on the following outcome measures in each
treatment group.
i) number of patients with adverse events such as
nausea, postural hypotension and neuropsychiatric effects.
ii) number of withdrawals due to adverse events.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

3

iii) total number of withdrawals.
if sufficient trials recorded outcomes at the same point in time
(for example, at one year) we sought to analyse outcomes at that
time point. the primary outcome measure was the number of
people who were dead or disabled since this assessed the overall
effect of treatment on a clinically important outcome. it would
capture any delay in disease progression or prevention of severe
motor complications with treatment but also take into account
any increase in death rate.

search methods for identification of studies
the following sources and searches were used to identify relevant
randomised controlled trials:
1. the cochrane central register of controlled trials
(central), (the cochrane library issue 11, 2011)[appendix
1]
2. medline through ovid gateway (last searched 8th
november 2011)[appendix 2]
3. embase through ovid gateway (last searched 8th
november 2011)[appendix 3]
4. online searching of conference proceedings through the
conference proceedings citation index ( xxxg584xxx ), (last searched
11th march 2010)[appendix 4]
5. handsearching of the following conference proceedings:
i) first to 13th international congress of parkinson’s
disease and movement disorders (1990 to 2010);
ii) xii international symposium on parkinson’s disease
(1997);
iii) xiii to xviii international congress on parkinson’s
disease and related disorders (1999 to 2009);
iv) xvith to xixth meeting of the world congress of
neurology (1997 to 2009);
v) thirty-seventh to 62nd annual meetings of the
american academy of neurology (1985 to 2010);
vi) one hundred and tenth to 134th meetings of the
american neurological association (1985 to 2009);
vii) sixth to 14th meetings of the european federation of
neurological sciences (2002 to 2010);
viii) tenth to 19th meetings of the european neurological
society (2001 to 2009);
ix) twenty-ninth to 33rd meetings of the scandinavian
congress of neurology (1990 to 2002);
x) first and 2nd world parkinson congress (2006,
2010).
6. checking reference lists: we sought to identify any
additional references to trials in the published reports of relevant
trials.
7. previous reviews were checked to identify any missing trials.
8. personal communication − we contacted other researchers
in the field.

data collection and analysis
for this update, two reviewers (kat, rc) independently assessed
the titles and abstracts identified from the electronic and other
searches and the full text of potentially relevant articles was obtained. the final eligibility of each article, on the basis of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, was checked with a third reviewer
(cc). there were no disagreements over which studies should be
included. articles reporting the same study were grouped together
and the most up-to-date results for each outcome were used for
this review.
the methodological quality of each trial was assessed according
to method of randomisation, the blinding of treatment and outcome assessment, the use of placebo control, the completeness of
follow-up and whether intention-to-treat analysis was carried out
or possible from the published data. the risk of bias table was
prepared by one author (kat) and checked by another (cc). we
also assessed whether the treatment groups were comparable with
regard to demographics, clinical characteristics, the number of patients excluded or lost to follow up within each trial and whether
the definitions of outcomes and inclusion and exclusion criteria
were comparable across the different trials. data on the number of
patients with each outcome event were sought by allocated treatment group, irrespective of compliance and whether or not the
patient was subsequently deemed ineligible or otherwise excluded
from follow up, to allow an intention-to-treat analysis. all data
were extracted by two reviewers and cross checked. we attempted
to contact the authors of the studies for further details if details of
randomisation or concealment were unclear or if any data on the
outcomes were missing.
formal meta-analysis was performed using revman 5 and where
we could not combine outcome data from different studies (for example, because the outcomes recorded were too variable) we gave
a descriptive summary of the results. for the main analyses the
denominator was the number of patients in whom the outcome
was assessed. for each outcome we calculated mean duration of
follow up weighted for trial size by multiplying the mean duration
of follow up for each study by the total trial size then dividing by
the total number of participants included for that outcome. we
calculated odds ratios (and 95% confidence intervals) for the binary outcomes and, if the results were statistically significant and
the duration of follow up was similar between trials, we calculated
the absolute risk reductions or increases for a variety of baseline
absolute risks. some trials had significantly different periods of
follow up in the two treatment arms and, therefore, we adjusted
the results of binary outcomes to take account of this by increasing the number of events in the arm with the shorter follow up
by a proportional amount. however, we have also reported the
unadjusted results. for continuous outcome measures (for example, impairment), we calculated a mean weighted difference where
possible (or a standardized mean difference where different scales
for the same outcome were used). to assess the change in impairment and disability data from baseline to one year, or to the end

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

4

of the washout period, we had to impute the standard deviations
from studies which only reported the standard deviations for the
baseline and final scores. to do this we used the following formula
to estimate the variance of the change in score:
√
vardiff = varpre + varpost - 2r (varpre varpost )
where vardiff is the variance of the change in score; varpre is
the variance of the baseline score; varpost is the variance of the
final score and r is the correlation between the pre- and posttreatment scores. we assumed a correlation co-efficient of 0.5,
which is a conservative estimate, to reduce the chance of false
positive results. continuous data that were obviously skewed were
excluded from meta-analysis because the statistical techniques used
assume a normal distribution.
for each outcome, the primary analysis was reported from a random-effects model. a fixed-effect model was also used but this
did not significantly alter any of the results. heterogeneity was
assessed with both the i2 statistic (higgins 2003) (0% indicates no
heterogeneity and a value greater than 50% indicates substantial
heterogeneity), and the chi squared test. the latter was regarded as
significant if the probability value was less than 0.1 because of the
low power of the test. there were no discrepancies between these
two measures of heterogeneity for any outcomes and so we have
only reported the i2 value in the text. if significant heterogeneity
was found, we attempted to identify possible causes for this by
carrying out planned subgroup analyses based on:
1. trial quality - high quality trials (truly randomised, well
concealed randomisation and double-blind) versus those of lower
quality;
2. the use of levodopa or a dopamine agonist at the beginning
of trial - trials with patients on levodopa or a dopamine agonist
at the start of a trial versus those studies where patients were
started only on an mao-b inhibitor or placebo/no treatment;
3. the different mao-b inhibitors;
4. the duration of follow up - trials with a follow up period
greater than five years versus those with follow up less than five
years;
5. the type of early patients recruited - trials using a more
strict definition of early disease (that is all patients hoehn and
yahr ii or less and previous treatment less than six months)
versus those using less strict criteria.
we assessed the difference between subgroups by calculating a
two-tailed z-score using the following formulae for binary and
continuous data respectively (fleiss 1993):
√
z = (lnor1 - lnor2 ) / (var[lnor1 ] + var[lnor2 ]); z = (smd1
√
- smd2 ) / (var[smd1 ] + var[smd2 ])
where or1/2 and smd1/2 are the combined odds ratios or
standardised mean differences from each subgroup and var is
the variance of each which was calculated from the 95% confidence intervals by the formula var[lnor] = {(ln[upper 95%ci] ln[lower95%ci])/(2*1.96)}2 .
for this update we had planned to perform a meta-analysis of
hazard ratios for survival from each trial but unfortunately there

were insufficient data in the published reports to do this.
the effect of publication bias was analysed with a funnel plot
(egger 1997) and by calculating the size of an imaginary null trial
(or = 1) that would be required to turn any statistically significant result into a non-significant result, assuming an event rate
equal to the average event rate in the control groups. finally, for
statistically significant results from dichotomous data we assessed
the effect of missing outcomes from patients excluded or lost after
randomisation by performing a modified worst-case or best-case
sensitivity analysis. for a true worst-case analyses (that is most
weighted against treatment) it is usually assumed that all excluded
patients in the treatment group had an adverse outcome and all
those in the control group had a positive outcome, and vice-versa
for a best-case analysis. however, it is often unrealistic to expect
this to be the case; so, for a more realistic assessment we performed
a modified worst-case or best-case analysis. for the former we assumed the lost patients in the treatment group had the highest
rate of poor outcome found in any trial whilst those in the control
group had the lowest rate in any individual trial, and vice versa for
the modified best-case analysis.

results

description of studies
see: characteristics of included studies; characteristics of excluded
studies.
twelve randomised trials, with a total of 2514 patients, met the
inclusion criteria and were included in the review. summary details of these trials are given in the characteristics of included
studies table. sixteen studies were excluded (see characteristics of
excluded studies table) for the following reasons (nb some trials
had more than one reason): period of treatment and follow up less
than one year (13 trials); confounding by another treatment, for
example comparing mao-b inhibitor alone versus levodopa or
bromocriptine alone (two trials); too many exclusions post-randomisation (one trial); and no useful outcome data (two trials).
no relevant ongoing trials have been identified to date.
all of the included trials recruited only patients with a clinical
diagnosis of idiopathic parkinson’s disease, although the precise
diagnostic criteria were not usually given. eight studies excluded
patients with dementia; and all except two (uk-pdrg (rr)
1998; uk-pdrg 2001) excluded severe or unstable concomitant diseases. four studies (california 1989; datatop 1993;
norway-denmark 1999; parjupar 1996) excluded both very
young and elderly patients, two excluded only elderly patients
(seledo 1999; swedish psg 1998), and one (uk 1996) included only patients aged 65 or over. mean age, adjusted for study
size, was 62.7 years. all studies except one (finland 1997) enrolled
more males than females, five studies with a 2:1 ratio or greater.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

5

the mean stage of disease, on the hoehn and yahr scale was about
two.
some participants had previously been treated with levodopa although not for more than one year. in four studies the percentage of patients that had previously been treated varied between
15% and 34% (california 1989; norway-denmark 1999; psg
1996; seledo 1999). four other studies (datatop 1993;
uk-pdrg 2001; uk-pdrg (rr) 1998; us 1995) included
only patients who were not on treatment for parkinson’s disease at
the time of randomisation of whom a small unspecified proportion
of participants had previously been treated with levodopa. four
studies (finland 1997; parjupar 1996; swedish psg 1998; uk
1996) included only patients who had never been treated with
levodopa or any other dopaminergic medication. only three studies met the criteria for a strict definition of early disease (that is
restricted to patients in hoehn and yahr grades i or ii with prior
treatment of less than six months (datatop 1993; parjupar
1996; psg 1996).
in eleven studies the mao-b inhibitor used was selegiline and
in one study lazabemide was used (psg 1996). no studies of
rasagiline or  xxxd3158xxx  met the inclusion criteria. all the selegiline
studies used either 10 mg daily or 5 mg twice daily. the psg
study used lazabemide at four different doses twice daily (12.5 mg,
25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg) and for the purposes of this review the
results from these dosage groups were combined because no doseresponse relationship was found.
in six trials the treated patients received selegiline (california 1989;
datatop 1993; finland 1997; swedish psg 1998; uk 1996)
or lazabemide (psg 1996) alone from the outset. in the californian and uk trials patients received selegiline or placebo until
levodopa was clinically indicated, at which point the participants
were withdrawn from further evaluation. the finnish and swedish
studies consisted of two phases: the first, until the patients required
levodopa, was treatment with just selegiline or placebo; the second phase involved the addition of levodopa to both groups. the
datatop study was a 2 by 2 factorial design with selegiline and
tocopherol ( xxxd3521xxx ). in this review we have recorded outcomes
for selegiline and placebo regardless of the use of tocopherol which
was found to be ineffective. levodopa was added to the treatment
regimen, as required, following washout. after an interim analysis at two years, the protocol was modified and all participants
received selegiline. subsequently the design was modified again
and the participants were re-randomised to remain on selegiline or
to have it withdrawn. because of these changes, and the multiple
publications, analysis of datatop by initial randomisation was
problematic although we have tried to record outcomes by the
original randomisation.
four trials used levodopa and selegiline treatment from the outset of the trials (norway-denmark 1999; uk-pdrg (rr) 1998;
uk-pdrg 2001; seledo 1999). patients in the norwegiandanish trial and the seledo study received either selegiline
or placebo in addition to levodopa until the endpoint or up

to five years. in the norwegian-danish study the endpoint was
the need for additional medication whilst in seledo it was a
50% increase in the levodopa dose. the uk-pdrg study was
an open trial with three arms: levodopa alone, selegiline and levodopa, and bromocriptine alone. in this review we have excluded
the bromocriptine patients except for a small number who were
quickly re-randomised into the first two arms because they were
unable to tolerate bromocriptine (uk-pdrg (rr) 1998). the
numbers of deaths in these patients were reported separately and
have been included as a separate trial. ten years after the ukpdrg trial began (mean follow up of 6.8 years) the selegiline
arm was discontinued due to concerns about increased mortality. follow up continued for another mean 2.4 years. one trial
(parjupar 1996) compared the combination of selegiline and
bromocriptine with bromocriptine alone with time to levodopa
the primary endpoint at which point follow up stopped.
the final study (us 1995) used a 2 by 2 factorial design to compare selegiline with placebo in the presence of either levodopa or
bromocriptine. for the main analyses we have considered the results from the levodopa arms and the bromocriptine arms separately.
six studies included a washout period after the endpoint to try to
assess the effect of mao-b inhibitors on actual disease progression
by attempting to eliminate the confounding of any symptomatic
effect. the washout period varied from two weeks (psg 1996) to
two months (swedish psg 1998; us 1995).
five studies had follow up lasting between one and three years
(california 1989; parjupar 1996; psg 1996; uk 1996; us
1995); two a maximum follow up duration of five years - norwaydenmark 1999 (mean follow up 2.9 years in selegiline arm, 3.1
years in placebo arm) and seledo 1999 (mean follow up 3.9
years in selegiline arm, 3.6 years in placebo arm); two had follow
up of six to seven years (finland 1997; swedish psg 1998), whilst
the datatop and uk-pdrg studies both had longer duration
of follow up for mortality - mean 8.2 years (datatop 1993)
and median 11.4 years (uk-pdrg 2001).

risk of bias in included studies
randomization
methods of randomisation were poorly described in most of the
studies. three studies did not provide any details of generation
of randomisation sequence or of concealment of allocation (psg
1996; seledo 1999; uk 1996) despite requesting this information from the authors. the californian study (california 1989)
used a “biased coin” and another study used a computer to generate the randomisation sequence (us 1995), but each gave no
details about concealment. five studies gave sufficient information for us to classify the concealment as adequate (datatop
1993; norway-denmark 1999; parjupar 1996; uk-pdrg
(rr) 1998; uk-pdrg 2001).
baseline differences between treatment groups

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

6

all the studies had similar severity scores in the intervention and
control groups at baseline.
blinding
blinding of patients, doctors and outcome assessors took place
in ten of the trials. the only unblinded trial was the uk study
(uk-pdrg (rr) 1998; uk-pdrg 2001). this leaves open the
possibility of intervention bias (systematic differences in the care
between groups) or measurement bias (systematic differences in
the measurement of outcomes). although the latter should have
had no effect on the number of deaths, we cannot discount the
possibility that bias was introduced in subjective measures such as
disease impairment or disability scales, or in decisions to introduce
levodopa.
exclusions and losses to follow up
many trials did not clearly report withdrawals so it was difficult to
calculate the total numbers of exclusions following randomisation
and losses to follow up, which also varied depending on the time
point at which the outcome was measured. as a maximum estimate
of the participants not included in the analyses, the total number
of withdrawals in all studies was 422 out of 2514 (16.8%), 229 of
1363 (16.8%) in the intervention group and 193 of 1151 (16.8%)
in the control group. however, losses to mortality follow up were
fewer because some of the withdrawn participants were included
in the analysis of deaths although the precise numbers were not
always reported.
intention-to-treat analysis
most studies did not include withdrawn patients in the analyses. only two trials (uk-pdrg (rr) 1998; uk-pdrg 2001)
reported results based on a true intention-to-treat analysis;
datatop 1993 reported mortality data and psg 1996 reported
results on numbers requiring levodopa on an intention-to-treat
basis.

effects of interventions
the 12 included trials varied substantially in measuring particular outcomes so we have more complete data for some outcome
measures than for others (table 1). all dichotomous outcomes are
adverse events so an odds ratio less than one favours treatment
with mao-b inhibitors. for the continuous outcomes a weighted
mean difference less than zero favours mao-b inhibitors.
dead or disabled at end of follow-up
no trial reported data on the primary outcome.
deaths at end of follow up (analysis 1.1)
all the studies reported data on deaths at the end of follow up. data
were available for 2430 patients (97% of all those randomised).
duration of follow up varied considerably between the trials from
one year to 11.4 years with a mean weighted follow up of 6.0
years. two studies had data available after the end of official follow
up: one study (finland 1997) reported deaths after the trial ended
in the final study publication (myllylä 1997) and further data
were available from one study (us 1995) in an individual patient
data meta-analysis (olanow 1998a). one study had a significant
difference in the duration of follow up in the two treatment arms,
which was adjusted for in the main analysis (uk-pdrg (rr)
1998).
overall there was a non-significant increase in deaths amongst patients treated with mao-b inhibitors compared with those given
control (odds ratio (or) 1.12; 95% confidence interval (ci) 0.90
to 1.41, p value 0.31) with no significant heterogeneity (i2 value
0%). the odds ratio remained non-significant when the unadjusted data from the uk-pdrg (rr) 1998 study were used (or
1.07; 95% ci 0.86 to 1.35).
a funnel plot (figure 1) did not show convincing evidence of
publication bias and analysis of only those trials with more than
150 patients (that is removing the potentially biased smaller trials)
did not alter the results (or 1.13; 95% ci 0.88 to 1.44).

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

7

figure 1. funnel plot of deaths at end of follow up

the following pre-specified subgroup analyses showed no significant differences (nb p value is the value from the test for heterogeneity between the subgroups):
1. high quality (well concealed randomisation, double-blind
trials) versus lower quality trials: or 1.06 versus or 1.17
respectively, p value 0.68.
2. trials which used levodopa or a dopamine agonist from the
beginning of the trial versus those that used mao-b inhibitors
alone: or 1.25 versus 1.00, p value 0.34.
3. trials of selegiline versus lazabemide: or 1.14 versus 0.47,
p value 0.32.
4. trials with follow up greater than five years versus those
with shorter follow up: or 1.20 versus 0.60, p value 0.08.
5. trials with a strict definition of early disease versus those
with a less strict definition: or 1.02 versus 1.20, p value 0.49.
severity of parkinsonism
all the studies reported data on disease progression in some form
but this lacked consistency. for example, a variety of different
scales were used. parkinsonian impairment was most commonly
reported using the unified parkinson’s disease rating scale (updrs) motor score; other impairment scales used included the
webster rating scale and the columbia university rating scale.
parkinsonian disability was mainly reported using the updrs activities of daily living (adl) score, but the schwab and england,

and the northwestern university disability scales were also used.
we have used the updrs motor and updrs adl scales in our
analysis because these had the most data. some trials reported
mean final scores while others reported the mean change in scores
from baseline. all trials measured patients while on treatment, and
some studies also measured patients after a washout period. in addition, trials measured severity after different follow up durations.
assessment of impairment and disability data at follow up greater
than one year was hampered by large numbers of withdrawals or
losses to follow up. no study measured quality of life.
one study (psg 1996) used different doses of lazabemide. there
was no dose-response relationship and so we used the arithmetic
mean of the impairment and disability scores and their standard
deviations across the four treatment doses.
mean change in updrs motor score from baseline to one year
on treatment (analysis 1.2)
for parkinsonian impairment we analysed change in updrs motor scores from baseline to one year. data from five studies (1305
patients, 52% of all patients and 91% of patients randomised in
those five trials) were available for this analysis. one other study
also reported updrs motor scores (swedish psg 1998) but losses
and withdrawals at one year (61%) were too high to allow inclusion in the meta-analysis. inclusion of this trial, however, did not

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

8

alter the results.
all the studies reporting this outcome favoured treatment with
mao-b inhibitors. the weighted mean difference (wmd) was 3.79 (95% ci -5.30 to -2.27) i.e. the mean decline in the motor
impairment score at one year was nearly four points (out of a total
scale of 108 points) less in participants treated with mao-b inhibitors than in those treated with control. although this result is
highly statistically significant (p value < 0.00001) its clinical significance is unclear and the results should be treated with caution
because we cannot be certain these data were normally distributed.
there was significant heterogeneity (i2 54%) amongst the studies in this analysis. however, this heterogeneity was entirely attributable to the psg 1996 study, which used lazabemide. when
this study was excluded from the analysis, the i2 value was 0%.
the results suggest that lazabemide (wmd -1.35; 95% ci -3.09
to 0.39) has a significantly weaker effect than selegiline (wmd 4.49; 95% ci -5.52 to -3.46, p value 0.002).
updrs motor scores at one year follow up (analysis 1.3)
in addition to analysing the change in impairment scores over one
year, we also looked at the actual scores at one year follow up.
only two studies reported data that we could use in this analysis
(217 patients, 9% of all patients). both studies favoured treatment
with mao-b inhibitors, the difference varied between -1.30 and
-3.00. we did not carry out meta-analysis, however, because the
data were skewed. three other trials recorded motor impairment
with scales other than the updrs (finland 1997; uk-pdrg
2001; seledo 1999) and all showed small benefits in favour of
mao-b inhibitors.
mean change in updrs adl score form baseline to one year
(analysis 1.4)
six studies reported updrs adl scores but once again we omitted data from one study because of large losses to follow up
(swedish psg 1998). data from 1306 participants were available
(52% of all patients, 91% of those randomised in the five studies).
all the studies favoured treatment with mao-b inhibitors. the
wmd was -1.49 (95% ci -2.49 to -0.49, p value 0.004), that is
the scores were about one and a half points better (out of a total
score of 52 points) after one year in patients treated with  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors. again, we cannot discount the possibility that some
of the disability data were skewed.
as with the impairment scores, there was an apparent difference
in effect between the studies using selegiline (wmd -2.19; 95%
ci -2.78 to -1.60) and the study that used lazabemide (wmd 0.47; 95% ci -1.31 to 0.37). this accounted for the substantial
heterogeneity (i2 58%) in this analysis. subgroup analysis showed
a significant difference between the two types of mao-b inhibitor
used (p value 0.0006).
updrs adl scores at one year follow up (analysis 1.5)
only two studies reported this outcome (217 patients, 9% of all
patients). meta-analysis could not be performed because some
data were skewed but there was no good evidence of significant
improvements with mao-b inhibitors.

mean change in updrs total score from baseline to end of
washout (analysis 1.6)
six studies incorporated a washout period into the study design to
minimise the effects of drug therapy on symptoms compared with
any effects on disease progression. two studies (datatop 1993;
norway-denmark 1999) reported data on insufficient numbers
of patients to allow inclusion in this analysis and one did not
report the total updrs score (california 1989). data from the
other three studies (psg 1996; swedish psg 1998; us 1995)
were combined in meta-analysis with a total of 429 patients (17%
of all patients, 74% of those included in the three studies). the
mean duration of follow up for this analysis was 1.1 years. the
length of the washout was between two weeks and two months.
meta-analysis yielded a weighted mean difference of -3.15 (95%
ci -5.48 to -0.82, p value 0.008), that is the increase in severity
score from baseline to the end of washout was about three points
less in the treatment group. heterogeneity was low (i2 20%) and
there was no obvious trend between the duration of the washout
and result.
levodopa requirements
participants requiring levodopa (analysis 1.7)
all seven studies in which mao-b inhibitors were initially compared with control in the absence of levodopa reported the number
of participants who subsequently required levodopa. four studies
(datatop 1993; parjupar 1996; psg 1996; uk 1996) assessed this outcome at a comparable follow up period of about one
year (1138 patients, 75% of patients in studies without levodopa
from the beginning, 92% of those randomised in the four studies).
the combined or was 0.48 (95% ci 0.37 to 0.62), significantly
in favour of mao-b inhibitors (p value < 0.00001) and with no
significant heterogeneity (i2 0%). the absolute rate of requiring
levodopa at one year in the control groups of the four trials varied
from about 15% (uk 1996) to 60% (datatop 1993), whereas
baseline severity in terms of the updrs were similar. this implies
either different rates of progression in the four trials or, perhaps
more likely, different thresholds for starting levodopa. the number needed to treat with mao-b inhibitors to avoid one person
requiring levodopa at one year, therefore, varied between 14 (95%
ci 11 to 21) at a control event rate of 15% to 6 (95% ci 4 to 9)
at a control rate of 60%.
at the end of three years follow up, the reduction in the odds
of needing levodopa was maintained in one study, which gave
bromocriptine to both groups (parjupar 1996), but another
study that did not use a dopamine agonist (california 1989) reported that only one patient (in the selegiline arm) still did not
require levodopa. in the other two studies without dopamine agonist use all the patients were receiving levodopa at the end of about
four years of follow up (finland 1997; swedish psg 1998).
time until levodopa was required (table 2)
six studies reported this outcome (1480 patients, 98% of patients
in trials without levodopa from the outset). because the data from
these studies were skewed it was not possible to use formal meta-

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

9

analysis. however, the data from all these studies showed a delay
in the median time to introduce levodopa with mao-b inhibitors
of between 4.1 and 8.7 months.
mean levodopa dose (table 3)
data from six trials were available for this outcome. we could
not calculate the total number of patients included in this analysis
because one study (uk-pdrg 2001) did not report this figure. a
meta-analysis was not done because the data were skewed and there
was substantial heterogeneity. the latter was partly attributable to
varying durations of follow up, ranging from one to four years. all
these studies showed higher levodopa doses in the control groups
than in patients treated with mao-b inhibitors. the difference
varied between 30 and 185 mg/day of levodopa and generally
increased as the duration of follow up increased up to five years
(finland 1997; norway-denmark 1999; seledo 1999; ukpdrg 2001).
development of motor complications
motor fluctuations (analysis 1.8)
data from six trials (1461 patients, 58% of all patients, 81% of
those randomised in the six trials) were available with a mean
weighted duration of follow up of 3.4 years. there were three
issues that created difficulty in analysing these data. firstly, raw
data from the uk-pdrg 2001 study did not show any difference
in the number of patients developing motor fluctuations between
the selegiline and non-selegiline arms at the end of follow up (161
of 268 (60%) versus 146 of 240 (61%) respectively). however, the
rate of developing motor fluctuations was lower in the selegiline
arm (157.5 per 1,000 patient-years versus 179.7 per 1,000 patientyears), implying that the selegiline patients had longer follow up
(mean 3.8 years versus 3.4 years). in the main analysis we adjusted
for this difference although we also performed an analysis with
the raw data. secondly, owing to the changes in the study design
over time, data on fluctuations from the datatop study did not
include a substantial number of patients (36%); we felt justified in
including datatop in the main analysis because the losses were
similar in both arms of the study. however, we also performed an
analysis excluding datatop. thirdly, the definitions of motor
fluctuations varied: two trials included “end of dose deterioration”
(finland 1997; norway-denmark 1999), one included patients
taking more than four doses of levodopa per day (swedish psg
1998), one “severe end of dose deterioration and random on/off
fluctuations” (seledo 1999), one “on/off fluctuations” (ukpdrg 2001), and one “wearing off ” (datatop 1993).
the overall effect was significantly in favour of mao-b inhibitors
(or 0.73; 95% ci 0.58 to 0.91, p value 0.006) with no evidence
of heterogeneity (i2 0%). however, this result was dependent on
the adjusted results of the uk-pdrg study and if the unadjusted
figures were used the overall result became non-significant (or
0.83; 95% ci 0.0.66 to 1.03). excluding the datatop study,
increased the observed benefit with selegiline (or 0.63; 95% ci
0.47 to 0.83).
the rate of developing fluctuations varied in the control groups

from 16% to 68%. this variation may have been due to differences
in definitions since the mean duration of follow up was very similar.
the number needed to treat with selegiline to prevent one person
developing motor fluctuations over about 3.4 years varied from 13
(95% ci 8 to 43) to 25 (95% ci 17 to 73) across these baseline
risks.
results were not reported for 351 patients in these six studies. a
modified worst-case analysis, in which excluded subjects in the
treatment group were given the highest event rate in any individual study (164/240, 68%) whilst excluded patients in the control
group were given the lowest (7/61, 11%), made the results nonsignificant (or 0.97; 95% ci 0.55 to 1.72). a null study of over
1500 patients with an event rate of 45% would be required to
make the motor fluctuations data non-significant. as there was no
heterogeneity, no subgroup analyses were performed.
dyskinesias (analysis 1.9)
data on the incidence of dyskinesias were reported in only five
trials (1362 participants, 54% of all randomised patients, 80% of
those randomised in the five trials). the mean weighted duration
of follow up of 3.5 years. adjustments were again made to the
data from the uk-pdrg study to account for the slightly shorter
follow up in the control group. the result showed no difference
between intervention and control (or 0.96; 95% ci 0.76 to
1.22). as with the motor fluctuations data, re-analysis using the
raw data from the uk-pdrg study did not alter the results (or
0.98), nor did exclusion of the datatop trial, which again had
missing data for this outcome (or 0.94).
patients with adverse events (analysis 1.10)
six trials (847 patients, 34% of all patients, 96% of those randomised in the six trials) reported the numbers of patients with any
significant adverse events. the precise definitions probably varied
between trials. overall, there were more adverse events with  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors (65% vs 58%, or 1.45; 95% ci 1.04 to 2.02), which
just reached statistical significance (p value 0.03). the reporting
of individual side-effects (for example nausea, confusion, hallucinations, postural hypotension) varied significantly between trials,
with many trials not reporting any information on specific side-effects and others only reporting those that were significantly different between treatment groups. this introduced a reporting bias.
eight studies (1436 patients, 57% of all patients, 98% of those
randomised in the eight trials) reported data on nausea (analysis
1.11). significantly more patients in the mao-b inhibitor group
reported nausea (or 1.76; 95% ci 1.10 to 2.82) and another
study reported significantly higher withdrawals due to upper gastrointestinal side-effects (uk-pdrg 2001).
concerns have been raised about potentially harmful cardiovascular side-effects of mao-b inhibitors including postural hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias. however, the studies in this review
that reported data on blood pressure (datatop 1993; finland
1997; swedish psg 1998; uk 1996) did not find lower mean
blood pressures in patients in the mao-b arms. datatop 1993
reported significantly more arrhythmias with selegiline than with

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

10

control (eight versus one); one other study reported more ecg
abnormalities with selegiline (norway-denmark 1999); and one
other study reported no difference in development of ecg abnormalities between lazabemide and control (psg 1996). the arrhythmias that were reported were not considered life threatening.
two studies reported significantly higher numbers of patients in
the mao-b inhibitor groups with elevated serum aminotransferases (datatop 1993; psg 1996). however, these enzyme
abnormalities were not thought to pose serious health risks. there
was insufficient information to evaluate neuropsychiatric side-effects.
withdrawals
eight trials (1479 patients, 59% of all randomised patients, 100%
of those randomised in the eight trials) reported the numbers of
withdrawals due to adverse events at the end of follow up (analysis
1.12). there was a non-significant trend for more withdrawals
with mao-b inhibitors (13% vs 9%, or 1.72; 95% ci 0.98 to
3.01, p value 0.06) with significant heterogeneity (i2 51%).
all 11 trials reported data on total numbers of withdrawals by
end of follow up (analysis 1.13). data were reported from 2410
participants, all patients except the re-randomised patients from
the uk-pdrg study. we have included losses to follow up in
the total number of withdrawals (losses to follow up were not
consistently reported) but have not included deaths. there was no
significant difference in the numbers of withdrawals between the
mao-b inhibitor and control arms (or 0.95; 95% ci 0.78 to
1.17).

discussion
since most data in this review were from studies using selegiline
our conclusions predominately relate to selegiline. given that one
of the aims of treatment of parkinson’s disease should be to reduce
disability and mortality in the long term, it was disappointing that
none of the trials assessed our primary outcome, which was chosen
to capture both of these factors. we feel that future studies should
incorporate this clinically important outcome into the study design, particularly for trials of possible neuroprotective agents that
would be expected to delay disability.
death
there has been much debate about whether selegiline increases
the risk of death after the finding that it was associated with excess
mortality in the uk-pdrg trial. this review and a similar review
(ives 2004) of all the available randomised evidence showed no significant increase in death with mao-b inhibitors in general or selegiline specifically. only the uk-pdrg trial showed an excess of
deaths with selegiline, which we feel was probably a chance finding
exacerbated by early stopping of the trial. however, publication
of this trial resulted in a dramatic reduction in the prescription of
selegiline (in the uk at least) (clarke 2001), which highlights the

dangers of changing practice on the basis of a single trial’s results.
whilst the confidence interval does not exclude a small increase in
death rates with mao-b inhibitors it does exclude any significant
reduction in mortality as was suggested by the observational data
from the 1980s (birkmayer 1985).
disease progression, impairment and disability
many claims and counter claims have been made with regard to
the effect of mao-b inhibitors on the progression of parkinson’s
disease. some researchers have argued that mao-b inhibitors confer a neuroprotective effect and delay disease progression, whilst
others have considered any beneficial effects of mao-b inhibitors
to be merely symptomatic improvements due to their dopaminergic effects. it is difficult clinically to separate out a symptomatic
effect from an effect on disease progression. it might be expected
that slowed disease progression would be reflected in improved
survival, which we have not shown to be the case. an alternative
way is to assess outcome following the withdrawal of medication
to try to remove any symptomatic effect. however, this requires
precise information about the duration of a symptomatic effect,
which is often lacking. moreover, it becomes difficult to withdraw
treatment for long periods of time in patients with parkinson’s
disease who require treatment to control their symptoms. another
strategy to differentiate a symptomatic from a disease-modifying
effect would be to establish whether differences in impairment and
disability on treatment or control medication diverge over time,
as would be expected with a disease modifying effect, or whether
they remain static, suggesting a symptomatic effect. divergence
was demonstrated in the seven year data from the swedish trial
but unfortunately this analysis is impossible to interpret due to
large losses to follow-up over time (pålhagen 2006). recent studies
of rasagiline using a delayed-start design, which aims to separate
symptomatic and neuroprotective effects have shown conflicting
evidence (tempo 2002; adagio 2009). the validity of this
study design in detecting neuroprotection is also debatable because it assumes that the symptomatic effect is constant over time,
which may not be true.
this review showed that mao-b inhibitors did reduce impairment and disability in parkinson’s patients in the short term (one
year) but the validity and clinical significance of these benefits is
less clear because the changes were small, the data were limited
both in terms of quantity (analyses only included about 50% of all
randomised patients) and quality, and the washout periods were
short. analysis was hindered by the use of several different measures of impairment and disability and by trials reporting the data
in various ways (for example absolute scores or change in scores
from baseline), in various states (that is on or off medication) and
at various time points. few trials were analysed on an intentionto-treat basis so patients who dropped out were not included in
these analyses. finally, it was often unclear whether the data were
normally distributed, which can invalidate the statistical methods
used for meta-analysis.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

11

whilst the analysis of those studies that included a washout phase
to minimise any symptomatic effects did show a significant benefit in favour of mao-b inhibitors, we would caution against interpreting this as demonstrating a significant slowing of disease
progression for several reasons. firstly, the absolute difference was
small (about three points out of a total updrs score of 176,
which combines motor, adl and mentation components). secondly, it was based on limited data (only 582 patients). and thirdly,
it remains unclear whether the washout periods (a mean of 1.3
months) were long enough to ensure complete elimination of the
study drug. some researchers have suggested that a washout of
two months may be insufficient, citing a half-life of 40 days for
selegiline (fowler 1996). if this is correct some if not all of the
residual effect of mao-b inhibitors observed after washout could
have been an ongoing symptomatic effect. taken overall, the results from the mortality, impairment and disability outcomes do
not provide any strong evidence for a delay in disease progression
with mao-b inhibitors.
levodopa requirements
the reduction in the need for additional levodopa at one year is
consistent with a symptomatic effect of mao-b inhibitors. however, as expected given the weak nature of this symptomatic effect,
as the disease progressed over three to four years almost all patients
eventually required levodopa. the exact duration of this levodopa
sparing effect in any given patient may vary depending on several
factors including how early in the disease mao-b inhibitors are
started. if treatment is started early when the symptoms are very
mild levodopa may not be required for many months whilst if
started later, when symptoms are more severe, levodopa may be
required much sooner. what is more interesting is that once patients started levodopa the dose required in those taking  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors remained significantly lower than for those who were
not taking them and that this difference increased over time in
some trials. whether this implies a slowing in disease progression
remains unclear as does the importance of minimising the levodopa dose in delaying long term complications (see below).

motor complications
one of the complications of long-term levodopa use is the development of motor fluctuations and dyskinesias. some data have
shown that lower doses of levodopa are associated with a lower risk
of these complications (poewe 1986) and previous guidelines have
recommended minimising the dose of levodopa because of this
(olanow 1998; pdcwg 2001). however, it may be that using
lower levodopa doses reflects less severe striatonigral neurodegeneration and it may be that it is the latter that is the most important
determinant of motor complications.
we found that, as well as being associated with lower levodopa
doses, selegiline was associated with a 25% reduction in the odds

of motor fluctuations but no reduction in dyskinesias. there may
be several reasons for this apparent discrepancy between these two
types of motor complication. firstly, the reduction in motor fluctuations may be spurious since it was based on a relatively small
number of patients; was largely dependent on the result from the
uk-pdrg trial which had to be adjusted for differences in the
duration of follow up; and was not robust to sensitivity analysis
based on losses to follow up. however, a similar reduction in motor fluctuations was found in a study comparing selegiline with
levodopa that was not eligible for this review (italian pdsg 2001).
secondly, it may be that mao-b inhibitors do also reduce dyskinesias and that the present result for dyskinesias is a false negative one. for example, the lower confidence limit for dyskinesias
is compatible with a 20% to 25% reduction in the odds of dyskinesias. thirdly, it may be that the effect of mao-b inhibitors on
motor fluctuations is purely a symptomatic one rather than due
to any fundamental effect on the mechanisms that cause motor
complications. the earliest and most common motor fluctuation
is end-of-dose wearing off. mao-b inhibitors may reduce this by
prolonging the dopamine half-life in the synapse but may not have
any effect on more random on/off oscillations and dyskinesias.
there is increasing clinical and experimental evidence to suggest
that the latter are triggered by the intermittent stimulation of the
striatal dopamine receptors (katzenschlager 2002; olanow 1998)
so that it may be that pulsatile exogenous dopamine, largely independent of the actual levodopa dose, is the main cause of these
motor complications.
if the reduction in motor fluctuations with selegiline is real the
next issue would be to determine whether it is clinically relevant.
this is unclear from the data in this review as we were unable to
determine the severity of the fluctuations.
safety
in general the side-effects reported by patients receiving mao-b
inhibitors were mild. however, analyses were limited by incomplete and non-standardised reporting of specific side-effects. there
were more side-effects in general with mao-b inhibitors and, in
particular, more nausea. although there may have been a greater
incidence of cardiac arrhythmias and elevated hepatic enzymes
these were rare and not thought to be life threatening. we were
unable to assess whether there were more psychiatric complications with mao-b inhibitors and could not confirm the higher
risk of postural hypotension that some have found (churchyard
1999). given that we have not shown clear evidence of an increase
in deaths with selegiline we believe that mao-b inhibitors are safe
in early parkinson’s disease.

authors’ conclusions
implications for practice
we did not find any convincing evidence that mao-b inhibitors

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

12

significantly delay disease progression in early parkinson’s disease,
although currently most of the data in this review relate to selegiline. our data on parkinsonian impairment and disability scores
were consistent with a small symptomatic effect but the clinical
relevance of this was uncertain. similarly, whilst there is good
evidence that mao-b inhibitors have a levodopa sparing effect,
whether this results in fewer long-term, clinically relevant motor
complications is unclear although there are promising data on motor fluctuations. the existing data do not exclude the possibility
that mao-b inhibitors cause an increase in mortality but, given
that only one trial has suggested this, we consider it very unlikely.
other side-effects were generally mild and infrequent. overall we
do not feel the present evidence supports the routine use of selegiline or any other mao-b inhibitor in early parkinson’s disease
although clinicians may wish to consider it in situations where
they feel it is important to delay or limit levodopa exposure, for
example in young patients.

will require individual patient data from each trial;
2. whether the reduction in motor fluctuations is real,
clinically relevant, and is also associated with a reduction in
dyskinesias;
3. the relative benefits of the newer mao-b inhibitors
(especially rasagiline) over selegiline.
a large ongoing trial of selegiline in early parkinson’s disease (pd
med, http://www.pdmed.bham.ac.uk/) will provide additional
important data although it will not be eligible for this review since
it compares initiating treatment with selegiline alone versus levodopa alone or dopamine agonists alone (that is it is not comparing selegiline with no selegiline). we believe that further trials
in early parkinson’s disease comparing the combination of  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors with either levodopa or dopamine agonists versus
monotherapy with levodopa or agonists alone are merited.

implications for research
more research is required, particularly to determine:

acknowledgements

1. whether selegiline or other mao-b inhibitors do increase
death rates. further analysis of the existing data may help clarify
this (for example, survival analysis using hazard ratios) but this

we thank professor cristina sampaio for providing the unpublished parjupar data for this updated review. if there are any relevant completed or ongoing trials that we have omitted from the
review please contact carl counsell.

references

references to studies included in this review
california 1989 {published data only}
kurth mc, tetrud jw, langston jw, tanner cm. age
at diagnosis and the effect of selegiline in patients with
parkinson’s disease [abstract]. neurology 1991;41(suppl 1):
400.
∗
tetrud jw, langston jw. the effect of deprenyl
(selegiline) on the natural history of parkinson’s disease.
science 1989;245(4917):519–22. [medline: 2502843]
datatop 1993 {published data only}
ben-shlomo y, head j, lees aj, shoulson i, oakes d,
olanow cw. mortality in datatop [multiple letters].
annals of neurology 1999;45(1):138–9. [medline:
1999027973]
parkinson study group. datatop: a multicenter
controlled clinical trial in early parkinson’s disease.
archives of neurology 1989;46(10):1052–60. [medline:
1989246338]
parkinson study group. effect of deprenyl on the
progression of disability in early parkinson’s disease. new
england journal of medicine 1989;321(20):1364–71.
[medline: 1989284239]
parkinson study group. impact of deprenyl and tocopherol
treatment on parkinson’s disease in datatop patients

requiring levodopa. annals of neurology 1996;39(1):37–45.
[medline: 1996049008]
parkinson study group. impact of deprenyl and tocopherol
treatment on parkinson’s disease in datatop subjects not
requiring levodopa. annals of neurology 1996;39(1):29–36.
[medline: 1996049007]
parkinson study group. mortality in datatop: a
multicenter trial in early parkinson’s disease. annals of
neurology 1998;43(3):318–25. [medline: 1998080934]
shoulson i, and the parkinson study group. datatop:
a decade of neuroprotective inquiry. annals of neurology
1998;44 suppl 1:s160–6. [medline: 1998312114]
shoulson i, and the parkinson study group. deprenyl
and tocopherol antioxidative therapy of parkinsonism
(datatop). acta neurologica scandinavica supplementum
1989;126:171–5. [medline: cn-00065462]
shoulson i, oakes d, fahn s, lang a, langston jw, lewitt
p, et al.impact of sustained deprenyl (selegiline) in levodopatreated parkinson’s disease: a randomised placebo-controlled
extension of the deprenyl and tocopherol antioxidative
therapy of parkinsonism trial. annals of neurology 2002;51
(5):604–12. [medline: 12112107]
shoulson i, the parkinson study group. an interim report
of the effect of selegiline (l-deprenyl) on the progression of
disability in early parkinson’s disease. european neurology

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

13

1992;32(suppl 1):46–53. [medline: 1992308096]
shoulson i for the parkinson study group. the impact
of extended deprenyl treatment in parkinson’s disease
patients not requiring levodopa therapy [abstract]. annals
of neurology 1993;34:263.
shults cw, and the parkinson study group. effect of
selegiline (deprenyl) on the progression of disability in early
parkinson’s disease. acta neurologica scandinavica 1993;87
(suppl 146):36–42. [medline: 8333252]
∗
the parkinson study group. effects of tocopherol and
deprenyl on the progression of disability in early parkinson’s
disease. new england journal of medicine 1993;328(3):
176–83. [medline: 1993021504]
finland 1997 {published and unpublished data}
myllylä vv, heinonen eh, vuorinen ja, kilkku oi,
sotaniemi ka. early selegiline therapy reduces levodopa
dose requirement in parkinson’s disease. acta neurologica
scandinavica 1995;91(3):177–82. [medline: 7793231]
myllylä vv, sontaniemi k, hakulinen p, mäki-ikola o,
heinonen eh. early selegiline treatment has a beneficial
long-term effect on the outcome of parkinson’s disease
[abstract]. movement disorders 1996;11(suppl 1):150.
myllylä vv, sontaniemi ka, tuominen j, heinonen
eh. selegiline monotherapy in early parkinson’s disease
[abstract]. acta neurologica scandinavica 1990;82(suppl
128):31.
∗
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, hakulinen p, mäki-ikola
o, heinonen eh. selegiline as the primary treatment of
parkinson’s disease--a long-term double-blind study. acta
neurologica scandinavica 1997;95(4):211–8. [medline:
9150811]
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, tuominen j, heinonen eh.
selegiline as primary treatment in early phase parkinson’s
disease - an interim report. acta neurologica scandinavica
1989;126:177–82. [medline: 2515724]
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, vuorinen ja, heinonen eh.
selegiline as initial treatment in de novo parkinsonian
patients. neurology 1992;42(2):339–43. [medline:
1736162]
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, vuorinen ja, heinonen eh.
selegiline in de novo parkinsonian patients: the finnish
study. movement disorders 1993;8(suppl 1):s41–4.
[medline: 8302307]
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, vuorinen ja, heinonen eh.
selegiline as a primary treatment of parkinson’s disease.
acta neurologica scandinavica 1991;84(suppl 136):70–2.
[medline: 1801540]
turkka j, suominen k, tolonen u, sotaniemi k, myllylä
vv. selegiline diminishes cardiovascular autonomic
responses in parkinson’s disease. neurology 1997;48(3):
662–7. [medline: 9065544]
norway-denmark 1999 {published data only}
boas j. effects of early selegiline therapy on long-term
levodopa treatment and parkinsonian disability [abstract].
acta neurological scandinavica 1996;94(suppl 167):5.
larsen jp, boas j, aasly j, boas j, boesen f, boisen e,
et al.the effects of early selegiline therapy on long-term

levodopa treatment and parkinsonian disability: an interim
analysis of a norwegian-danish 5-year study. movement
disorders 1997;12(2):175–82. [medline: 1997106451]
∗
larsen jp, boas j, erdal je and the norwegian-danish
study group. does selegiline modify the progression
of early parkinson’s disease? results from a five-year
study. european journal of neurology 1999;6(5):539–47.
[medline: 10457386]
parjupar 1996 {published and unpublished data}
castro-caldas a, sampaio c, botelho a, gouveia a and
the parjupar study group. bromocriptine or selegiline,
or both, to delay the need of levodopa therapy in “de novo”
parkinson’s disease patients [abstract]. movement disorders
1996;11(suppl 1):744.
∗
castro-caldas a, sampaio c, botelho ma, gouveia a
and the parjupar study group. parjupar study:
bromocriptine, selegeline or both delay the need of
levodopa therapy in “de novo” parkinson’s disease
patients. personal communication.
castro-caldas a, sampaio c, botelho ma, gouveia a for
the parjupar study group. parjupar study: bromocriptine
or selegiline or both, to delay the need of levodopa therapy
in de novo parkinson’s disease patients [abstract]. neurology
1996;46:a375.
psg 1996 {published data only}
kieburtz k and the parkinson study group. effect of
lazabemide on the progression of disability in early
parkinson’s disease [abstract]. neurology 1995;45:a291.
∗
the parkinson study group. effect of lazabemide on
the progression of disability in early parkinson’s disease.
annals of neurology 1996;40(1):99–107. [medline:
1996228130]
seledo 1999 {published data only}
kraus ph. seledo-study. aktuelle neurologie 1998;25(suppl
4):s324–6. [medline: 1999034849]
przuntek h. five years’ analysis of the seledo study
[abstract]. neurology 1996;46:a376.
∗
przuntek h, conrad b, dichgans j, kraus ph, krauseneck
p, pergande g. seledo: a 5-year long-term trial on the
effect of selegiline in early parkinsonian patients treated
with levodopa. european journal of neurology 1999;6(2):
141–50. [medline: 10053226]
swedish psg 1998 {published and unpublished data}
pålhagen s, heinonen eh, hägglund j, kaugesaar t,
kontants h, mäki-ikola o, et al and the swedish parkinson
study group. selegiline delays the onset of disability in de
novo parkinsonian patients. neurology 1998;51(2):520–5.
∗
pålhagen s, heinonen eh, hägglund j, kaugesaar t,
mäki-ikola o, palm r and the swedish parkinson study
group. selegiline slows the progression of the symptoms
of parkinson disease. neurology 2006;66(8):1200–6.
[medline: 16540603]
pålhagen s and the swedish parkinson study group. final
results of the monotherapy part from the multicentre trial
on selegiline [abstract]. acta neurologica scandinavica
1996;94(suppl 167):5.
pålhagen s and the swedish parkinson study group.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

14

selegiline delays the onset of disability in de novo patients
with parkinson’s disease [abstract]. movement disorders
1996;11(suppl 1):150.
pålhagen se, heinonen e. use of selegiline as
monotherapy and in combination with levodopa in the
management of parkinson’s disease: perspectives from the
monocomb study. progress in neurotherapeutics and
neuropsychopharmacology 2008;3(1):49–71.
uk 1996 {published data only}
kirollos c, bowes sg, charlett a, purkiss a, weller c,
o’neill cj. an evaluation, with objective assessment, of
selegiline monotherapy in newly diagnosed elderly sufferers
from idiopathic parkinsonism [abstract]. british journal of
clinical pharmacology 1994;37(1):114p. [medline: cn00337404]
∗
kirollos c, charlett a, bowes sg, purkiss ag, o’neill cj,
weller c, et al.time course of physical and psychological
responses to selegiline monotherapy in newly diagnosed,
idiopathic parkinsonism. european journal of clinical
pharmacology 1996;50(1-2):7–18. [medline: 8739805]
uk-pdrg (rr) 1998 {published data only}
∗
ben-shlomo y, churchyard a, head j, hurwitz b,
overstall p, ockelford j, et al.investigation by parkinson’s
disease research group of united kingdom into excess
mortality seen with combined levodopa and selegiline
treatment in patients with early, mild parkinson’s disease:
further results of randomised trial and confidential inquiry.
bmj 1998;316(7139):1191–6. [medline: 9583926]
uk-pdrg 2001 {published data only}
ben-shlomo y, churchyard a, head j, hurwitz b, overstall
p, ockelford j, et al.investigation by parkinson’s disease
research group of united kingdom into excess mortality
seen with combined levodopa and selegiline treatment in
patients with early, mild parkinson’s disease: further results
of randomised trial and confidential inquiry. bmj 1998;
316(7139):1191–6. [medline: 9583926]
katzenschlager r, head j, ben-shlomo y, lees aj. update
on 10-year follow-up of the data of the parkinson’s disease
research group of united kingdom randomised trial
of levodopa, levodopa in combination with selegiline or
bromocriptine in patients with early, mild parkinson’s
disease; 11th meeting of the european neurological society.
http://congress.akm.ch/abstract/abstract/abt.ausgabe?
xnkon˙nr=48&xssprache=eng. (accessed 19th september
2003).
katzenschlager r, head j, schrag a, ben-shlomo y, evans
a, lees aj. fourteen-year final report of the randomised
pdrg-uk trial comparing three initial treatments in pd.
neurology 2008;71(7):474–80. [pubmed: 18579806]
lees aj, abbott r, banerji n, barrie m, boddie gh,
bradbury p, et al.comparison of therapeutic effects and
mortality data of levodopa and levodopa combined with
selegiline in patients with early, mild parkinson’s disease.
bmj 1995;311(7020):1602–7. [medline: 1996004250]
lees aj, abbott r, banerji n, barrie m, boddie gh,
bradbury p, et al.comparisons of therapeutic effects of
levodopa, levodopa and selegiline, and bromocriptine

in patients with early, mild parkinson’s disease: three
year interim report. bmj 1993;307(6902):469–72.
[medline: 1993242113]
∗
lees aj, katzenschlager r, head j, ben-schlomo y on
behalf of the parkinson’s disease research group of the
united kingdom. ten-year follow-up of three different
initial treatments in de-novo pd: a randomised trial.
neurology 2001;57(9):1687–94. [medline: 11706112]
lees aj, venna n. levodopa, selegiline, and bromocriptine
for parkinson disease. annals of internal medicine 1994;120
(6 suppl 2):36. [medline: 1994084096]
parkinson’s disease research group in the united
kingdom. comparisons of therapeutic effects of levodopa,
levodopa and selegiline, and bromocriptine in patients
with early, mild parkinson’s disease: three year interim
report. parkinson’s disease research group in the united
kingdom. bmj 1993;307(6902):469–72. [medline:
8400928]
us 1995 {published data only}
fowler js, fazzini e, volkow nd. deprenyl and levodopa
and parkinson’s disease progression [multiple letters].
annals of neurology 1996;40(2):267–8. [medline:
1996252984]
∗
olanow cw, hauser ra, gauger l, malapira t, koller
w, hubble j, et al.the effect of deprenyl and levodopa on
the progression of parkinson’s disease. annals of neurology
1995;38(5):771–7. [medline: 7486869]
olanow cw, koller w, hauser r, malapira t, busenbark
k. a prospective, longitudinal controlled study of deprenyl
in parkinson’s disease [abstract]. neurology 1994;44:a258.

references to studies excluded from this review
adagio 2009 {published data only}
∗
olanow cw, rascol o, hauser r, feigin pd, jankovic
j, lang a, et al for the adagio study investigators. a
double-blind, delayed-start trial of rasagiline in parkinson’s
disease. new england journal of medicine 2009;361:
1268–78.
ahangar 2005 {published data only}
∗
ahangar aa, sadraie ar, vaghefi sba, ramesani ms.
comparison between bromocriptine and selegiline in
treatment of parkinson. daru (journal of faculty of
pharmacy, tehran university of medical sciences) 2005;13
(1):23–7.
sadraie a, ashrafvaghefi sb, ramezani ms. comparison
between bromocriptine and selegiline in treatment of
parkinson. movement disorders 2006;21(suppl 15):s635.
biglan 2006 {published data only}
biglan km, schwid s, eberly s, blindauer k, fahn s,
goren t, et al.rasagiline improves quality of life in patients
with early parkinson’s disease. movement disorders 2006;21
(5):616–23. [pubmed: 16450340]
dalrymple-alford 95 {published data only}
dalrymple-alford jc, jamieson cf, donaldson im. effects
of selegiline (deprenyl) on cognition in early parkinson’s
disease. clinical neuropharmacology 1995;18(4):348–59.
[medline: 8665548; 96220361]

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

15

fsmt 1993 {published data only}
allain h, cougnard j, neukirch hc. selegiline in de novo
parkinsonian patients: the french selegiline multicenter
trial (fsmt). acta neurologica scandinavica 1991;84(suppl
136):73–8. [medline: 1801541]
allain h, pollak p, neukirch hc and members of the
french selegiline multicenter trial. symptomatic effect
of selegiline in de novo parkinsonian patients. movement
disorders 1993;8(suppl 1):s36–40. [medline: cn00098810]
haapaniemi 2000 {published data only}
haapaniemi th, kallio ma, korpelainen jt, suominen k,
tolonen u, sotaniemi ka, et al.levodopa, bromocriptine
and selegiline modify cardiovascular responses in parkinson’s
disease. journal of neurology 2000;247(11):868–74.
[medline: 11151420; 21025896]
italian pdsg 2001 {published data only}
caraceni t, musicco m. levodopa or dopamine agonists,
or deprenyl as initial treatment for parkinson’s disease. a
randomised multicenter study. parkinsonism & related
disorders 2001;7(2):107–14. [medline: 2001086199]
caraceni ta, on behalf of the italian parkinson disease
study group. dopamine agonists and deprenyl in
comparison to levodopa for initial treatment of parkinson
disease. movement disorders 1997;12(suppl 1):s81.
the italian parkinson study group. a multicenter italian
randomised study on early treatment of parkinson disease:
comparison of l-doipa, l-deprenyl and dopaminoagonists.
study design and short term results.. italian journal of
neurological sciences 1992;13:735–9.
mally 1995 {published data only}
mally j, kovacs ab, stone tw. delayed development of
symptomatic improvement by (--)-deprenyl in parkinson’s
disease. journal of the neurological sciences 1995;134(1-2):
143–5. [medline: 8747857; 96341520]
nappi 1991 {published data only}
nappi g, martignoni e, horowski r, pacchetti c, rainer
e, bruggi p, et al. xxxd2498xxx  plus selegiline in the treatment
of early parkinson’s disease. acta neurologica scandinavica
1991;83(6):407–10. [medline: 1909485]
psg lazabemide 1994 {published data only}
parkinson study group. a controlled trial of lazabemide
(ro 19-6327) in levodopa-treated parkinson’s disease.
archives of neurology 1994;51(4):342–7. [medline:
8155011; 94206243]
parkinson study group. a controlled trial of lazabemide
(ro 19-6327) in untreated parkinson’s disease. annals of
neurology 1993;33(4):350–6. [medline: 1993103966]
rsg 2000 {published data only}
rabey jm, sagi i, huberman m, melamed e, korczyn
a, giladi n, et al.rasagiline mesylate, a new mao-b
inhibitor for the treatment of parkinson’s disease: a doubleblind study as adjunctive therapy to levodopa. clinical
neuropharmacology 2000;23(6):324–30. [medline:
11575866; 21459687]

stern 2004 {published data only}
stern mb, marek kl, friedman j, hauser ra, lewitt
pa, tarsy d, et al.double-blind, randomised, controlled
trial of rasagiline as monotherapy in early parkinson’s
disease patients. movement disorders 2004;19(8):916–23.
[medline: 15300656]
stocchi 2004 {published data only}
stocchi f, arnold g, onofrj m, kwiecinski h, szczudlik a,
thomas a, et al.improvement of motor function in early
parkinson disease by  xxxd3158xxx . neurology 2004;63(4):
746–8. [pubmed: 15326260]
su 2004 {published data only}
su w, chen h.-b, zhang z.-x, chen b, wang l.-n, sun
x.-r, shen y, li y, geng t.-c, zhao w.-q, zhang x.y. a multi-center, randomised,  xxxd3521xxx  controlled and
opening clinical trial of selegiline in patients with parkinsons
disease. chinese journal of neurology 2004;37(5):413–416.
[: embase: 2005008352]
tempo 2002 {published data only}
∗
parkinson study group. a controlled, randomised,
delayed-start study of rasagiline in early parkinson disease.
archives of neurology 2004;61(4):561–6. [medline:
15096406]
parkinson study group. a controlled trial of rasagiline in
early parkinson’s disease [abstract]. annals of neurology
2000;48:489.
parkinson study group. a controlled trial of rasagiline in
early parkinson disease: the tempo study. archives of
neurology 2002;59(12):1937–43. [medline: 12470183]
zhao 2005 {published data only}
zhao w-w, he x-j, zhang z-f, kong l-s, su j-j, xie h-j.
influence of selegiline on dopaminergic neurons in patients
with early parkinson disease. zhongguo linchuang kangfu
2005; vol. 9, issue 9:190–2. [: cn–00569431]

additional references
ahlskog 2001
ahlskog je, muenter md. frequency of levodopa-related
dyskinesias and motor fluctuations as estimated from the
cumulative literature. movement disorders 2001;16(3):
448–58.
birkmayer 1985
birkmayer w, knoll j, riederer p, youdim mbh, hars v,
marton j. increased life expectancy resulting from addition
of (-) deprenyl to madopar treatment in parkinson’s disease:
a long term study. journal of neural transmission 1985;64
(2):113–27.
breteler 1998
breteler mm. selegiline, or the problem of early termination
of clinical trials. the clinical questions are not well
answered, and probably never will be. bmj 1998;316
(7139):1182–3.
calne 1995
calne db. selegiline in parkinson’s disease. bmj 1995;311
(7020):1583–4.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

16

churchyard 1999
churchyard a, mathias cj, lees aj. selegiline-induced
postural hypotension in parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal
study on the effects of drug withdrawal. movement disorders
1999;14:246–51.
clarke 2001
clarke ce. medical management - neuroprotection. in:
clarke ce editor(s). parkinson’s disease in practice. 1st
edition. london: the royal society of medicine press
limited, 2001:35–41. [: issn 1473–6845]
egger 1997
egger m, davey smith g, schneider m, minder c. bias
in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. bmj
1997;315(7109):629–34.
fleiss 1993
fleiss jl. the statistical basis of meta-analysis. statistical
methods in medical research 1993;2(2):121–45.
[medline: 8261254]
fowler 1996
fowler js, fazzini e, volkow nd. deprenyl and parkinson’s
disease progression. annals of neurology 1996;40(2):267–8.
heikkila 1984
heikkila re, manzino l, cabbat fs, duvoisin rc.
protection against the dopaminergic neurotoxicity of 1methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine by monoamine
oxidase inhibitors. nature 1984;311(5985):467–9.
higgins 2003
higgins jpt, thompson sg, deeks jj, altman dg.
measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. bmj 2003;327
(7414):557–60.
katzenschlager 2002
katzenschlager r, lees aj. treatment of parkinson’s disease:
levodopa as the first choice. journal of neurology 2002;249
(suppl 2):19–24.
lang 1998
lang ae, lozano am. parkinson’s disease. new england
journal of medicine 1998;339(16):1130–43.
langston 1983
langston jw, ballard p, tetrud jw, irwin i. chronic
parkinsonism in humans due to a product of meperidineanalog synthesis. science 1983;219(4587):979–80.
lees 1995
lees aj, abbott r, banerji n, barrie m, boddie gh,
bradbury p, et al.comparison of therapeutic effects and
mortality data of levodopa and levodopa combined with
selegiline in patients with early, mild parkinson’s disease.
bmj 1995;311(7020):1602–7. [medline: 1996004250]
macleod 2005
macleod ad, counsell ce, ives n, stowe r. monoamine
oxidase b inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease. cochrane
database of systematic reviews 2005, issue 3. [doi:
10.1002/14651858.cd004898.pub2]
maruyama 2002
maruyama w, akao y, carrillo mc, kitani k, youdium
mb, naoi m. neuroprotection by propargylamines in

parkinson’s disease: suppression of apoptosis and induction
of prosurvival genes. neurotoxicology & teratology 2002;24
(5):675–82.
myllylä 1997
myllylä vv, sotaniemi ka, hakulinen p, mäki-ikola o,
heinonen eh. selegiline as the primary treatment of
parkinson’s disease--a long-term double-blind study. acta
neurologica scandinavica 1997;95(4):211–8. [medline:
9150811]
olanow 1996
olanow cw. selegiline: current perspectives on issues
related to neuroprotection and mortality. neurology 1996;
47(6 suppl 3):s210–8.
olanow 1998
olanow cw, koller wc. an algorithm (decision tree)
for the management of parkinson’s disease: treatment
guidelines. neurology 1998;50(suppl 2):s1–s57.
pdcwg 2001
parkinson’s disease consensus working group. updated
guidelines for the management of parkinson’s disease.
hospital medicine 2001;62(8):456–70.
poewe 1986
poewe wh, lees aj, stern gm. low-dose l-dopa therapy
in parkinson’s disease: a 6 year follow-up study. neurology
1986;36(11):1528–30. [medline: 3762973]
psg 1989
parkinson study group. effect of deprenyl on the
progression of disability in early parkinson’s disease. new
england journal of medicine 1989;321(20):1364–71.
[medline: 1989284239]
pålhagen 2006
pålhagen s, heinonen eh, hägglund j, kaugesaar t,
mäki-ikola o, palm r and the swedish parkinson study
group. selegiline slows the progression of the symptoms of
parkinson disease. neurology 2006;66(8):1200–6.
tanner 1992
tanner cm. epidemiology of parkinson’s disease. neurologic
clinics 1992;10(2):317–29.
twelves 2003
twelves d, perkins ksm, counsell c. systematic review of
incidence studies of parkinson’s disease. movement disorders
2003;18(1):19–31.
watts 1997
watts rl. the role of dopamine agonists in early parkinson’s
disease. neurology 1997;49(1 suppl 1):s34–48.

references to other published versions of this review
ives 2004
ives nj, stowe rl, marro j, counsell c, macleod a, clarke
ce, et al. xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors in early
parkinson’s disease: meta-analysis of 17 randomised trials
involving 3523 patients. bmj 2004;329:593–6.
∗
indicates the major publication for the study

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

17

characteristics of studies

characteristics of included studies [ordered by study id]
california 1989
methods

g: “biased coin”
c: no details given
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

california, usa
54 randomised
27 to selegiline; 27 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd or treatment < 1 yr, h&y i/ii, duration < 5 yrs
excl: age <30 or >80; major medical or psychiatric disorders, dementia
baseline mean updrs (motor): selegiline 22; placebo 21

interventions

treatment: selegiline 5 mg twice a day
control: placebo
duration of treatment: up to 3 years (mean 312 days in selegiline group; 549 days in
placebo group)

outcomes

deaths
updrs
time to levodopa & levodopa requirement
withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu: selegiline 0.9 yrs placebo 1.5 yrs
1 month washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “patients were randomised... using
a biased coin randomisation method”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

comment: no information provided.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

quote: “the patients, and all clinic personnel who came in contact with them, were
blinded as to treatment status.”
quote: “deprenyl and identical (except
for the deprenyl) placebo tablets were provided”

18

california 1989

(continued)

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 27 randomised, 26 analysed (1 required
early levodopa)
c: 27 randomised, 25 analysed (2 required
early levodopa)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

low risk

rx: 27 randomised, 22 analysed (1 early
treatment, 2 lost to fu, 2 side-effect withdrawals)
c: 27 randomised, 22 analysed (2 early
treatment, 2 side-effect withdrawals, 1 incidental surgery)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

rx: 27 randomised, 23 analysed (2 lost to
fu, 2 side-effects withdrawals)
c: 27 randomised, 24 analysed (2 side-effects withdrawals, 1 incidental surgery)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

low risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

comment: no protocol available

other bias

high risk

different mean durations of fu (longer for
selegiline arm).

datatop 1993
methods

g: computer
c: central allocation
2x2 factorial design
patients/doctors/assessors blind
intention-to-treat for deaths only

participants

usa
800 randomised
399 to selegiline; 401 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd not requiring symptomatic treatment at present, h&y i
/ ii, duration < 5 yrs
excl: age <30 or > 79, dementia, severe tremor, certain drugs, unstable medical or
psychiatric problems, previous neurosurgery

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

19

datatop 1993

(continued)

baseline mean updrs: selegiline 25; placebo 25
interventions

treatment: selegiline 10 mg daily
control: placebo
also tocopherol

outcomes

deaths
updrs
time to levodopa & levodopa requirement
motor fluctuations
dyskinesias
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu (for mortality): 8.2 yrs
2 month washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “computer generated randomisation.”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote “central allocation.”

low risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: “identical-appearing placebo capsules”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 399 randomised, 399 analysed
c: 401 randomised, 401 analysed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

rx: 399 randomised, 372 analysed (27
withdrawals [reasons unclear])
c: 401 randomised, 353 analysed (30 withdrawals [reasons unclear], 18 not followed
for sufficiently long to be included)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

rx: 399 randomised, 372 analysed (27
withdrawals [reasons unclear])
c: 401 randomised, 371 analysed (30 with-

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

20

datatop 1993

(continued)

drawals [reasons unclear])
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

high risk

rx: 399 randomised, 273 analysed (126
withdrawals [reasons unclear])
c: 401 randomised, 241 analysed (160
withdrawals [reasons unclear])

selective reporting (reporting bias)

high risk

study protocol is available. primary outcome of time to levodopa is reported. several secondary outcomes not reported (eg
some functional and cognitive assessments)

other bias

high risk

initial phase of trial stopped early after interim analysis at about 12 months showed
benefit in delaying time to levodopa with
selegiline: benefits for time to levodopa and
numbers requiring levodopa may therefore
be overestimated. all remaining patients
then put on open-label selegiline after mean
of 23 months fu. after another two years,
there was a further randomisation of those
on levodopa & open-label selegiline to either continue or stop the selegiline. hence,
significant cross contamination of treatment and control groups affecting results
for deaths and motor complications

finland 1997
methods

g: computer
c: sealed envelopes
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

finland
56 randomised
28 to selegiline; 28 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y i - iii
excl: other neurological diseases, active psychosis, severe medical diseases
baseline mean wrs: selegiline 8; placebo 8

interventions

treatment: selegiline 10 mg daily
control: placebo
levodopa combination therapy in phase ii of study

outcomes

deaths
time to levodopa & levodopa requirement
motor fluctuations
dyskinesia

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

21

finland 1997

(continued)

withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals
notes

mean fu: selegiline 6.0 yrs ; placebo 5.7 yrs
no washout
no significant differences in blood pressure found

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “patients were grouped randomly
(by a computer)”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

comment: no information provided.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: “individual patient data and randomisation codes have not been shown to
the clinical investigators or staff ”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes

quote: “matching placebo controlled”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 28 randomised, 27 analysed (one excluded because drug induced park)
c: 28 randomised, 25 analysed (three excluded, one with post traumatic park, two
reasons unclear)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

low risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

rx: 28 randomised, 24 analysed (one excluded because drug induced park, three
withdrew because of co-morbidities)
c: 28 randomised, 22 analysed (three excluded [one with post traumatic park, two
reasons unclear], two withdrew with comorbidities, one withdrew for personal reasons)

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

22

finland 1997

(continued)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

low risk

rx: 28 randomised, 24 analysed (one excluded because drug induced park, three
withdrew because of co-morbidities)
c: 28 randomised, 22 analysed (three excluded [one with post traumatic park, two
reasons unclear], two withdrew with comorbidities, one withdrew for personal reasons)

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

different mean durations of fu: slightly
longer in selegiline arm (6.0 yrs vs 5.7 yrs)
. three of the five authors affiliated with
orion pharma

norway-denmark 1999
methods

g: unknown
c: central allocation
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

norway and denmark
163 randomised
77 to selegiline; 86 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd or levodopa < 6 months, h&y i - iii
excl: age <35 or >75, dementia, psychosis, unstable diseases
baseline mean updrs: selegiline 37; placebo 35

interventions

treatment: selegiline 10 mg daily
control: placebo
both groups also received levodopa
duration of treatment: up to 5 years

outcomes

deaths
updrs
mean levodopa dose
motor fluctuations
dyskinesia
withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu: selegiline 2.9 yrs; placebo 3.1 yrs
1 month washout

risk of bias

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

23

norway-denmark 1999

(continued)

bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection unclear risk
bias)

quote: ”randomisation was done centrally
by the study monitor in each country“
comment: probably random

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote: ”randomisation was done centrally
by the study monitor in each country“
comment: central allocation.

low risk

blinding (performance bias and detection unclear risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: ”sealed envelopes containing the
treatment code were added to the study material. the code was broken by the data analyst after the analyses were done.” unclear
if envelopes were opaque and placebo identical

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 77 randomised, 73 analysed
c: 86 randomised, 81 analysed
9 excluded (three protocol violations, six
not deemed to have parkinson’s disease after one year fu). data not given by randomised group

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

rx: 77 randomised, 62 analysed (reason for
withdrawals unclear)
c: 86 randomised, 73 analysed (reasons for
withdrawlas unclear)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

high risk

rx: 77 randomised, 65 analysed (reasons
for withdrawal not given)
c; 86 randomised, 72 analysed (reasons for
withdrawal not given)

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

different mean durations of fu: slightly
longer in control arm (2.9 vs 3.1 yrs)
quote: “supported by orion pharma”

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

24

parjupar 1996
methods

g: random number table
c: central allocation of numbered medication packages in each centre
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

portugal
92 randomised patients included (exact number randomised unclear)
47 to selegiline and bromocriptine; 45 to bromocriptine
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y i - ii, age 30-75 yrs
excl: severe tremor, depression
baseline mean updrs: seleg & bromo 31, bromo 31

interventions

treatment: selegiline 10 mg daily plus bromocriptine up to 30 mg daily
control: bromocriptine up to 30 mg daily
duration of treatment: mean 1.7 yrs

outcomes

deaths
time to levodopa & levodopa requirement
withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu: 1.7 years (max 3 yrs)
no washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “a table of random numbers,
blocked in units of six”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote: “randomisation was centralised.
the centres received numbered medication
packages”

low risk

blinding (performance bias and detection unclear risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “placebo were used in a doubledummy way”. unclear if identical placebos

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

unclear how many patients randomised in
each group. 165 patients randomised in total to three groups (one group not eligible for this review) but 20 not analysed because had not reached time for first assessment and six excluded post-randomisation
because failed inclusion/exclusion criteria.
no details given for which groups these patients were in
rx: at least 47 randomised, 41 analysed: six

unclear risk

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

25

parjupar 1996

(continued)

lost to fu
c: at least 45 randomised, 44 analysed: 1
lost to fu
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

low risk

not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

rx: at least 47 randomised, 29 analysed:
six lost to fu, 12 withdrawals (10 adverse
events, 2 protocol violations)
c: at least 45 randomised, 30 analysed:
one lost to fu, 14 withdrawals (10 adverse
events, 4 protocol violations)
one year requirements estimated from kaplan meier curves

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

low risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

low risk

psg 1996
methods

g: unknown
c: unknown
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

usa
321 randomised
60 to 25 mg group, 67 to 50 mg group, 64 to 100 mg group, 64 to 200 mg group, 66
to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y i - ii, <7 yrs duration
excl: severe tremor, unstable medical or psychiatric problems, dementia
baseline mean updrs: 25 mg group 23; 50 mg group 23; 100 mg group 21; 200 mg
group 21; placebo 20

interventions

treatment: lazabemide 12.5 / 25 / 50 / 100mg twice a day
control: placebo
duration of treatment: 52-54 weeks

outcomes

deaths
updrs
levodopa requirement
total withdrawals

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

26

psg 1996

(continued)

notes

fu: 56 weeks
2-4 week washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection unclear risk
bias)

no information provided.

allocation concealment (selection bias)

no information provided.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: “all patients, investigators and coordinating staff were kept unaware of treatment assignments.”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes

quote: “matching tablets of placebo”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

unclear risk

rx: 255 randomised, 224 (88%) analysed
(16 withdrew because of side-effects, 15
reasons for withdrawal not stated)
c: 66 randomised, 54 (82%) analysed
(three withdrew because of side-effects,
nine reasons for withdrawal not stated)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

rx: 255 randomised, 253 analysed using
last outcome carried forward analysis
c: 66 randomised, 66 analysed using last
outcome carried forward analysis

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

rx: 255 randomised, 224 (88%) analysed
(16 withdrew because of side-effects, 15
reasons for withdrawal not stated)
c: 66 randomised, 54 (82%) analysed
(three withdrew because of side-effects,
nine reasons for withdrawal not stated)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

27

psg 1996

(continued)

other bias

unclear risk

comment: hoffmann- la roche contributed to the authorship.

seledo 1999
methods

g: unknown
c: unknown
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

germany
116 randomised
61 to selegiline; 55 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd or levodopa < 1 yr, h&y i - iii
excl: age >75, dementia, serious concomitant diseases, certain drugs
baseline mean curs: selegiline 23; placebo 26

interventions

treatment: selegiline 5 mg twice a day
control: placebo
both groups also received levodopa
duration of treatment: up to 5 years

outcomes

deaths
withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu: selegiline 3.9 yrs ; placebo 3.6 yrs
no washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection unclear risk
bias)

no details given.
quote: “randomized (stratified by trial centre, block size four)”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

no details given.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: “placebo tablets of identical appearance.”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

28

seledo 1999

(continued)

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

116 randomised
rx: 61 randomised, 59 analysed
c: 55 randomised, 50 analysed
7 excluded (2 consent withdrawals, 2 misdiagnoses, 1 inclusion violation, 2 loss to
fu) but data not given by group

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

low risk

outcome not assessed: time to motor fluctuations was reported but not numbers of
patients

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

low risk

quote: “costs of the study were covered by
asta germany”

swedish psg 1998
methods

g: unknown
c: sequentially numbered identical packs
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

sweden
157 randomised
81 to selegiline; 76 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y i-iii
excl: unstable medical or psychiatric diseases; age > 75
baseline mean updrs selegiline 24; placebo 21

interventions

phase i:
treatment: selegiline 10 mg daily
control: placebo
phase ii: levodopa added to all maintaining original blinded allocation after median of
12.7 months in selegiline arm and 8.6 months placebo arm)

outcomes

deaths
updrs
time to levodopa requirement
motor fluctuations
dyskinesias

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

29

swedish psg 1998

(continued)

withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals
notes

fu: max 7 yrs, mean unknown
2 month washout period before starting levodopa

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection unclear risk
bias)

quote from paper: “randomized”
quote from correspondence with principal
investigator: “each study site had their own
randomisation lists”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote from correspondence with principal
investigator: “investigators were instructed
to give a subject number to subjects in the
order they entered the study. the subject
numbers were the same as the medication
number. both packages and tablets for selegiline and placebo were identical.”

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote from paper: “placebo-controlled,
double-blind”, “investigators and patients
unaware of treatment assignments”
quote from correspondence with principal
investigator: “both packages and tablets for
selegiline and placebo were identical.”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

unclear risk

rx: 81 randomised, 81 analysed
c: 76 randomised, 75 analysed (one lost to
fu)
however, only deaths occurring on study
treatment or within 2 weeks of withdrawing from treatment included

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

high risk

rx: 81 randomised, 37 (46%) analysed at
one year, 19 at six years
c: 76 randomised, 24 (32%) analysed at
one year, 28 at six years

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

30

swedish psg 1998

(continued)

data not included in meta-analysis because
of amount of missing data
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

rx: 81 randomised, 72 analysed (4 withdrew because of side-effects, 5 other reasons)
c: 76 randomised, 69 analysed (1 withdrew
because of side-effects, 1 lost to fu, 5 other
reasons)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

unclear risk

rx: 81 randomised, 71 analysed (5 withdrew because of side-effects, 5 other reasons)
c: 76 randomised, 69 analysed (1 withdrew
because of side-effects, 1 lost to fu, 5 other
reasons)

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

different mean durations of fu: about 4
months longer in selegiline arm
baseline severity of pd slightly worse in
selegiline arm.
quote: “sponsored by orion pharma”

uk 1996
methods

g: unknown
c: unknown
patients/doctors/assessors blind
not intention-to-treat

participants

uk
30 randomised
14 to selegiline; 16 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y i - iii
excl: age < 65, mental or physical disorders affecting performance or evaluation, medication with effect on cns
baseline median h&y: selegiline 2; placebo 2

interventions

treatment: selegiline 5 mg twice a day
control: placebo
duration of treatment and fu: 54 weeks

outcomes

deaths
levodopa requirements
total withdrawals

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

31

uk 1996

(continued)

notes

fu: 54 weeks
no washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection unclear risk
bias)

no details given.

allocation concealment (selection bias)

no details given.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection unclear risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “double-blind”
quote: “matched placebo tablets”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 14 randomised, 14 analysed
c: 16 randomised, 16 analysed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

rx: 14 randomised, 13 analysed (1 withdrawal due to side-effects or lack of benefit)
c: 16 randomised, 12 analysed (4 withdrawals due to side-effects or lack of benefit)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

quote: “we wish to thank dr esa
heinonen, orion-farmos pharmaceuticals, and mr derek woodcock, britannia
pharmaceuticals, for their help and advice.
”

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

32

uk-pdrg (rr) 1998
methods

g: random number tables
c: central allocation
patients/doctors/assessors all unblinded
intention-to-treat

participants

uk
104 patients from arm 3 (bromocriptine) re-randomised
51 to selegiline; 53 to control
incl and excl criteria as for uk-pdrg 2001

interventions

treatment: selegiline 5 mg twice a day
control: no selegiline
both groups received levodopa

outcomes

deaths

notes

patients who initially could not tolerate bromocriptine were subsequently re-randomised
to selegiline or no selegiline
mean duration of fu: 6.8 years
no washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “random number tables”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote: “randomization was carried out by
an independent coordinator”
quote: “the investigators telephoned the
coordinator for the treatment code, which
was subsequently confirmed in writing.”

low risk

blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “an open, randomised trial”
comment: not blinded. unlikely to bias
mortality data but may influence other
more subjective outcomes

blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

rx: 51 re-randomised, 51 analysed
c: 53 re-randomised, 53 analysed
33

uk-pdrg (rr) 1998

(continued)

no reasons for loss documented.
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

quote: “sponsorship from britannia pharmaceuticals and sandoz products”

uk-pdrg 2001
methods

g: random number tables
c: central allocation
patients/doctors/assessors all unblinded
intention-to-treat

participants

uk
520 randomised
271 to selegiline; 249 to control
incl: untreated idiopathic pd with incapacity requiring dopaminergic treatment
excl: dementia, previously failed to respond to dopaminergic drugs
baseline mean wrs: selegiline 11; control 11

interventions

treatment: selegiline 5 mg twice a day
control: no selegiline
both groups received levodopa
mean mortality fu: 9.2 years

outcomes

deaths
mean levodopa dose
motor fluctuations
dyskinesias
withdrawals due to side-effects
total withdrawals

notes

mean fu: 9.2 yrs (11.4 yrs for mortality)
no washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

support for judgement
34

uk-pdrg 2001

(continued)

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “random number tables”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

quote: “randomization was carried out by
an independent coordinator”
quote: “the investigators telephoned the
coordinator for the treatment code, which
was subsequently confirmed in writing.”

low risk

blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “an open, randomised trial”
comment: not blinded. unlikely to bias
mortality data but may influence other
more subjective outcomes

blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes
blinding (performance bias and detection high risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 271 randomised, 267 analysed (four
lost to mortality fu)
c: 249 randomised, 243 analysed (six lost
to mortality fu)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

low risk

outcome not included in this review (assessed using webster rating scale not updrs)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

low risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

low risk

rx: 271 randomised, 268 analysed (as rate
per 1,000 person-yrs fu)
c: 249 randomised, 240 analysed (as rate
per 1,000 person-yrs fu)

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

different mean durations of fu: slightly
longer in selegiline arm (3.8 vs 3.4 yrs)
quote: “sponsorship from britannia pharmaceuticals and sandoz products”

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

35

us 1995
methods

g: computer
c: unknown
2x2 factorial design
patients/doctors/assessors blind
intention-to-treat for mortality only

participants

us
101 randomised
52 to selegiline; 49 to placebo
incl: untreated idiopathic pd, h&y stage i - iii,
excl: previous neurosurgery, clinically significant medical or laboratory abnormalities
baseline mean updrs: selegiline 25; placebo 21

interventions

treatment: selegiline 10mg daily
control: placebo
half also received levodopa ( xxxd2471xxx ) and half received bromocriptine
(doses adjusted as clinically appropriate)
duration of treatment: 12 months

outcomes

deaths
updrs
mean levodopa dose
total withdrawals

notes

fu: 14 months
2 month washout

risk of bias
bias

authors’ judgement

support for judgement

random sequence generation (selection low risk
bias)

quote: “computer-generated randomisation schedule”

allocation concealment (selection bias)

no details given.

unclear risk

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
doctors, all outcomes

quote: “all evaluations were performed by
the same observer who was blinded”
quote: “adjustment of treatment drug was
carried out by a neurologist-therapist who
was unaware of the identity of the study
drug”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
patients, all outcomes

quote: “identical appearing placebo”

blinding (performance bias and detection low risk
bias)
outcome assessors, all outcomes
 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

36

us 1995

(continued)

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
mortality

low risk

rx: 52 randomised, 52 analysed
c: 49 randomised, 49 analysed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
parkinsonian impairment & disability

unclear risk

rx: 52 randomised, 42 analysed (10 withdrew or lost to fu)
c: 49 randomised, 40 analysed (9 withdrew
or lost to fu)
reasons for withdrawal not given by treatment group: 2 side-effects, 3 lack of efficacy, 1 death, 3 unrelated medical problems, 1 refused washout, 5 loss to fu, 4
unknown)
quote: “there were no significant differences in the reasons for dropout among the
treatment groups”

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
participants requiring levodopa

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
motor fluctuations & dyskinesias

unclear risk

outcome not assessed

selective reporting (reporting bias)

unclear risk

no protocol available.

other bias

unclear risk

baseline severity of pd slightly worse in
selegiline arm.
comment: supported by grants from sandoz and somerset pharmaceuticals

g = generation of random sequence; c = concealment of randomisation; incl = inclusion criteria; excl = exclusion criteria; fu = follow
up; pd = parkinson’s disease; yr = year; h&y = hoehn and yahr stage; curs = columbia university rating scale; nuds =
northwestern university disability scale; s&e = schwab and england scale; updrs = unified parkinson’s disease rating scale;
wrs = webster rating scale

characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study id]

study

reason for exclusion

adagio 2009

too short - 9 months duration for rasagiline vs placebo

ahangar 2005

high percentage (>25%) excluded from analysis post-randomisation
no useful outcomes measured

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

37

(continued)

biglan 2006

too short - 6 months duration

dalrymple-alford 95

too short - 8 weeks duration

fsmt 1993

too short - 3 months duration

haapaniemi 2000

confounded - selegiline versus levodopa versus bromocripitine
too short - 6 months treatment

italian pdsg 2001

confounded - selegiline versus levodopa versus dopamine agonist

mally 1995

too short - 3 weeks duration

nappi 1991

too short - 6 months duration

psg lazabemide 1994

too short - 8 weeks duration

rsg 2000

too short - 12 weeks duration; some patients late disease

stern 2004

too short - 10 weeks duration

stocchi 2004

too short - 3 months duration

su 2004

too short - 3 months duration

tempo 2002

too short - 26 weeks duration

zhao 2005

sub-therapeutic dose of selegiline used
no useful outcomes measured

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

38

data and analyses

comparison 1.  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control

outcome or subgroup title
1 deaths at end of follow up (fu)
1.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
1.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
1.3 lazabemide - no levodopa
at outset
2 parkinsonian impairment - mean
change in updrs motor score
from baseline to 1 year
2.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
2.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
2.3 lazabemide - no levodopa
at outset
3 parkinsonian impairment updrs motor scores at 1 year
fu
3.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
3.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
4 parkinsonian disability - mean
change in updrs adl score
from baseline to 1 year
4.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
4.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
4.3 lazabemide - no levodopa
at outset
5 parkinsonian disability - updrs
adl scores at 1 year fu
5.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
5.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
6 mean change in updrs total
score from baseline to end of
washout
6.1 selegiline

no. of
studies

no. of
participants

12
5

2430
926

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.12 [0.90, 1.41]
1.25 [0.91, 1.71]

7

1226

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.03 [0.73, 1.44]

1

278

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.47 [0.08, 2.65]

5

1305

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-3.79 [-5.30, -2.27]

2

176

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-4.12 [-6.58, -1.65]

3

810

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-4.57 [-5.70, -3.44]

1

319

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-1.35 [-3.09, 0.39]

2

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

totals not selected

2

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

0.0 [0.0, 0.0]

1

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

0.0 [0.0, 0.0]

statistical method

effect size

5

1306

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-1.49 [-2.49, -0.49]

2

176

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-1.54 [-3.77, 0.68]

3

811

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-2.24 [-2.85, -1.62]

1

319

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-0.47 [-1.31, 0.37]

2

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

totals not selected

2

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

0.0 [0.0, 0.0]

1

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

0.0 [0.0, 0.0]

3

429

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-3.15 [-5.48, -0.82]

2

223

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)

-4.00 [-6.49, -1.52]

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

39

6.2 lazabemide
7 participants requiring levodopa
7.1 follow up about 1 year
7.2 at end of follow up
8 development of motor
fluctuations
8.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
8.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
9 development of dyskinesias
9.1 selegiline - levodopa from
outset
9.2 selegiline - no levodopa at
outset
10 subjects with adverse events
10.1 selegiline - levodopa
from outset
10.2 selegiline - no levodopa
at outset
10.3 lazabemide
11 nausea
11.1 selegiline - levodopa
from outset
11.2 selegiline - no levodopa
at outset
12 withdrawals due to adverse
events
12.1 selegiline - levodopa
from outset
12.2 selegiline - no levodopa
at outset
12.3 lazabemide - no
levodopa at outset
13 total withdrawals
13.1 selegiline - levodopa
from outset
13.2 selegiline - no levodopa
at outset
13.3 lazabemide - no
levodopa at outset

1
7
4
4
6

206
1138
293
1461

mean difference (iv, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

-1.12 [-4.95, 2.71]
subtotals only
0.48 [0.37, 0.62]
0.50 [0.18, 1.38]
0.73 [0.58, 0.91]

3

761

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.67 [0.49, 0.91]

3

700

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.72 [0.44, 1.17]

5
2

1362
662

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.96 [0.76, 1.22]
0.98 [0.71, 1.34]

3

700

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.95 [0.66, 1.36]

6
2

847
263

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.45 [1.04, 2.02]
1.52 [0.83, 2.78]

3

263

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.26 [0.56, 2.85]

1
8
2

321
1436
267

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.37 [0.79, 2.39]
1.76 [1.10, 2.82]
2.19 [0.83, 5.80]

6

1169

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.57 [0.86, 2.84]

8

1479

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.72 [0.98, 3.01]

3

799

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

2.52 [1.03, 6.14]

4

359

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.23 [0.59, 2.54]

1

321

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.41 [0.40, 4.98]

11
4

2410
848

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)
odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.95 [0.78, 1.17]
0.90 [0.66, 1.23]

7

1241

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

1.14 [0.83, 1.57]

1

321

odds ratio (m-h, random, 95% ci)

0.62 [0.30, 1.29]

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

40

analysis 1.1. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 1 deaths at end of
follow up (fu).
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 1 deaths at end of follow up (fu)

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

norway-denmark 1999

4/73

4/81

2.6 %

1.12 [ 0.27, 4.63 ]

seledo 1999

2/59

3/50

1.5 %

0.55 [ 0.09, 3.43 ]

28/51

21/53

8.5 %

1.86 [ 0.85, 4.04 ]

175/267

149/243

39.6 %

1.20 [ 0.84, 1.72 ]

1/25

1/24

0.6 %

0.96 [ 0.06, 16.24 ]

475

451

52.9 %

1.25 [ 0.91, 1.71 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

uk-pdrg (rr) 1998
uk-pdrg 2001
us 1995

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 210 (mao-b inhibitor), 178 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 1.87, df = 4 (p = 0.76); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 1.40 (p = 0.16)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

0/26

0/25

70/399

67/401

38.2 %

1.06 [ 0.73, 1.53 ]

finland 1997

7/27

6/25

3.3 %

1.11 [ 0.31, 3.90 ]

parjupar 1996

1/41

1/44

0.7 %

1.08 [ 0.07, 17.77 ]

swedish psg 1998

4/81

1/75

1.1 %

3.84 [ 0.42, 35.20 ]

uk 1996

0/14

2/16

0.5 %

0.20 [ 0.01, 4.54 ]

us 1995

2/27

5/25

1.7 %

0.32 [ 0.06, 1.83 ]

615

611

45.4 %

1.03 [ 0.73, 1.44 ]

datatop 1993

subtotal (95% ci)

not estimable

total events: 84 (mao-b inhibitor), 82 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 4.19, df = 5 (p = 0.52); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 0.16 (p = 0.87)
3 lazabemide - no levodopa at outset
psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

4/224

2/54

1.7 %

0.47 [ 0.08, 2.65 ]

224

54

1.7 %

0.47 [ 0.08, 2.65 ]

1314

1116

100.0 %

1.12 [ 0.90, 1.41 ]

total events: 4 (mao-b inhibitor), 2 (control)
heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 0.85 (p = 0.39)

total (95% ci)

0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

favours control

(continued . . . )

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

41

(. . .
study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

n/n

n/n

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

continued)
odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

total events: 298 (mao-b inhibitor), 262 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 7.74, df = 11 (p = 0.74); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 1.01 (p = 0.31)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 1.68, df = 2 (p = 0.43), i2 =0.0%

0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

favours control

analysis 1.2. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 2 parkinsonian
impairment - mean change in updrs motor score from baseline to 1 year.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 2 parkinsonian impairment - mean change in updrs motor score from baseline to 1 year

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

mean
difference

control

weight

iv,random,95% ci

mean
difference

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

iv,random,95% ci

norway-denmark 1999

62

-12.8 (10.9)

73

-9.4 (9.8)

12.0 %

-3.40 [ -6.92, 0.12 ]

us 1995

20

-7 (6.3)

21

-2.2 (4.82)

12.4 %

-4.80 [ -8.25, -1.35 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

subtotal (95% ci)

82

24.4 % -4.12 [ -6.58, -1.65 ]

94

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.31, df = 1 (p = 0.58); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 3.27 (p = 0.0011)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

22

6.75 (4.92)

22

13.4 (8.54)

9.7 %

-6.65 [ -10.77, -2.53 ]

datatop 1993

372

4.89 (7.81)

353

9.36 (9.61)

27.7 %

-4.47 [ -5.75, -3.19 ]

22

-3 (4.69)

19

1 (5.14)

14.5 %

-4.00 [ -7.03, -0.97 ]

us 1995

subtotal (95% ci)

416

51.9 % -4.57 [ -5.70, -3.44 ]

394

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 1.14, df = 2 (p = 0.57); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 7.91 (p < 0.00001)
3 lazabemide - no levodopa at outset

-10

-5

favours treatment

0

5

10

favours control

(continued . . . )

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

42

(. . .
study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

mean
difference

control

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

253

3.95 (6.13)

66

5.3 (6.5)

253

continued)

mean
difference

weight

iv,random,95% ci

iv,random,95% ci

66

23.7 %

-1.35 [ -3.09, 0.39 ]

23.7 %

-1.35 [ -3.09, 0.39 ]

heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 1.52 (p = 0.13)

total (95% ci)

751

100.0 % -3.79 [ -5.30, -2.27 ]

554

heterogeneity: tau2 = 1.74; chi2 = 10.82, df = 5 (p = 0.06); i2 =54%
test for overall effect: z = 4.90 (p < 0.00001)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 9.37, df = 2 (p = 0.01), i2 =79%

-10

-5

favours treatment

0

5

10

favours control

analysis 1.3. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 3 parkinsonian
impairment - updrs motor scores at 1 year fu.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 3 parkinsonian impairment - updrs motor scores at 1 year fu

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

mean
difference

control

mean
difference

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

iv,random,95% ci

iv,random,95% ci

norway-denmark 1999

62

12.1 (9.9)

73

13.4 (9.4)

-1.30 [ -4.57, 1.97 ]

us 1995

20

7.6 (5.81)

21

10.6 (5.04)

-3.00 [ -6.34, 0.34 ]

22

11.2 (4.69)

19

12.4 (4.36)

-1.20 [ -3.97, 1.57 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
us 1995

-10

-5

favours treatment

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

0

5

10

favours control

43

analysis 1.4. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 4 parkinsonian
disability - mean change in updrs adl score from baseline to 1 year.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 4 parkinsonian disability - mean change in updrs adl score from baseline to 1 year

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

mean
difference

control

weight

iv,random,95% ci

mean
difference

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

iv,random,95% ci

norway-denmark 1999

62

-4.9 (13.4)

73

-3.8 (12.3)

4.6 %

-1.10 [ -5.47, 3.27 ]

us 1995

20

-2.3 (4.71)

21

-0.6 (3.63)

10.7 %

-1.70 [ -4.28, 0.88 ]

15.3 %

-1.54 [ -3.77, 0.68 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

subtotal (95% ci)

82

94

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.05, df = 1 (p = 0.82); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 1.36 (p = 0.17)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

22

2.69 (2.72)

22

4.45 (4.74)

12.6 %

-1.76 [ -4.04, 0.52 ]

datatop 1993

372

2.2 (3.82)

354

4.53 (5.08)

32.0 %

-2.33 [ -2.99, -1.67 ]

22

-1.5 (4.3)

19

-0.1 (4.15)

10.6 %

-1.40 [ -3.99, 1.19 ]

us 1995

subtotal (95% ci)

416

55.3 % -2.24 [ -2.85, -1.62 ]

395

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.65, df = 2 (p = 0.72); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 7.15 (p < 0.00001)
3 lazabemide - no levodopa at outset
psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

253

1.83 (3.05)

66

253

2.3 (3.1)

66

29.5 %

-0.47 [ -1.31, 0.37 ]

29.5 %

-0.47 [ -1.31, 0.37 ]

heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 1.10 (p = 0.27)

total (95% ci)

751

100.0 % -1.49 [ -2.49, -0.49 ]

555

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.70; chi2 = 11.85, df = 5 (p = 0.04); i2 =58%
test for overall effect: z = 2.92 (p = 0.0036)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 11.15, df = 2 (p = 0.00), i2 =82%

-10

-5

favours treatment

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

0

5

10

favours control

44

analysis 1.5. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 5 parkinsonian
disability - updrs adl scores at 1 year fu.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 5 parkinsonian disability - updrs adl scores at 1 year fu

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

mean
difference

control

mean
difference

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

iv,random,95% ci

iv,random,95% ci

norway-denmark 1999

62

-4.9 (13.4)

73

-3.8 (12.3)

-1.10 [ -5.47, 3.27 ]

us 1995

20

7.3 (4.92)

21

9.3 (4.12)

-2.00 [ -4.78, 0.78 ]

22

9.2 (4.69)

19

8.6 (4.79)

0.60 [ -2.31, 3.51 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
us 1995

-10

-5

favours treatment

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

0

5

10

favours control

45

analysis 1.6. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 6 mean change in
updrs total score from baseline to end of washout.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 6 mean change in updrs total score from baseline to end of washout

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

mean
difference

control

weight

iv,random,95% ci

mean
difference

n

mean(sd)

n

mean(sd)

iv,random,95% ci

swedish psg 1998

72

11.3 (9.1)

69

14.2 (10.9)

38.1 %

-2.90 [ -6.22, 0.42 ]

us 1995

42

0.4 (8.42)

40

5.8 (8.85)

31.5 %

-5.40 [ -9.14, -1.66 ]

1 selegiline

subtotal (95% ci)

114

109

69.6 % -4.00 [ -6.49, -1.52 ]

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.96, df = 1 (p = 0.33); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 3.16 (p = 0.0016)
2 lazabemide
psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

172

172

7.58 (9.95)

34

8.7 (10.5)

34

30.4 %

-1.12 [ -4.95, 2.71 ]

30.4 %

-1.12 [ -4.95, 2.71 ]

heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 0.57 (p = 0.57)

total (95% ci)

286

100.0 % -3.15 [ -5.48, -0.82 ]

143

heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.84; chi2 = 2.49, df = 2 (p = 0.29); i2 =20%
test for overall effect: z = 2.65 (p = 0.0081)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 1.53, df = 1 (p = 0.22), i2 =35%

-10

-5

favours mao-b inhib

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

0

5

10

favours control

46

analysis 1.7. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 7 participants
requiring levodopa.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 7 participants requiring levodopa

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

datatop 1993

154/372

222/371

76.1 %

0.47 [ 0.35, 0.64 ]

parjupar 1996

4/47

9/45

4.1 %

0.37 [ 0.11, 1.31 ]

80/224

29/54

18.1 %

0.48 [ 0.26, 0.87 ]

4/13

2/12

1.8 %

2.22 [ 0.33, 15.18 ]

656

482

100.0 %

0.48 [ 0.37, 0.62 ]

9.8 %

0.31 [ 0.01, 7.91 ]

1 follow up about 1 year

psg 1996
uk 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 242 (mao-b inhibitor), 262 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 2.61, df = 3 (p = 0.46); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 5.58 (p < 0.00001)
2 at end of follow up
california 1989

22/23

24/24

finland 1997

24/24

22/22

parjupar 1996

16/29

21/30

swedish psg 1998

72/72

69/69

subtotal (95% ci)

148

145

not estimable
90.2 %

0.53 [ 0.18, 1.54 ]
not estimable

100.0 %

0.50 [ 0.18, 1.38 ]

total events: 134 (mao-b inhibitor), 136 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.10, df = 1 (p = 0.76); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 1.34 (p = 0.18)

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

47

analysis 1.8. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 8 development of
motor fluctuations.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 8 development of motor fluctuations

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

17/65

28/72

9.5 %

0.56 [ 0.27, 1.15 ]

7/61

9/55

4.5 %

0.66 [ 0.23, 1.92 ]

161/268

164/240

37.6 %

0.70 [ 0.48, 1.01 ]

394

367

51.6 %

0.67 [ 0.49, 0.91 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset
norway-denmark 1999
seledo 1999
uk-pdrg 2001

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 185 (mao-b inhibitor), 201 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.29, df = 2 (p = 0.86); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 2.55 (p = 0.011)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
88/273

81/241

37.0 %

0.94 [ 0.65, 1.36 ]

5/24

8/22

2.9 %

0.46 [ 0.12, 1.71 ]

swedish psg 1998

14/71

23/69

8.5 %

0.49 [ 0.23, 1.06 ]

subtotal (95% ci)

368

332

48.4 %

0.72 [ 0.44, 1.17 ]

100.0 %

0.73 [ 0.58, 0.91 ]

datatop 1993
finland 1997

total events: 107 (mao-b inhibitor), 112 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.07; chi2 = 2.95, df = 2 (p = 0.23); i2 =32%
test for overall effect: z = 1.32 (p = 0.19)

total (95% ci)

762

699

total events: 292 (mao-b inhibitor), 313 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 3.92, df = 5 (p = 0.56); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 2.76 (p = 0.0058)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 0.07, df = 1 (p = 0.79), i2 =0.0%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

48

analysis 1.9. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 9 development of
dyskinesias.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 9 development of dyskinesias

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

18/73

20/81

10.5 %

1.00 [ 0.48, 2.08 ]

150/268

136/240

45.7 %

0.97 [ 0.68, 1.38 ]

341

321

56.2 %

0.98 [ 0.71, 1.34 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset
norway-denmark 1999
uk-pdrg 2001

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 168 (mao-b inhibitor), 156 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.00, df = 1 (p = 0.95); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 0.14 (p = 0.89)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
52/273

45/241

28.8 %

1.02 [ 0.66, 1.60 ]

5/24

6/22

3.0 %

0.70 [ 0.18, 2.74 ]

swedish psg 1998

25/71

27/69

12.0 %

0.85 [ 0.43, 1.68 ]

subtotal (95% ci)

368

332

43.8 %

0.95 [ 0.66, 1.36 ]

100.0 %

0.96 [ 0.76, 1.22 ]

datatop 1993
finland 1997

total events: 82 (mao-b inhibitor), 78 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.41, df = 2 (p = 0.81); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 0.30 (p = 0.77)

total (95% ci)

709

653

total events: 250 (mao-b inhibitor), 234 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.43, df = 4 (p = 0.98); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 0.31 (p = 0.76)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 0.02, df = 1 (p = 0.90), i2 =0.0%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

49

analysis 1.10. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 10 subjects with
adverse events.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 10 subjects with adverse events

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

norway-denmark 1999

63/73

62/81

15.6 %

1.93 [ 0.83, 4.48 ]

seledo 1999

16/59

12/50

14.8 %

1.18 [ 0.50, 2.80 ]

132

131

30.4 %

1.52 [ 0.83, 2.78 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 79 (mao-b inhibitor), 74 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 0.64, df = 1 (p = 0.42); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 1.36 (p = 0.17)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
parjupar 1996

40/47

39/45

8.0 %

0.88 [ 0.27, 2.85 ]

swedish psg 1998

50/72

37/69

23.3 %

1.97 [ 0.99, 3.92 ]

1/14

3/16

1.9 %

0.33 [ 0.03, 3.64 ]

133

130

33.3 %

1.26 [ 0.56, 2.85 ]

uk 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 91 (mao-b inhibitor), 79 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.17; chi2 = 2.90, df = 2 (p = 0.23); i2 =31%
test for overall effect: z = 0.57 (p = 0.57)
3 lazabemide
psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

166/255

38/66

36.4 %

1.37 [ 0.79, 2.39 ]

255

66

36.4 %

1.37 [ 0.79, 2.39 ]

327

100.0 %

1.45 [ 1.04, 2.02 ]

total events: 166 (mao-b inhibitor), 38 (control)
heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 1.13 (p = 0.26)

total (95% ci)

520

total events: 336 (mao-b inhibitor), 191 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 3.60, df = 5 (p = 0.61); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 2.17 (p = 0.030)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 0.14, df = 2 (p = 0.93), i2 =0.0%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

50

analysis 1.11. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 11 nausea.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 11 nausea

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

9/77

8/89

17.4 %

1.34 [ 0.49, 3.66 ]

20/56

6/45

17.0 %

3.61 [ 1.30, 10.00 ]

133

134

34.4 %

2.19 [ 0.83, 5.80 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset
norway-denmark 1999
seledo 1999

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 29 (mao-b inhibitor), 14 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.23; chi2 = 1.85, df = 1 (p = 0.17); i2 =46%
test for overall effect: z = 1.58 (p = 0.11)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

5/27

5/27

10.3 %

1.00 [ 0.25, 3.95 ]

datatop 1993

8/399

1/401

4.8 %

8.18 [ 1.02, 65.74 ]

finland 1997

9/27

9/25

14.1 %

0.89 [ 0.28, 2.79 ]

parjupar 1996

8/47

6/45

14.0 %

1.33 [ 0.42, 4.20 ]

17/72

7/69

18.9 %

2.74 [ 1.06, 7.09 ]

1/14

2/16

3.4 %

0.54 [ 0.04, 6.67 ]

586

583

65.6 %

1.57 [ 0.86, 2.84 ]

100.0 %

1.76 [ 1.10, 2.82 ]

swedish psg 1998
uk 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 48 (mao-b inhibitor), 30 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.09; chi2 = 5.94, df = 5 (p = 0.31); i2 =16%
test for overall effect: z = 1.48 (p = 0.14)

total (95% ci)

719

717

total events: 77 (mao-b inhibitor), 44 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.07; chi2 = 8.27, df = 7 (p = 0.31); i2 =15%
test for overall effect: z = 2.34 (p = 0.019)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 0.34, df = 1 (p = 0.56), i2 =0.0%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

51

analysis 1.12. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 12 withdrawals due
to adverse events.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 12 withdrawals due to adverse events

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

14/77

10/86

15.8 %

1.69 [ 0.70, 4.06 ]

6/61

4/55

10.6 %

1.39 [ 0.37, 5.21 ]

37/271

7/249

16.5 %

5.47 [ 2.39, 12.51 ]

409

390

42.9 %

2.52 [ 1.03, 6.14 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset
norway-denmark 1999
seledo 1999
uk-pdrg 2001

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 57 (mao-b inhibitor), 21 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.37; chi2 = 4.94, df = 2 (p = 0.08); i2 =59%
test for overall effect: z = 2.03 (p = 0.043)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

2/27

2/27

5.9 %

1.00 [ 0.13, 7.67 ]

10/28

3/28

9.7 %

4.63 [ 1.11, 19.26 ]

7/47

8/45

12.8 %

0.81 [ 0.27, 2.45 ]

swedish psg 1998

17/81

17/76

17.5 %

0.92 [ 0.43, 1.97 ]

subtotal (95% ci)

183

176

45.9 %

1.23 [ 0.59, 2.54 ]

finland 1997
parjupar 1996

total events: 36 (mao-b inhibitor), 30 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.18; chi2 = 4.41, df = 3 (p = 0.22); i2 =32%
test for overall effect: z = 0.55 (p = 0.58)
3 lazabemide - no levodopa at outset
psg 1996

16/255

3/66

11.2 %

1.41 [ 0.40, 4.98 ]

255

66

11.2 %

1.41 [ 0.40, 4.98 ]

847

632

100.0 %

1.72 [ 0.98, 3.01 ]

subtotal (95% ci)
total events: 16 (mao-b inhibitor), 3 (control)
heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 0.53 (p = 0.60)

total (95% ci)

total events: 109 (mao-b inhibitor), 54 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.32; chi2 = 14.36, df = 7 (p = 0.05); i2 =51%
test for overall effect: z = 1.90 (p = 0.057)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 1.53, df = 2 (p = 0.46), i2 =0.0%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

52

analysis 1.13. comparison 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control, outcome 13 total
withdrawals.
review:

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease

comparison: 1  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors versus control
outcome: 13 total withdrawals

study or subgroup

mao-b inhibitor

control

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

weight

odds ratio
mh,random,95%
ci

n/n

n/n

norway-denmark 1999

28/77

25/86

9.5 %

1.39 [ 0.72, 2.69 ]

seledo 1999

35/61

35/55

7.4 %

0.77 [ 0.36, 1.63 ]

123/271

129/249

33.6 %

0.77 [ 0.55, 1.09 ]

5/25

3/24

1.7 %

1.75 [ 0.37, 8.30 ]

434

414

52.3 %

0.90 [ 0.66, 1.23 ]

1 selegiline - levodopa from outset

uk-pdrg 2001
us 1995

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 191 (mao-b inhibitor), 192 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.01; chi2 = 3.30, df = 3 (p = 0.35); i2 =9%
test for overall effect: z = 0.67 (p = 0.51)
2 selegiline - no levodopa at outset
california 1989

5/27

5/27

2.2 %

1.00 [ 0.25, 3.95 ]

27/399

30/401

14.1 %

0.90 [ 0.52, 1.54 ]

finland 1997

15/28

7/28

3.2 %

3.46 [ 1.12, 10.75 ]

parjupar 1996

18/47

15/45

5.7 %

1.24 [ 0.53, 2.92 ]

swedish psg 1998

43/81

37/76

10.5 %

1.19 [ 0.64, 2.23 ]

uk 1996

6/14

6/16

1.9 %

1.25 [ 0.29, 5.41 ]

us 1995

5/27

6/25

2.3 %

0.72 [ 0.19, 2.74 ]

623

618

40.0 %

1.14 [ 0.83, 1.57 ]

datatop 1993

subtotal (95% ci)

total events: 119 (mao-b inhibitor), 106 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.0; chi2 = 5.01, df = 6 (p = 0.54); i2 =0.0%
test for overall effect: z = 0.79 (p = 0.43)
3 lazabemide - no levodopa at outset
psg 1996

subtotal (95% ci)

31/255

12/66

7.8 %

0.62 [ 0.30, 1.29 ]

255

66

7.8 %

0.62 [ 0.30, 1.29 ]

1098

100.0 %

0.95 [ 0.78, 1.17 ]

total events: 31 (mao-b inhibitor), 12 (control)
heterogeneity: not applicable
test for overall effect: z = 1.27 (p = 0.20)

total (95% ci)

1312

total events: 341 (mao-b inhibitor), 310 (control)
heterogeneity: tau2 = 0.00; chi2 = 11.10, df = 11 (p = 0.43); i2 =1%
test for overall effect: z = 0.47 (p = 0.64)
test for subgroup differences: chi2 = 2.60, df = 2 (p = 0.27), i2 =23%

0.1 0.2

0.5

favours mao-b inhib

1

2

5

10

favours control

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

53

additional tables
table 1. reported outcomes in each trial

study id dead or deaths
disabled

updrs

need for time to levlevodopa levodopa odopa
dose

modyskinetor fluc- sias
tuations

adverse
events

total withdrawals

california 1989

n

y

y

y

y

n

n

n

n

y

n

y

y

y

y

n

y

y

n

y

n

y

n

y

y

y

y

y

n

y

norway- n
denmark
1999

y

y

n/a

n/a

y

y

y

y

y

parjupar
1996

n

y

n

y

y

n

n

n

y

y

psg
1996

n

y

y

y

y

n

n

n

y

y

seledo n
1999

y

n

n/a

n/a

y

y

n

y

y

swedish
psg
1998

n

y

nu

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

uk 1996

n

y

n

n

n

n

n

n

y

y

ukpdrg
2001

n

y

n

n/a

n/a

y

y

y

n

y

ukpdrg
(rr)
2001

n

y

n

n/a

n/a

n

n

n

n

y

us 1995

n

y

y

y

y

y

n

n

n

y

datatop
1993
finland
1997

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

54

updrs - unified parkinson’s disease rating scale; n - no; y - yes; n/a - not applicable; nu - not used (reported but not used in
this review)

table 2. time to levodopa

study id

measure

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitor

control

california 1989

mean ± sd

548.9 ± 286.2 days

312.1 ± 208.6 days

datatop 1993

median

719 days

454 days

finland 1997

median ± se
mean ± se

545 ± 90 days
686.7 ± 73.7 days

372 ± 28 days
487.0 ± 74.4 days

parjupar 1996

median

965 days

804 days

psg 1996

mean ± se

310.2 ± 13.1 days

276 ± 15.7 days

swedish psg 1998

median ± quartile

386.3 ± 276.8 days

261.6 ± 243.3 days

sd - standard deviation; se - standard error

table 3. daily levodopa dose (mean or median)

study id

length of fol- n (mao-b in- dose (mao-b n (control)
low up
hibitor)
inhib)

dose (control)

difference

us
1995 1 year
(bromocriptine
arms)

22

mean 85 mg (sd 19
198)

mean 117 mg (sd 32 mg/day
173)

us 1995 (lev- 1 year
odopa arms)

20

mean 382 mg 21
(sd 155)

mean 426 mg (sd 44 mg/day
110)

finland 1997

about 3 years

23

mean 358 mg 21
(sd 117)

mean 543 mg (sd 185 mg/day
150)

seledo 1999

about 3.5 years

26

mean 338 mg

20

mean 521 mg

183 mg/day

uk-pdrg
2001

4 years

unknown

median 375 mg

unknown

median 625 mg

250 mg/day

norwaydenmark 1999

5 years

38

mean 424 mg 43
(sd 113)

mean 506 mg (sd 82 mg/day
184)

psg 7 years

19

mean 529 mg 28
(sd 145)

mean 631 (sd 102 mg/day
186)

swedish
1998

sd - standard deviation
 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

55

appendices
appendix 1. the cochrane central register of controlled trials (central) search strategy
#1. mesh descriptor parkinsonian disorders explode all trees
#2. parkinson* in clinical trials
#3. (#1 or #2)
#4. mesh descriptor monoamine oxidase inhibitors, this term only
#5. monoamine oxidase inhibitor* in clinical trials
#6. mao b inhibitor* in clinical trials
#7. selegiline in clinical trials
#8. deprenyl in clinical trials
#9. deprenil in clinical trials
#10. eldepryl in clinical trials
#11. jumex in clinical trials
#12. movergan in clinical trials
#13. anipryl in clinical trials
#14. antiparkin in clinical trials
#15. atapryl in clinical trials
#16. deprenaline in clinical trials
#17. egibren in clinical trials
#18. eldeprine in clinical trials
#19. emsam in clinical trials
#20. jumexal in clinical trials
#21. parkryl in clinical trials
#22. plurimen in clinical trials
#23. seledat in clinical trials
#24. zelapar in clinical trials
#25. rasagiline in clinical trials
#26. agilect in clinical trials
#27.  xxxd271xxx  in clinical trials
#28. lazabemide in clinical trials
#29. pakio in clinical trials
#30. tempium in clinical trials
#31.  xxxd2389xxx  in clinical trials
#32. ladostigil in clinical trials
#33. mofegiline in clinical trials
#34.  xxxd2850xxx  in clinical trials
#35. phenelzine in clinical trials
#36.  xxxd3158xxx  in clinical trials
#37. tranylcypromine in clinical trials
#38.(#4 or #5 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 or #12 or #13 or #14 or #15 or #16 or #17 or #18 or #
19 or #20 or #21 or #22 or #23 or #24 or #25 or #26 or #27 or #28 or #29 or #30 or #31 or #32 or #33 or #
34 or #35 or #36 or #37)

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

56

appendix 2. medline search strategy
#1. parkinson$.tw.
#2. exp parkinsonian disorders/
#3. 1 or 2
#4. randomised controlled trial.pt.
#5. controlled clinical trial.pt.
#6. randomised.ab.
#7. placebo.ab.
#8. drug therapy.fs.
#9. randomly.ab.
#10. trial.ab.
#11. groups.ab.
#12. 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
#13. monoamine oxidase inhibitors/
#14. selegiline/
#15. selegiline.tw.
#16. deprenyl.tw.
#17. deprenil.tw.
#18. eldepryl.tw.
#19. jumex.tw.
#20. movergan.tw.
#21. anipryl.tw.
#22. antiparkin.tw.
#23. atapryl.tw.
#24. deprenaline.tw.
#25. egibren.tw.
#26. eldeprine.tw.
#27. emsam.tw.
#28. jumexal.tw.
#29. parkryl.tw.
#30. plurimen.tw.
#31. seledat.tw.
#32. zelapar.tw.
#33. rasagiline.tw.
#34. agilect.tw.
#35.  xxxd271xxx .tw.
#36. lazabemide.tw.
#37. pakio.tw.
#38. tempium.tw.
#39. isocarboxacid.tw.
#40. ladostigil.tw.
#41. mofegiline.tw.
#42.  xxxd2850xxx .tw.
#43. phenelzine.tw.
#44.  xxxd3158xxx .tw.
#45. tranylcypromine.tw.
#46. or/13-45
#47. 3 and 12 and 46
#48. exp animals/ not humans.sh.
#49. 47 not 48
#50. 49

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

57

appendix 3. embase search strategy
#1. parkinson disease/
#2. parkinsonism/
#3. parkinson$.tw.
#4. or/1-3
#5. selegiline/
#6. selegiline.tw.
#7. deprenyl.tw.
#8. deprenil.tw.
#9. eldepryl.tw.
#10. jumex.tw.
#11. movergan.tw.
#12. anipryl.tw.
#13. antiparkin.tw.
#14. atapryl.tw.
#15. deprenaline.tw.
#16. egibren.tw.
#17. eldeprine.tw.
#18. emsam.tw.
#19. jumexal.tw.
#20. parkryl.tw.
#21. plurimen.tw.
#22. seledat.tw.
#23. zelapar.tw.
#24. rasagiline/
#25. rasagiline.tw.
#26. agilect.tw.
#27.  xxxd271xxx .tw.
#28. lazabemide/
#29. lazabemide.tw.
#30. pakio.tw.
#31. tempium.tw.
#32.  xxxg1358xxx  inhibitor/
#33. monoamine oxidase inhibitor/ or  xxxd2389xxx / or ladostigil/ or lazabemide/ or mofegiline/ or  xxxd2850xxx / or phenelzine/ or
rasagiline/ or  xxxd3158xxx / or selegiline/ or tranylcypromine/
#34. or/5-33
#35. clinical tral/
#36. multicenter study/
#37. phase 2 clinical trial/
#38. phase 3 clinical trial/
#39. phase 4 clinical trial/
#40. randomised controlled trial/
#41. controlled study/
#42. meta analysis/
#43. double blind procedure/
#44. single blind procedure/
#45. randomisation/
#46. major clinical study/
#47. placebo/
#48. drug comparison/
#49. clinical study/
#50. (clin$ adj25 trial$).tw.
 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

58

#51. ((singl$ or doubl$ or tripl$ or trebl$) adj25 (blind$ or mask$)).tw.
#52. placebo$.tw.
#53. random$.tw.
#54. control$.tw.
#55. or/35-54
#56. human/
#57. nonhuman/
#58. 56 and 57
#59. 57 not 58
#60. 55 not 59
#61. 4 and 34 and 60
#62. 61

appendix 4. conference proceedings citation index ( xxxg584xxx )
#1 ts=(selegiline or deprenyl or deprenil or eldepryl or lazabemide or rasagiline or  xxxd271xxx )
#2 ts=(trial or random* or placebo* or control*)
#3 #1 and #2

what’s new
last assessed as up-to-date: 8 november 2011.

date

event

description

8 november 2011

new search has been performed

searches updated;  xxxd3158xxx  added as a new mao-b inhibitor (no relevant
trial found); one new trial included (parjupar, n=92); additional data
added from latest publications for two trials (swedish psg 1998, ukpdrg
2001) and minor corrections to previous data; risk of bias table added. conclusions unchanged

history
protocol first published: issue 3, 2004
review first published: issue 3, 2005

date

event

description

8 february 2007

new citation required and conclusions have changed

substantive amendment

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

59

contributions of authors
protocol: am, cc, ni, rs.
literature search: kat, rc, am, rs.
literature selection: kat, rc, am, cc.
papers quality assessment: kat, rc, am, cc.
data collection from papers: kat, rc, am, cc.
interpretation of data: cc, ni.
review writing: kat, rc, cc, am, ni, rs.

declarations of interest
cc, ni, and rs are all involved in the pd med trial.

sources of support
internal sources
• university of aberdeen, uk.
• university of birmingham, uk.

external sources
• the health foundation, uk.

index terms
medical subject headings (mesh)
antiparkinson agents [therapeutic use]; dopamine agonists [therapeutic use]; levodopa [therapeutic use]; monoamine oxidase
inhibitors [∗ therapeutic use]; parkinson disease [∗ drug therapy]; picolinic acids [therapeutic use]; randomized controlled trials as
topic; selegiline [therapeutic use]

mesh check words
humans

 xxxg1358xxx  inhibitors for early parkinson’s disease (review)
copyright © 2012 the cochrane collaboration. published by john wiley & sons, ltd.

60

