review
anti-inflammatory

emerging drugs for ocular allergy
andrea leonardi
university of padua, department of neuroscience, ophthalmology unit, via giustiniani 2,
35128 padova, italy
1. background
2. medical need
3. existing treatments and

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

therapeutic class review
4. current research goals
5. competitive environment
6. pharmacoeconomics
7. expert opinion

ocular allergy is a common condition that usually affects the conjunctiva of
the eye and is, therefore, often referred to as allergic conjunctivitis. the
severity of the disease can range from mild itching and redness, as seen in
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis, to the more severe, sight-threatening forms
such as vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis. the central mechanism in the
pathogenesis of these diseases is ige-mediated mast cell degranulation and
activation of t lymphocytes, eosinophils and conjunctival structural cells. the
pharmacotherapy of allergic conjunctivitis consists of several classes of drugs:
antihistamines, mast cell stabilisers, dual-acting agents and corticosteroids.
none of the available drugs completely abolishes the development of ocular
allergy. for this reason, new topical antiallergic/anti-inflammatory agents are
currently and continually under clinical trials. this review provides a background to ocular allergic diseases, the medical need for therapy and current
and potential new treatments.
keywords: allergic conjunctivitis, antihistamines,  xxxd371xxx , mast cell stabilisers,
new strategies, treatment of ocular allergy
expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3):505-520

1.

ashley publications
www.ashley-pub.com

background

ocular allergic manifestations are relatively common in the general population, considering that allergy affects 15 – 20% of people worldwide, and that ocular symptoms are present in a subset of ∼ 50% [1]. allergy is observed more frequently in
industrialised countries, as a consequence of the deviation of the immune system
towards a th2-type immune response favoured by a reduction in infection, air pollution and modern life styles [2]. this disease ranges in severity from mild forms,
which still interfere significantly with quality of life, to severe cases, which are
characterised by potential impairment of visual function.
the term ocular allergy refers to a collection of hypersensitivity disorders that
affect the lid, conjunctiva and/or cornea. various clinical forms are included in the
classification of ocular allergy: seasonal (sac) and perennial allergic conjunctivitis
(pac), vernal keratoconjunctivitis (vkc), atopic keratoconjunctivitis (akc), giant
papillary conjunctivitis (gpc) and contact or drug-induced dermoconjunctivitis.
sac and pac are the most common allergic diseases, accounting for almost 90%
of ocular allergic manifestations. these are, at the same time, the most difficult to
diagnose, because no typical or exclusive signs or symptoms can be defined. the
chronic forms, vkc, akc and gpc, are relatively rare, but clinically well characterised. each of these diseases has specific clinical features in terms of diagnosis, and
pharmacological and nonpharmacological management.
there is now overwhelming support for a genetic component of allergic diseases
[3]. discovery of the genetic basis of ocular allergic diseases would be invaluable, not
only with regard to their molecular aetiology, but also for the development of new
therapeutic modalities. all ocular allergic diseases have in common similar pathophysiological mechanisms, but are different in their clinical phenotypes and
subphenotypes, which render the diseases sometimes complex and difficult to

10.1517/14728214.10.3.505 © 2005 ashley publications ltd issn 1472-8214

505

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

diagnose and treat [4]. clinical phenotypes are the result of
multiple interactions among genetic factors (mostly still
unknown), exposure to external environmental conditions
[5], expression of multiple mediators, and activation of
inflammatory and structural cells.
treatment of ocular allergy should begin with conservative
measures, including allergen avoidance, environmental control, ocular irrigation and cold compresses. pharmacologically,
a complete therapeutic strategy is still a long way from being
realised, and at present a multiple approach is the ideal for the
treatment of this disease.
to better understand the therapeutic needs and future
strategies associated with ocular allergy, a brief summary on
immunopathology and clinical characteristics of the single
forms are necessary.
clinical forms of ocular allergy
sac and pac are typical ige-mediated reactions to environmental airborne allergens, such as grass and tree pollens,
mites, mould and animal dander [1]. sac is usually an acute
or subacute manifestation that is characterised by peaks of
self-limiting signs and symptoms, whereas those of pac are
present all year with seasonal exacerbations depending on
individual sensitisation to airborne allergens. although these
conditions are not serious, they may be very disturbing to
patients, can affect their quality of life and have significant
socioeconomic impact. the hallmark signs and symptoms are
itching, redness and puffy eyes. patients may also complain of
tearing, mucous discharge, burning and swelling. however,
no ocular sign is specific to sac or pac.
vkc is a relatively rare, chronic form of ocular allergy
that can cause severe inflammation and visual complications
[6]. it appears most often in boys and is seasonal, but can at
times be perennial. it is a th2 lymphocyte-mediated disease
and specific ige sensitisation can be identified in only 50%
of patients. mast cells, t cells, eosinophils and their mediators all play major roles in the clinical manifestation of
vkc. typical th2-type cytokines, il-4, -5 and -13, as well
as other proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth
factors and enzymes, are overexpressed in the conjunctiva of
vkc patients [6-8]. most of the vkc patients complain of
symptoms from early spring to autumn, with variations
among the climactic zones. in warm or subtropical countries, symptoms may persist throughout the year. exacerbations of the disease or acute episodes beyond the chronic
inflammation can be triggered by either allergen exposure or,
more frequently, by nonspecific stimuli such as wind, light
and dust. intense itching, tearing and photophobia are the
classic symptoms of these patients. the tarsal form of the
disease is characterised by irregularly sized hypertropic papillae, leading to a cobblestone appearance on the upper tarsal
plate, whereas the limbal form is characterised by multiple
gelatinous, yellow-grey infiltrates, and papillae at the limbus, which may appear thickened and opacified for 360°.
punctate keratitis, epithelial macroerosion or ulcers, and
1.1

506

plaques are signs of corneal involvement, which resolves
with different levels of subepithelial scarring.
akc is a persistent or chronic inflammatory, bilateral condition that can be defined as the ocular manifestation of
atopic dermatitis [9]. akc can have sight-threatening sequelae
from corneal complications. high serum total ige levels are a
common laboratory test finding. as in vkc, the pathogenesis
of akc primarily involves t lymphocyte and eosinophil activation, as well as mast cell activation and its typical mediator
cascade of effects [10]. generally, it emerges in young adults,
and continues through the fifth decade of life, reaching its
peak incidence at the ages of 30 – 50 [11].
gpc is a chronic inflammatory process originating from
conjunctival mechanical microtrauma secondary to the contact lens edge, or an external device causing chronic irritation
of the upper eyelid with each blink, leading to giant papillae
formation on the tarsal conjunctiva. first described in
patients wearing rigid contact lenses, gpc may occur with
any type of contact lenses, exposed sutures, ocular prosthesis
or ocular surface irregularities [12,13]. previously considered an
allergic condition, gpc has similarities with vkc for the
morphology of giant papillae, and some immunopathological
findings such as increased mast cell number, eosinophil and
t cell infiltration, expression of th2-type cytokines, and
increased production of leukotrienes and  xxxg354xxx  [7,14]. in
contact lens gpc, mild lens intolerance progresses to foreign
body sensation, itching, blurred vision and increased mucus
production. intolerance progresses until patients are no
longer able to wear their lenses. the defining characteristic of
gpc is giant papillae formation > 0.3 mm in diameter.
conjunctival hyperaemia, limbal infiltrates, mucous
discharge and lens deposits are typical.
immunopathogenesis
acute and chronic allergic diseases have in common: i) sensitisation to environmental allergens; ii) ige-mast cell activation
with subsequent mediator cascade; iii) conjunctival inflammation with a prevalence of eosinophils; iv) presence of
lymphocytes with a th2 profile of cytokine production; and
v) mucosal hyper-reactivity.
other mechanisms may amplify the mucosal allergic
inflammation: activation of conjunctival epithelial cells,
fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells, neuromediatorinduced reactions, in situ activation of inflammatory cells
and/or production of th1-type cytokines.
1.2

sensitisation
like the respiratory mucosa, the conjunctiva is normally
exposed to picogram quantities of environmental allergens
such as pollens, dust mite fecal particles, animal dander and
other proteins. when deposited on the mucosa, these antigens
are processed by langerhans, dendritic or other antigenpresenting cells (apcs) in the mucosal epithelium. proteolitically cleaved antigens bind to the antigen recognition site of
major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class ii molecules.
1.2.1

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

leonardi

carried by apc cells, antigen is presented to naive th0
lymphocytes at some unknown location that could be the
local draining lymph nodes, where th0 cells expressing
antigen-specific t cell receptors recognise the antigenic peptide. complex and multiple simultaneous contacts and
cytokine exchanges between apc and t cells are necessary to
trigger the antigen-specific th0 to differentiate into th2 lymphocytes [2,15]. the cytokines released by th2 cells,  xxxg1177xxx , -4,
-5, -6 and -13, and  xxxg526xxx  (gm-csf), stimulate b cell ige production and
inhibit the development of th1-mediated delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions.
allergic reaction
in the sensitised host, mast cells residing in the conjunctival
mucosa have specific ige antibodies bound to the cell surface
by high affinity receptors. this reaction has been well studied
in the eye using the conjunctival allergen challenge – also
called the conjunctival provocation test (cpt). after the
exposure to natural environmental allergens or after the cpt,
antigens bind to adjacent specific ige on mast cells, causing a
crosslinking of the molecules and signalling the subsequent
degranulation of the mast cell, with the release of inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, tryptase, prostaglandins
and leukotrienes. these trigger the clinical manifestations of
the acute phase of the disease (early phase). mast cell degranulation also induces activation of vascular endothelial cells, and
thus the expression of chemokines and adhesion molecules
such as regulated upon activation, normal t cell expressed
and secreted ( xxxg363xxx ), monocytes chemotactic protein-1,
il-8,  xxxg354xxx , intercellular adhesion molecule (icam)-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule (vcam) and  xxxg2049xxx . these
factors initiate the recruitment phase of inflammatory cells in
the conjunctival mucosa. the late-phase reaction to allergen
stimulation occurs hours after the allergen exposure and is
typified by the recurrence or prolongation of symptoms, and
characterised by mucosal infiltration of eosinophils, neutrophils, basophils and t lymphocytes. a variety of mediators
released by these cells contribute to the continued symptomatology and the development of late-phase inflammation. this
late-phase reaction mirrors the findings in persistent/chronic
allergic disorders [16-19].
1.2.2

mast cells
in normal individuals, mast cells are particularly abundant in
the conjunctival stroma, especially at the limbus. conjunctival biopsies from symptomatic allergic patients have shown an
increase in subepithelial and epithelial mast cells, with evidence of mast cell degranulation [20]. two different types of
mast cells have been shown also in the conjunctiva, depending
on their content in tryptase alone (mucosal mast cell) or both
tryptase and chymase (connective tissue mast cell [mctc])
[21]. the vast majority of mast cells in the conjunctiva belong
to the mctc subtype. activated mast cells, in addition to the
well-known gamut of inflammatory mediators, can also
1.2.3

release several cytokines such as il-4, -6, -8 and -13, tnf-alpha
and transforming growth factor-beta, all of which have profound
effects on the mucosa, including the induction of expression
of chemokines and adhesion molecules that contribute to the
recruitment of inflammatory cells [22-24].
eosinophils
influx of eosinophils is essential in allergic inflammation and
produces profound changes in the conjunctival mucosa [25].
eosinophils are activated by interactions with other inflammatory cells, mediators such as  xxxd2973xxx 
(paf), c5a, allergen–antibody complexes, and possibly ige
through high- and low-affinity receptors (fcepsilonri and -ii).
activated eosinophils are an important source of leukotrienes,
prostaglandins, cytokines and chemokines, and release very
basic, highly charged polypeptides, including major basic protein (mbp),  xxxg1965xxx  (ecp) eosinophilderived neurotoxin and  xxxg720xxx . these proteins
may bind to basement membrane proteoglycans and
 xxxd2289xxx  to cause cellular disaggregation and epithelial
desquamation. ecp and mbp are also epitheliotoxic and are
involved in the corneal damage that occurs in severe chronic
allergic conditions [25,26].
1.2.4

t cells
helper lymphocytes (cd4+ t cells) are the predominant
population in inflamed conjunctival tissues [27-29]. an
increased expression of th2-type cytokines (il-4, -5 and -13)
has been demonstrated in sac, vkc and akc. compared
with sac, vkc is thought to involve an overexpression of
these cytokines and chemokines specific for eosinophil attraction ( xxxg354xxx ) in addition to other mechanisms [6]. however,
in addition to typical th2-derived cytokines, increases of
 xxxg1141xxx  have been recently shown both in vkc and akc,
suggesting that in the most severe atopic conditions, a
cell-mediated hypersensitivity may also occur [7].
1.2.5

2.

medical need

ocular allergic patients need fast relief of signs and symptoms, long-lasting therapeutic effects, comfortable and safe
topical drugs, and a convenient treatment regimen. the
most common diseases, sac and pac, are classic ige-mediated disorders, in which the therapeutic focus is mostly confined to the suppression of mast cells, their degranulation
and the effects of histamine and other mast cell-derived
mediators. conversely, severe chronic disorders such as vkc
and akc are both ige- and t cell-mediated, leading to a
chronic inflammation where eosinophil, lymphocyte and
structural cell activation characterises the conjunctival allergic reaction. in these cases, stabilisation of mast cells and
histamine or other mediator receptor antagonists are frequently insufficient to control conjunctival inflammation.
severe disease necessitates the use of potent drugs and a
more complex therapeutic regimen, often with more

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

507

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

table 1. current topical ocular allergy medications.
class

drug

indicate dosing advantages

disadvantages

vasoconstrictor/
antihistamine combinations

 xxxd2698xxx / xxxd2906xxx 

q.i.d.

rapid onset of action

short duration of action
tachyphylaxis
mydriasis
ocular irritation
hypersensitivity
hypertension
potential for
inappropriate patient use

topical antihistamines

 xxxd2469xxx 
emedastine

q.i.d.

rapid onset of action
relief of itching
relief of signs and
symptoms of sac

short duration of action

mast cell stabilisers

 xxxd1763xxx 
nedocromil
lodoxamide
naaga
pemirolast

q.i.d.

relief of signs and
symptoms of sac and
pac

long-term usage
no rapid onset of action
prophylactic dosing

antihistamine/mast cell
stabilisers (dual-acting)

azelastine
epinastine
ketotifen
olopatadine

b.i.d.

treatment of signs and
symptoms of sac
rapid onset of action
long duration of action
excellent comfort

corticostesteroids

 xxxd2509xxx 
fuormetholone
 xxxd1850xxx 
 xxxd3124xxx 
dexamethasone
prednisolone

q.i.d.

treatment of allergic
inflammation
use in severe forms of
allergies

risk for long-term side
effects
no mast cell stabilisation
potential for
inappropriate patient use
requires close monitoring

b.i.d.: twice-daily; naaga: n-acetyl-aspartyl  xxxd2431xxx ; pac: perennial allergic conjunctivitis; q.i.d.: four times daily; sac: seasonal allergic conjunctivitis.

frequent side effects. none of the available drugs covers all
therapeutic requirements for suppression of conjunctival
allergies.

existing treatments and therapeutic class
review

they may cause several side effects, such as rebound hyperaemia, follicular conjunctivitis, lacrimal punctal occlusion and
systemic hypertension. furthermore, their unregulated
availability can lead to abuse in the chronic allergy sufferer.

3.

current available topical drugs for allergic conjunctivitis
belong to different pharmacological classes: vasoconstrictors,
antihistamines, mast cell stabilisers, nsaids and corticosteroids. a new class of antiallergic agents has both mast cell
stabilising and antihistaminic pharmacological activities; thus,
these drugs are called dual-acting agents (table 1).
vasoconstrictors
these agents are alpha-adrenergic agonists, and are commonly
used topically for relief of conjunctival redness [30]. the
number and commercial names of these products are countless all over the world. although they are well known and
widely used, their short duration of action (≤ 2 h) limits their
value when compared with the newer antiallergic drugs available. topical vasocontrictors are not usually recommended,
because they are nonspecific and not pharmacologically active
in the cascade of events that leads to the allergic reaction.
3.1

508

antihistamines
topical antihistamines are the first line in the treatment of ocular allergy [30]. these drugs are h1-receptor competitive antagonists of varying specificity, potency and duration of action. the
first-generation antihistamines,  xxxd2906xxx  and  xxxd186xxx ,
have a long safety record, but are known for their burn on
instillation, the rapid onset and disappearance of their effects,
and their limited potency. these are still available in over-thecounter products, particularly in association with vasoconstrictors. the newer antihistamines are also h1-antagonists, but
they have a longer duration of action (4 – 6 h), and are better
tolerated than their predecessors. these include  xxxd2469xxx 
hydrochloride 0.5% and emedastine difumarate 0.05%.
the clinical efficacy of ophthalmic  xxxd2469xxx  was
shown in numerous studies [31,32], but the newer emedastine
appears to be stronger and more selective [33,34]. in fact, in a
direct comparison with  xxxd2469xxx , emedastine proved significantly more effective in alleviating chemosis and lid
swelling [33]. both drugs were effective and well tolerated in
3.2

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

leonardi

paediatric subjects with allergic conjunctivitis; however,
emedastine was superior for relief of itching, redness and eyelid swelling in the follow-up visits [34]. in two in vitro studies,
emedastine, and to a much lesser degree  xxxd2469xxx ,
blocked histamine-stimulated proinflammatory cytokine
(il-8 and -6) release from conjunctival epithelial cells and
fibroblasts [35,36].
systemic antihistamines can be used for the treatment of
ocular allergy. however, ocular allergy is a topical disease with
typical anatomical and pharmacological conditions for convenient local delivery [37]. topical agents provide faster relief
of ocular symptoms compared with oral agents, because they
are delivered directly into the target tissue at a higher concentration. in contrast, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis is an equally
frequent condition generally treated with systemic antihistamines, which have proved to be effective in relieving
nasal and conjunctival signs and symptoms. first-generation
h1-receptor antagonists may provide some relief of ocular
itching, but are sedating and have anticholinergic effects such
as dry mouth, dry eye, blurred vision and urinary retention.
the second-generation antihistamines offer the same efficacy
as their predecessors, but with a low sedating profile and lack
of anticholinergic activity. these drugs attenuate the early
phase and some of the features of the late-phase ocular
response, including swelling and redness. second-generation
anti-histamines include acrivastine, cetirizine, ebastine, fexofenadine, loratadine and mizolastine.  xxxd1846xxx  and levocetirizine are considered a further evolution of the secondgeneration agents [37]. nevertheless, in a recent study, the
most successful systemic antihistamine, loratadine, was shown
to be inferior to local antiallergy therapy in alleviating allergic
signs and symptoms [38].
mast cell stabilisers
mast cell stabilisers inhibit degranulation by interrupting the
normal chain of intracellular signals resulting from the
crosslinking and activation of fcepsilonri by allergen [39]. this promotes activation of various kinase cascades, resulting in ca2+
mobilisation and cytoskeletal changes, culminating in immediate release of stored mediators such as histamine, tryptase,
chymase and some cytokines. simultaneously, downstream
signalling stimulates a number of transcription factors, leading to activation of genes that regulate the release of newly
formed mediators such as prostaglandin (pg)d2, leukotriene
(lt)c4 and cytokines (e.g., tnf-alpha). these transcription factors include nuclear factor of activated t cells (nfat),
 xxxg1559xxx , signal transducer and activator of transcription
(stat)-6,  xxxg1222xxx , c-fos and c-jun [39].
several mast cell stabilisers are available for use in the eye:
 xxxd1763xxx  4%, nedocromil sodium 2%, lodoxamide
 xxxd3449xxx  ophthalmic solution 0.1%, spaglumic acid 4%
and pemirolast potassium ophthalmic solution 0.1%. all
these drugs inhibit mast cell degranulation, the release of
histamine and the other preformed mediators and the
 xxxd208xxx  cascade.
3.3

 xxxd1763xxx  was the first of these molecules to be
developed, and an enormous body of literature is devoted to
proving its efficacy in all clinical forms of ocular allergy [40-44].
the recommended dosing schedule is four to six times daily,
with a loading period of at least 7 days and an onset of activity
after as long as 2 weeks. however, in human conjunctivalderived mast cells in culture,  xxxd1763xxx  only partially inhibited cell degranulation and histamine release [45]. this may
explain the modest efficacy of this drug in the clinical
treatment of ocular allergy.
nedocromil appears to be more potent than  xxxd1763xxx , and
is approved for twice-daily dosing [46,47]. nedocromil was
shown to stabilise both connective tissue and mucosal mast
cells, as opposed to  xxxd1763xxx , and appears to inhibit mast
cells, eosinophils, epithelial cells and sensory nerves by a common pathway. it has been shown to be superior to placebo
and  xxxd1763xxx  in trials of seasonal and perennial allergic
conjunctivitis, and other ocular allergic disorders [48].
lodoxamide has been available since 1993 in the us and
europe for the treatment of vkc; however, it has also been
shown to be effective against allergic conjunctivitis. its mechanism of action is thought to be similar to that of  xxxd1763xxx , as
it was shown to prevent histamine release. inhibition of eosinophil activation and degranulation is the proposed mechanism for its efficacy against corneal signs such as keratitis and
shield ulcers in severe allergic disease [49]. lodoxamide was
shown to be superior to placebo [50],  xxxd1763xxx  [51] and
n-acetyl aspartyl  xxxd2431xxx  (naaga) [52] for the treatment of vkc, and equal or superior to  xxxd1763xxx  for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis [53]. its recommended dosing is
four times daily.
pemirolast is another mast cell stabiliser that has been shown
to alleviate the signs of allergic conjunctivitis [54]. previous
in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated the efficacy of
pemirolast in inhibiting the antigen-induced release of inflammatory mediators (e.g., histamine, ltc4, -d4, and -e4) from
human mast cells and subsequently in preventing signs and
symptoms associated with allergic conjunctivitis. pemirolast is
currently approved for a four times daily dosing regimen [55].
dipeptide n-acetyl-aspartyl  xxxd2431xxx  6% has been
widely used in europe as topical eye drops in the treatment of
allergic conjunctivitis, vkc and gpc [52,56]. naaga is
known to inhibit leukotriene synthesis, histamine release by
mast cells, and complement-derived anaphylatoxin production. this antiallergic compound was also shown to directly
inhibit leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells induced by
proinflammatory stimuli, and abrogates tnf-alpha-induced
expression of adhesion molecules on granulocytes and
endothelial cells [57]. these pharmacological properties confer
a potential anti-inflammatory activity to naaga.
dual-action antiallergic molecules
the newest trend in ocular allergy treatment is the dual mechanism molecule that inhibits histamine release from mast
cells, and competitively inhibits histamine binding to
3.4

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

509

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

h1-receptors. examples of this class are olopatadine,
ketotifen, azelastine and epinastine. the advantage offered by
these molecules is the rapidity of symptomatic relief given by
immediate histamine receptor antagonism, which alleviates
itching and redness, coupled with the long-term diseasemodifying benefit of mast cell stabilisation. olopatadine is
approved for treatment of all the signs and symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis (i.e., itching, redness, lid swelling and
chemosis), whereas ketotifen, epinastine and azelastine are
approved for the treatment of ocular itching [58].
olopatadine has been shown in numerous in vitro [59-61],
in vivo [62] and clinical studies [58] to effectively and potently
inhibit conjunctival mast cells in allergic patients with seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis and allergic symptoms associated with contact lens wear [58]. olopatadine 0.1%
was shown to reduce the levels of histamine, the cellular infiltrate, and icam expression compared with placebo after conjunctival allergen challenge, indicating that it reduced the
release of mast cell-derived mediators in humans [63]. olopatadine was demonstrated to be more effective and comfortable
than ketotifen in seasonal studies [64,65], and more effective
than the mast cell stabiliser nedocromil [66], and the antiinflammatory agent ketorolac, in the conjunctival allergen
challenge model in allergic subjects [67].
ketotifen has been shown to inhibit the release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells, basophils and neutrophils,
to inhibit the production and release of ltc4 and -b4, paf
production by normal human neutrophils and eosinophils,
and eosinophil chemotaxis [68]. clinically, it has been shown
to be effective in the allergen challenge model, superior to
both placebo [69] and  xxxd1763xxx  [70], and a safe treatment
option for children with allergic conjunctivitis [71].
azelastine, which was available in the past for rhinitis, has
been approved for ocular itching associated with allergic
conjunctivitis. azelastine was shown to reduce icam-1
expression on conjunctival epithelium, and inflammatory
cell infiltration during both early- and late-phase allergic
reactions [72]. in placebo-controlled environmental and antigen challenge clinical trials, azelastine was demonstrated to
be significantly effective in adults and children ≥ 4 years old,
and to be at least as effective as  xxxd2469xxx  [73-76]. the
duration was shown to be at least ≥ 8 h. the most significant side effect with azelastine is an unpleasant taste
following instillation.
epinastine is a new-generation histamine h1-receptor
antagonist with mast cell-stabilising activity and no effect on
muscarinic receptors [77]. epinastine was shown to suppress
allergic inflammation not only through its strong antihistamine and antimediator effects, but also by inhibiting eosinophilic chemotaxis and the expression of adhesion molecules
involved in chemotaxis [78,79]. its safety and efficacy have been
investigated in the clinical conjunctival allergen challenge
model, and in patients with active seasonal allergy, where it
was shown to rapidly and significantly inhibit hyperaemia,
chemosis and lid swelling for ≥ 8 h [80,81].
510

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
ketorolac 0.5% is the only ophthalmic nsaid currently
fda approved for use in acute seasonal allergic conjunctivitis,
for the relief of ocular itching. the mechanism of action of
this nsaid is inhibition of the enzyme, cox, thereby blocking the synthesis of prostaglandins, particularly,  xxxg1073xxx , which
is known to incite significant and immediate allergic symptomatology. evaluation in two separate clinical trials [82,83]
proved ketorolac to be effective and well tolerated for the
treatment of allergic conjunctivitis when administered four
times daily. however, comparative clinical studies in the conjunctival challenge model proved ketorolac inferior to the
dual acting agent, olopatadine [67]. diclofenac sodium 0.1%
was also shown to have some effect in controlling signs and
symptoms of seasonal allergic and vernal conjunctivitis [84,85].
3.5

corticosteroids
corticosteroids should be the last choice in treating allergic
disease. they should be avoided in seasonal and perennial
allergic conjunctivitis, although their use is at times inevitable in vkc and akc. pharmacologically, they work at both
the molecular and cellular levels, passing through plasma
membranes and binding to steroid receptors on the cytoplasm. the corticosteroid–receptor complex then travels to
the nucleus, where it directs changes in mrna, stimulating
the synthesis of specific proteins that regulate the antiinflammatory response. on a cellular level, they do not
directly stabilise immune cell membranes or inhibit histamine release; however, they may modulate the mast cell
response by inhibiting mediators (e.g., gm-csf,  xxxg1177xxx ,
icam-1, il-4, etc.) that induce the proliferation and
recruitment of additional mast cells. thus, mechanistically,
they are not the ideal therapy choice for allergic disease;
however, clinically, are the most effective anti-inflammatory
agents in active ocular allergy.
the well-known side effects of cataracts, glaucoma, superinfection and corneal melting contraindicate their use in all
but extreme cases. the relatively new molecules, the so-called
soft steroids, have very little systemic and corneal absorption
compared with the stronger prednisolone and dexamethasone.
 xxxd2132xxx  and  xxxd2555xxx  are well recognised to be the
steroids of choice when a mild, weakly penetrating drug is
needed.  xxxd2132xxx  can reduce the signs and symptoms
of vkc, including tearing, discharge, conjunctival redness,
papillary hypertrophy and trantas dots [86].
 xxxd2509xxx  (not available in europe),  xxxd3124xxx  and
 xxxd1850xxx  (not available in us) are examples of the latest
generation of soft steroids, and are being investigated for use
in allergic conjunctivitis. they appear to be less likely related
to typical corticosteroids side effects such as increased
intraocular pressure.  xxxd2509xxx  0.2% four times daily has
been shown effective in allergic conjunctivitis [87-88] and in
gpc [89].  xxxd1850xxx  has a significant therapeutic effect on
both the induced conjunctival early and late allergic reaction
and in active sac [90].
3.6

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

leonardi

when considering steroid therapy for severe ocular allergy,
the minimal dose for the shortest duration of time should be
used. the therapeutic effects of the drug, as well as the potential side effects, must be monitored, and topical therapy
tapered slowly over several days.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

4.

current research goals

the newest concepts highlight the complexity of mechanisms
involved in the development of allergy and allergic inflammation. these have stimulated research, not only into more
effective agents within the typical antiallergic therapeutic
classes (new antihistamines, mast cell stabilisers, antileukotrienes), but also have prompted the development of new
agents that specifically interact with target cells and/or mediators. this is the case of the immunomodulator agents, such as
cyclosporin and tacrolimus, which are active on t cells,
monoclonal antibodies against ige and  xxxg354xxx , and agents
that interfere with adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors. for example, preclinical studies indicate that blockade of
molecules required for leukocyte recruitment into the
conjunctiva ( xxxg354xxx , very late antigen [vla]-4 and
 xxxg2406xxx ) can inhibit the allergic response.
another new area of investigation is the genetics of ocular
allergy. several studies in animal models, currently used to
clarify the pathophysiology of ocular allergy and to improve
therapeutic intervention in this disease [91], have shed light on
its possible genetic basis. individuals who develop allergy
probably have a local propensity to overexpress ige or
cytokines, such as il-4, -5 and -10 and  xxxg354xxx , which prime
conjunctival mast cells to become activated by allergens [19].
thus, modulation of ige, il-4, -5 and -10, or  xxxg354xxx 
production in situ may be one future modality of ocular
allergy therapy.
a greater understanding of the mast cell will certainly lead
to more precisely designed targets and treatment choices, and
even additional indications for drugs that inhibit mast cell
activity. recent work focusing on mast cell-deficient and
chemokine gene-deficient mice are revealing unique pathways
for conjunctival mast cell priming and activation [19]. data
indicate that beta-chemokines, such as macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1alpha and  xxxg354xxx , are necessary not only for
the recruitment of inflammatory cells in the late-phase reaction, but also are obligate costimulatory signals for mast cells
during disease pathogenesis [81].
more work is necessary to understand the pathogenic role
of t cells and resident dendritic cells in ocular allergic conditions. the isolation of t cell and dendritic cell lines might
help to better understand the local interactions between these
populations of cells. an analysis of t cell subsets infiltrating
the conjunctiva and their functional phenotype in the different conjunctival diseases will aid in understanding their pathogenic role in the development of different allergic
phenotypes. similarly, an analysis of dendritic cell subsets in
the conjunctiva might reveal that the dynamic of apcs in the

conjunctiva is critical to the development of local diseases [19].
this research may launch local immunomodulation as a treatment of ocular allergy. for example, in a mouse model of
allergic eye disease, an  xxxd2806xxx  was shown to
suppress allergic eye disease by a downregulation of recruitment of eosinophils and other inflammatory cells essential to
the immunopathogenesis of ocular atopy [93]. thus, arresting
il-1-dependent activation of resident apcs might inhibit
both mast cell activation and the late-phase response.
even more interestingly, systemic or conjunctival administration of immunostimulatory sequence oligodeoxynucleotides
(odns) was shown to significantly inhibit allergic responses in
a mouse model of ocular allergy [94], indicating that odns may
be another form of immunotherapy in the future.
matrix metalloproteases (mmp), as well as other proteases,
such as tryptase, plasmin, urokinase and their inhibitors, are
thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of allergic conjunctivitis via their influence on the function and migration of
inflammatory cells, as well as on matrix deposition and degradation [95,96]. although it is clear that enhanced conjunctival
inflammation and corneal complications are associated with
increased expression of mmp [97], at least in vkc, the
therapeutic potential of specific mmp inhibitors is not clear.
these potential interventions would be pertinent not only
in severe allergic conditions, such as vkc, akc and, at times,
gpc, but also in the milder seasonal and perennial allergic
conditions.
5.

competitive environment

see also table 2
5.1 novel histamine antagonists and mast cell
stabilisers

a newer stronger concentration of olopatadine 0.2% is being
investigated that would allow for a once-daily regimen [98].
this would be truly advantageous to the ocular allergy patient
used to instilling drops four, six and even eight times daily.
ebastine and its corresponding oxidised carboxylic acid,
carebastine, are new antihistamines that may be beneficial
not only for h1-receptor antagonism, but also for reducing
histamine-, paf- and leukotriene-induced bronchoconstriction, and inhibiting histamine release from challenged cells.
carebastine is in phase iii trials for conjunctivitis. in a
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study,
patients with sac were treated with an eye drop formulation of carebastine 2.5 mg/ml or placebo [99]. carebastine
was significantly better than placebo at relieving the effects
of sac, as early as 15 min after administration, and the
effect lasted for 14 days. carebastine was well tolerated and
there were no differences in adverse events between the two
groups. no further development has been reported on the
compound since 2000.
 xxxd2572xxx  is a potent h1-selective antihistamine,
widely used orally, that has been recently formulated as a

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

511

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

table 2. topical drugs in development with potential use in ocular allergy.
drug

class

mechanisms of action

side effects

phase

olopatadine 0.2%
(alcon)

antihistamine/
mast cell stabiliser

h1-receptor antagonism
cell membrane
stabilisation

not reported

phase iii

 xxxd3411xxx 
(kissei)

antihistamine/
mast cell stabiliser
vasoprotectant
anti-inflammatory

h1-receptor antagonism
cell membrane
stabilisation
anti- xxxg2269xxx 

not reported

marketed in japan, china
and korea

 xxxd317xxx  besilate 1%
(senju)

antihistamine

h1-receptor antagonism

mild topical burning

phase iii

carebastine 2.5 mg/ml
(almirall prodesfarma)

antihistamine

h1-receptor antagonism

mild topical burning

phase iii

apafant (de-081)
(santen pharmaceutical)

anti-inflammatory

paf antagonism

limited effect in earlyand late-phase reaction

discontinued

bertilimab
(cat-213)
(cambridge antibody
technology)

monoclonal antibody

chemokine modulator
ccr3 chemokine
antagonist

limited effect in early
phase

phase ii clinical

cylosporin a 0.05%
(allergan)

immunomodulator

inhibition of calcineurin
blocks the release of
nfat-mediated cytokines
from t lymphocytes

burning
marketed in us for dry
potential for systemic side eye syndrome
effects
phase iii for akc
higher doses (1 – 2%)
required for severe ocular
allergies

tacrolimus ( xxxd3271xxx )
(fujisawa/sucampo)

immunomodulator

inhibition of calcineurin
blocks the release of
nfat-mediated cytokines
from t lymphocytes

not known

phase iii

akc: atopic keratoconjunctivitis; ccr: cc  xxxg565xxx ; nfat: nuclear factor of activated t cells; paf:  xxxd2973xxx .

0.05% ophthalmic solution. a recent trial failed to demonstrate superiority of this topical antihistamine with placebo
when a single dose of treatment was instilled following conjunctival allergen challenge, but efficacy was superior to
placebo in preventing the allergen-induced reaction after
2 weeks of treatment [100].
mizolastine is an h1-antihistamine with anti-inflammatory properties; it has been developed and launched for the
treatment of allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis and urticaria.
the drug has demonstrated high efficacy in relieving both
seasonal and perennial allergic diseases in clinical studies. in
addition to its antihistaminic effect, it inhibits the production and release of mediators involved in the late phase of
the allergic response, which cause typical allergy symptoms.
topical use of mizolastine has been postulated, but not
further reported.
senju pharmaceutical, under licence from tanabe seiyaku,
is developing an ophthalmic formulation of  xxxd317xxx  besilate for the potential treatment of allergic conjunctivitis. in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised, pairedcomparison, single-centre japanese study of  xxxd317xxx ,
15 healthy volunteers with a medical history of allergic conjunctivitis were enrolled in a conjunctival allergen challenge
protocol [101]. one drop of  xxxd317xxx  1.0% was instilled to
512

one eye at 30 min, 4 h or 8 h before allergen challenge,
whereas placebo was instilled in the contralateral eye.  xxxd317xxx  besilate was superior to placebo in preventing ocular
itching at all time points from 30 min to 4 h.
a binding protein derived from tick saliva, ev-131, has
been found to contain a bioactive substance that counters
the host’s defence reactions at the feeding site. this molecule
has broad spectrum anti-inflammatory activities, apparent
low toxicity and immunogenicity, and excellent stability.
ev-131 binds  xxxd2281xxx  and appears to have activities
that include mast cell stabilisation, inhibition of vascular
adhesion molecule expression, inhibition of neutrophil and
eosinophil chemotaxis, and inhibition of allergen-induced
airway hyper-responsiveness [102].
 xxxd3411xxx  (n-3,4-dimethoxycinnamoyl  xxxd189xxx )
has been in clinical use in japan for many years to treat allergic diseases such as allergic conjunctivitis, rhinitis, bronchial
asthma and atopic dermatitis. its mechanism of action is
based on the inhibition of antigen-induced release of chemical mediators from mast cells and basophils [103].  xxxd3411xxx  is
also known to be effective against keloids, the formation of
which is thought to be associated with excessive proliferation
of, and excessive collagen synthesis by, fibroblasts. for this
reason, ophthalmic formulation of  xxxd3411xxx  has been used in

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

leonardi

japan for the treatment
keratoconjunctivitis [104].

of

vernal

and

atopic

lipooxygenase pathway inhibitors
the significance of leukotrienes in the pathogenesis of
asthma has propelled an enormous amount of research into
antileukotriene drug development. bronchial hyperreactivity, mucus secretion and leukocyte chemotaxis are
only some of the inflammatory events in which they are
known to participate. in ocular allergy, antileukotrienes
would be expected to function only in the chronic, more
severe disease phenotypes such as vkc and akc. they are
considered steroid-sparing drugs in asthma, and may have a
similar future indication in ophthalmology. antilipoxygenase drugs prevent the synthesis of leukotrienes in much the
same way that the nsaids inhibit cox and prostaglandin
synthesis. a number of antileukotriene agents have been
developed for asthma, and three are currently approved by
the fda:  xxxd3545xxx  and montelukast are receptor antagonists for ltc4, -d4 and -e4, and  xxxd3554xxx  is a  xxxg147xxx 
inhibitor that blocks ltb4, c4, d4 and -e4 synthesis. the
cysteinyl leukotrienic antagonist,  xxxd3545xxx , was investigated in experimental allergic conjunctivitis.  xxxd3545xxx 
reversed the effects on nitrite (no) release in 48/80, but had
no effect on histamine content. by inhibiting the late-phase
no component of the conjunctival hypersensitivity
response, these agents may contribute to the management of
ocular inflammatory responses [105].
only montelukast has been investigated for ophthalmic
use, and was found to be effective in reducing the ocular signs
and symptoms associated with vkc [106]. c1-1004, a  xxxg147xxx  and cox inhibitor, is currently under investigation.
this compound may offer the efficacy of a steroid, yet with a
better safety profile.  xxxd2995xxx  is also being developed for the
treatment of asthma, and may, in addition, inhibit eosinophils
and the release of ecp. these latter properties may make this
an interesting candidate for the treatment of corneal damage
in vkc and akc.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

5.2

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
the effects of nsaids on experimental allergic conjunctivitis
induced by ocular challenge with antigen in actively sensitised
guinea-pigs have been investigated [107]. nsaids inhibited
the increase in  xxxg1073xxx  and -e2 by 90 – 95% in ocular lavage
fluid, lowered itch–scratch response (isr) to approximately
a third of the vehicle-treated group, but scarcely affected
plasma exudation in the conjunctiva. these results suggest
that a part of antigen-induced isr may be attributable to
prostaglandins, but not plasma exudation.
de-081 or apafant, and isv-611 or lexipafant, are two
ophthalmic formulations of paf antagonists that have been
studied for potential treatment of ocular allergic inflammation. however, the studies were discontinued, as it became
clear that paf did not play a major role in ocular allergy [108].
5.3

corticosteroids
corticosteroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory
agents for the treatment of allergic cellular inflammation.
maintaining the anti-inflammatory activity of these drugs
without the risk of side effects would be a great advancement in the management of allergic conjunctivitis. the
ocular anti-inflammatory effect of al-2512 was shown to be
equivalent to dexamethasone, and superior to prednisolone
acetate in rat and feline models of ocular inflammation,
respectively [109]. this steroid provides anti-inflammatory
efficacy equivalent to dexamethasone, yet with a reduced
risk of inducing ocular hypertension.
5.4

anti-ige compounds
human ige pentapeptide (hepp), a synthetic antiallergic
agent that has been under investigation for many years, is
thought to competitively block the binding of ige to cell
receptors. one study with 50 patients showed that hepp
0.5% was safe and effective in relieving the signs and symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis, and at least as effective as
 xxxd1763xxx  4% [110].
a recombinant, humanised nonanaphylactogenic antibody against ige has been developed that could provide a
new therapeutic alternative to existing treatment classes.
 xxxd2784xxx  is a novel anti-ige antibody that is directed
against the receptor-binding domain of ige. this binding is
specific to free ige, so that ige is unable to interact with
fcepsilonri on cells, thereby preventing the antibody from attaching to the mast cell. initial studies demonstrated attenuation
of the early and late asthmatic responses when anti-ige was
administered to asthmatic subjects. later, this novel molecule was found to improve symptom scores, rescue medication use, quality of life scores and peak expiratory flows in
patients with allergic asthma. in patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis, there was a significant reduction in the nasal and
ocular symptoms, as well as in the use of rescue medications.
 xxxd2784xxx  also demonstrated a high level of safety in
adults, adolescents and children, with a side effect profile no
different from the placebo [111].
in a recent study on allergic rhinitis patients, blood eosinophils, free ige in serum, and the number of eosinophils in
nasal biopsy specimens were reduced by  xxxd2784xxx  treatment compared with the placebo [112]. furthermore, the
number of ige-positive staining cells decreased significantly
in the  xxxd2784xxx  group during season compared with
placebo. the development of  xxxd2784xxx  for ophthalmic
use may be an exciting milestone in the treatment of ocular
allergic disease.
small cyclic peptides are thought to inhibit ige synthesis or
an associated process such as il-4-induced transcription, in
b cells [201]. they are claimed to have potential use for treating
atopic dermatitis, atopic eczema, atopic asthma, allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, systemic mastocytosis, hyper-ige
syndrome, ige gammopathies and b-cell lymphoma.
5.5

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

513

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

adhesion molecule inhibitors
the role of adhesion molecules in allergic disease has generated much interest in the last 10 years. adhesion molecules
sited on the vascular endothelium function in the recruitment
of eosinophils to the site of inflammation. p- and  xxxg2048xxx 
mediate cd4+ and cd8+ th1 cell migration in human
inflamed tissue.  xxxg2049xxx  glycoprotein ligand-1 (spsgl-1)
appears to be the sole ligand for  xxxg2049xxx  and one of the
ligands for  xxxg2048xxx , and is critical in eosinophil adhesion
to surface-anchored platelets in shear flow. in a mouse
model of ocular allergy, spsgl-1 was found to inhibit
eosinophil recruitment, tissue infiltration, and late-phase
inflammation [113].
natalizumab is a humanised monoclonal antibody to
 xxxg833xxx -integrin that selectively blocks the  xxxg1203xxx , which is critical
for lymphocytes and eosinophils to adhere to endothelial cells
before transmigration. this compound is being tested in animal models of ocular allergy [19]. a human monoclonal antibody that binds to cd63, and an agent that inhibits a function
of cd63, are under investigation [202]. an rna interference
molecule, an antisense oligonucleotide or a ribozyme may be
the inhibiting factor(s). this agent, by interfering with the
interaction between tetraspanin cd63 and its binding partner,
may be useful for the treatment of allergic conditions such as
asthma, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, atopic dermatitis, systemic
allergic reactions. adhesion molecule inhibitors may have a role
in the treatment of chronic ocular disease with a significant
late-phase component such as vkc or akc.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

5.6

chemokine inhibitors
the chemokine,  xxxg354xxx , a 8.4-kda protein, is a potent
cc chemokine first isolated from lung lavage fluid of sensitised guinea-pigs following allergen exposure [114]. it has been
shown to specifically attract and activate eosinophils in vitro
and in vivo, acting through  xxxg565xxx -3, which is
expressed on cells such as eosinophils, basophils, mast cells,
dendritic cells and th2 cells [115].  xxxg354xxx  can be produced by
a variety of cell types, including eosinophils, epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, t lymphocytes, monocytes and macrophages,
which are induced by proinflammatory mediators such as
tnf-alpha, il-4 and il-13.  xxxg354xxx  and -2 levels were elevated
in the tears of vkc patients and correlate significantly with
eosinophil counts [116]. therapies involving the suppression of
 xxxg354xxx , which inhibits the recruitment of eosinophils and
t cells to sites of inflammation, may constitute a new
therapeutic strategy.
bertilimumab (cat-213) is a human igg4 monoclonal
antibody against  xxxg354xxx , which effectively and specifically
inhibits its function, and is under development by cambridge
antibody technology for the potential treatment of allergic
disorders such as asthma, allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis.
preclinical and clinical studies have shown that bertilimumab
inhibits the  xxxg354xxx -mediated chemotaxis of eosinophils from
normal or asthmatic donors, and neutralised eosinophil
chemotaxis in induced sputum from moderate and severe
5.7

514

asthma, but not mild asthma [117], suggesting that this drug is
potentially more effective for the treatment of asthmatics with
severe disease. bertilimumab was able to inhibit the activation
of both early- and late-phase inflammation in the murine
model of ocular allergy [118]. a phase i/iia allergen challenge
study of a topically applied single dose of bertilimumab has also
been carried out in patients with allergic conjunctivitis. bertilimumab had no effect on symptoms, although detailed results
have not been published. as allergen challenge did not provoke
a large enough late-phase response involving eosinophils, the
drug did not demonstrate effectiveness [119].
 xxxd2570xxx  is a monoclonal antibody directed against
 xxxg1180xxx  that is in phase ii trials as a potential treatment for asthma,
hypereosinophilic syndrome and atopic dermatitis. together
with bertilimumab, the efficacy of these agents may have a role
in the treatment of chronic ocular disease with a more
significant eosinophil component, such as vkc and akc.
 xxxd371xxx 
cyclosporin and tacrolimus ( xxxd3271xxx ) are examples of  xxxd371xxx  with known powerful effects on the ocular
immune system. a significant body of literature has been
accumulated establishing the efficacy of cyclosporin for the
treatment of severe vkc, akc [120-124] and, more recently,
dry eye (sjogren’s syndrome, keratoconjunctivitis sicca). both
cyclosporin and tacrolimus have been shown to block mast
cell proliferation and inhibit histamine release from mast
cells [125,126]. their primary mechanism of action is thought to
be inhibition of calcineurin, a phosphatase that plays a role in
the fcepsilonri-mediated exocytosis of preformed mediators from
the mast cell. nfat, a transcription regulator for the production of inflammatory cytokines, is regulated by calcineurin.
thus, cyclosporin and  xxxd3271xxx  may block the release of nfatmediated cytokines from t lymphocytes and mast cells, reduce
eosinophil infiltration, and decrease cellular adhesion at the site
of inflammation. they may also act on various kinases (protein
 xxxg2198xxx , protein kinase c, phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase), thus altering calcium transients, and inhibiting
degranulation and cytokine gene expression [127].
topical  xxxd1781xxx  was effective in inhibiting the development of mast cell-mediated allergic conjunctivitis in mice,
indicating that it should be effective in treating allergic
conjunctivitis in humans [128].
cyclosporin was shown in clinical trials to significantly ameliorate the signs and symptoms of vkc and akc [120-124] and to
reduce the percentages of cd4+ and cd23+ cells in conjunctival
impression cytology specimens [129]. in conjunctival fibroblasts
derived from vkc patients and cultured in vitro, cyclosporin
reduced in a dose-dependent manner proliferation and migration, as well as procollagen i and il-1 production. conversely,
il-6 and -8 production was stimulated by cyclosporin, and
apoptosis was induced in a time- and dose-dependent manner
[130]. the ability of  xxxd1781xxx  to accelerate apoptosis in clinically fibrotic tissues may prove to be therapeutic and useful in
hyperproliferative conjunctival disorders.
5.8

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

leonardi

tacrolimus is a potent drug similar in its mode of action,
but chemically different, to cyclosporin. a skin ointment of
tacrolimus has recently been licenced for the treatment of
moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis in adults [131] and in
atopic eyelid diseases [132]. however, patients may be at an
increased risk of folliculitis, acne and herpes simplex. in a
recent ocular allergic animal model study, tacrolimus eye
drops significantly reduced the severity of induced conjunctival inflammation, as well as the number of t cells and eosinophils infiltrating during the late phase [133]. these effects
were similar to that of corticosteroids.
fujisawa, in collaboration with sucampo, is developing an
eye drop formulation of tacrolimus for the treatment of dry
eye syndrome and vernal conjunctivitis. in november 2003,
tacrolimus eye drops entered phase iii trials for vernal conjunctivitis in japan; the trials are still ongoing. a recent study
reported great efficacy of tacrolimus 0.1% ointment in the
treatment of severe vkc patients [134].
6.

pharmacoeconomics

although allergic conjunctivitis is a benign condition, its vast
incidence, economic impact and negative consequences on
the quality of life of the patient demand the development of a
definitive, simple and efficacious therapy. we still are looking
for an effective therapy that eradicates signs and symptoms,
not only in terms of improving the quality of life of millions
of individuals, but also in terms of pharmacoeconomics, as
millions of dollars are lost annually in the symptomatic
treatment and missed work of these patients.
it has been calculated that the healthcare for rhinoconjunctivitis in the us was $1.9 billion (in 1996) when this allergic
disease was the primary diagnosis [135]. the cost when this disease was a secondary diagnosis was estimated at $4.0 billion,
giving an estimate of $5.9 billion for the overall direct medical
expenditures attributable to allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. outpatient services (63%, $3.7 billion), medications (25%,
$1.5 billion), and in-patient services (12%, $0.7 billion)
accounted for the expenditures. children ≤ 12 years
accounted for $2.3 billion (38.0%). in another estimate, the
indirect costs of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis (decreased
productivity, lost work) were calculated to be $3.8 billion, and
the total economic impact to be $25 billion.
a recent japanese survey [136] reported that the price of the
ophthalmic antiallergic drugs was in the range of $6.35 – 8.38,
and that the daily cost calculated varied in the range of
$0.26 – 0.57. the study concluded that, at current prices, the
volume of a drop and the dosage had a greater effect on the
daily cost than the price of a bottle.

in another recent study, the total of both the public healthcare and private out-of-pocket costs of seasonal allergic
conjunctivitis ranged on average between £64.61 ($117.5) for
a pensioner to £123.69 ($224.9) for a person with allergic
conjunctivitis in paid employment. thus, the allergic condition is not only associated with significant reductions in both
ocular and general quality of life, but also with ongoing outof-pocket expenses and healthcare costs. medications that
reduce this demand on healthcare systems and out-of-pocket
expenses by patients could be of potential importance in
reducing the overall economic and health burden of illness
posed by allergic conjunctivitis [137].
7.

expert opinion

the future of ocular allergy research ultimately lies in identifying a safe, definitive disease-modifying pharmacological
treatment, particularly for the severe and vision-threatening
vkc and akc. however, even in mild and moderate forms
of seasonal or perennial conjunctivitis, patients are ever less
tolerant to the nonaestheticism of ocular allergic signs: red
swollen eyes have no place in their professional and personal life. it is up to the physician to identify the allergy
sufferer from within his/her practice, even those asymptomatic and out of season, and prescribe the ideal therapy for
future use based on their individual needs. treatment preferences should, therefore, be based on convenience of use
(with reduced frequency of instillation for some preparations), patient preference, and costs, avoiding or limiting
treatments with potential side effects, such as
corticosteroids and vasoconstrictors.
the newly available topical antiallergic agents, the dualacting drugs, are a great improvement in the treatment of
seasonal, perennial and occasional allergic conjunctivitis. for
severe forms of ocular allergy, a combined treatment with
two or three different agents, a mast cell stabiliser, an antihistamine and an anti-inflammatory, are often necessary for
several months/year. these multiple regimens test the
patient’s and, in the case of children, the parent’s, compliance and patience. it would be a major advance if alternative
anti-inflammatory agents became available, particularly if
they had equivalent efficacy and were without the long-term
side effects of corticosteroids. another great advancement
would be offered by interference with the initial mechanisms
that lead to allergic sensitisation. pharmacological and
immunological research has shown new possibilities in modifying the ocular immune response. hopefully, this progress
will lead to an eventual complete cure of mild to severe
forms of ocular allergy.

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

515

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

bibliography

13.

allansmith mr, korb dr,
greiner jv: giant papillary
conjunctivitis induced by hard or soft
contact lens wear: quantitative histology.
ophthalmology (1978) 85:766-778.

14.

irkec mt, orhan m, erdener u:
role of tear inflammatory mediators in
contact lens-associated giant papillary
conjunctivitis in soft contact lens wearers.
ocul. immunol. inflamm. (1999) 7:35-38.

papers of special note have been highlighted as
either of interest (•) or of considerable interest
(••) to readers.
1.

2.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

3.

•

abelson mb: allergic disease of the eye.
mb abelson (ed.), wb saunders co,
philadelphia, usa (2001).
kay ab: allergy and allergic diseases.
part i. n. engl. j. med. (2001) 344:30-37.
toda m, ono sj: genomics and
proteomics of allergic disease. immunology
(2002) 106:1-10.
review on genetics for ocular allergy.

4.

mcgill ji, holgate st,
church mk, anderson df,
bacon a: allergic eye disease
mechanisms. br. j. ophthalmol. (1998)
82:1203-1214.

5.

takenaka h, zhang k,
diaz-sanchez d, tsein a,
sackson a: enhanced human ige
production results from exposure to the
aromatic hydocarbons from diesel exhaust:
direct effects on b cell ige production.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (1995)
95:103-115.

6.

7.

8.

calder vl, jolly g, hingorani m
et al.: cytokine production and mrna
expression by conjunctival t cell lines in
chronic allergic eye diseases. clin. exp.
allergy (1999) 29:1214-1222.
montan pg, scheynius a,
van der ploeg i: similar t helper
th2-like cytokine mrna expression in
vernal keratoconjunctivitis regardless of
atopic constitution. allergy (2002)
57:436-441.
foster cs, calonge m: atopic
keratoconjunctiuvitis. ophthalmology
(1990) 97:992-100.

10.

foster cs, rice ba, dutt je:
immunopathology of atopic
keratoconjunctivitis. ophthalmology (1991)
98:1190-1196.

12.

516

romagnani s: biology of human th1
and th2 cells. j. clin. immunol. (1995)
15:121-129.

16.

bonini s, bonini s, bucci mg et al.:
allergen dose response and late symptoms
in a human model of ocular allergy.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (1990)
86:869-876.

17.

leonardi aa, smith lm,
fregona ia, salmaso m,
secchi ag: tear histamine and
 xxxg167xxx  during the early (epr) and late
(lpr) phases of the allergic reaction and the
effects of lodoxamide. eur. j. ophthalmol.
(1996) 6:106-112.

18.

bacon as, ahluwalia p, irani am
et al.: tear and conjunctival changes during
the allergen-induced early- and late-phase
responses. j. allergy clin. immunol. (2000)
106:948-954.

19.

ono sj, abelson mb: allergic
conjunctivitis: update on pathophysiology
and prospects for future treatment. j. allergy
clin. immunol. (2005) 115:118-122.

20.

macleod jda, anderson df,
baddeley sm, holgate st,
mcgill ji, roche wr:
immunolocalization of cytokines to mast
cells in normal and allergic conjunctiva.
clin. exp. allergy (1997) 27:1328-1334.

leonardi a: vernal
keratoconjunctivitis: pathogenesis and
tratment. prog. ret. eye res. (2002)
21:319-339.

9.

11.

15.

tuft sj, kemeny dm, dart jk,
buckley rj: clinical features of atopic
keratoconjunctivitis. ophthalmology (1991)
98:150-158.
allansmith mr, korb dr,
greiner jv et al.: giant papillary
conjunctivitis in contact lens wearers.
am. j. ophthalmol. (1977) 83:697-708.

21.

irani aa, butrus si, tabbara kf,
schwartz lb: human conjunctival
mast cells: distribution of mct and
mctc cells in vernal conjunctivitis and
giant papillary conjunctivitis. j. allergy clin.
immunol. (1990) 86:34-39.

22.

anderson df, zhang s,
bradding p et al.: the relative
contribution of mast cell subsets to
conjunctival t(h)2-like cytokines. invest.
ophthalmol. vis. sci. (2001) 42:995-1001.

23.

miller s, cook eb, graziano fm
et al.: human conjunctival mast cell
responses in vitro to various secretagogues.
ocul. immunol. inflamm. (1996) 4:39-49.

24.

cook eb, stahl j, miller s et al.:
isolation of human conjunctival mast cells
expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

and epithelial cells: tumor necrosis factoralpha from mast cells affects intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 expression on
epithelial cells. invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci.
(1998) 39:336-343.
25.

trocme sd, aldave aj: the eye and
the eosinophil. survey ophthalmol (1994)
39:241-252.

26.

trocme sd, leiferman km,
george t et al.: neutrophil and
eosinophil participation in atopic and vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. curr. eye res. (2003)
26:319-325.

27.

metz dp, bacon as, holgate s,
lightman sl: phenotypic
characterization of t cells infiltrating the
conjunctiva in chronic allergic eye disease.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (1996)
98:686-696.

28.

metz dp, hingorani m,
calder vl, buckley rj,
lightman sl:
t cell cytokines in chronic allergic eye
diseases. j. allergy clin. immunol. (1998)
100:817-824.

29.

zhan h, calder v, lightman s:
t-cell characterization in chronic allergic
eye disease. curr. allergy asthma rep.
(2003) 3:358-362.

30.

abelson mb, schaefer k, wun pj:
antihistamines and antihistamine/
vasoconstrictor combinations. in: allergic
diseases of the eye. mb abelson (ed.),
wb saunders co, philadelphia, usa
(2001):206-214.

31.

dechant kl, goa kl:  xxxd2469xxx :
a review of its pharmacological properties
and therapeutic potential as a topical
antihistamine in allergic rhinitis and
conjunctivitis. drugs (1991) 41:202-224.

32.

abelson mb, george ma,
schaefer k, smith lm: evaluation of
the new ophthalmic antihistamine 0.05%
 xxxd2469xxx  in the clinical allergen
challenge model of allergic conjunctivitis.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (1994)
94:458-464.

33.

secchi a, leonardi a,
discepola m et al.: an efficacy and
tolerance comparison of emedastine
difumarate 0.5% and  xxxd2469xxx 
hydrochloride 0.05%: reducing chemosis
and eyelid swelling in subjects with seasonal
allergic conjunctivitis. acta ophthalmol.
scand. (2000) 78(230):48-51.

34.

secchi a, ciprandi g,
leonardi a et al.: safety and efficacy

leonardi

comparison of emedastine 0.05%
ophthalmic solution compared to
 xxxd2469xxx  0.05% ophthalmic suspension
in pediatric subjects with allergic
conjunctivitis. acta ophthalmol. scand.
(2000) 78(230):42-47.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

35.

36.

37.

•

38.

39.

•
40.

41.

42.

yanni jm, sharif na,
gamache da et al.: a current
appreciation of sites for pharmacological
intervention in allergic conjunctivitis:
effects of new topical ocular drugs.
acta ophthalmol. (1999) 77(228):33-37.
leonardi a, defranchis g,
depaoli m, fregona ia,
plebani m, secchi ag: histamineinduced cytokine production and icam-1
expression in human conjunctival
fibroblasts. curr. eye res. (2002)
25:189-196.
bielory l, lien kw, bigelsen s:
efficacy and tolerability of newer
antihistamines in the treatment of allergic
conjunctivitis. drugs (2005) 65(2):215-228.
review on mechanisms of actions of
topical and systemic antihistamines for
ocular allergy.
abelson mb, welch dl: an
evaluation of onset and duration of action
of patanol® (olopatadine hydrochloride
ophthalmic solution 0.1%) compared to
claritin® (loratadine 10 mg) tablets in acute
allergic conjunctivitis in the conjunctival
allergen challenge model. acta ophthalmol.
scand. (2000) 78(230):60-63.
cook eb, stahl jl, barney np,
graziano fm: mechanisms of
antihistamines and mast cell stabilizers in
ocular allergic inflammation. curr. drug
targets inflamm. allergy (2002)
1(2):167-180.
review on mechanisms of actions of
topical antiallergic drugs.
kazdan jj, crawford js,
langer h, macdonald al: sodium
 xxxd1763xxx  (intal) in the treatment of
vernal keratoconjunctivitis and allergic
conjunctivitis. canad. j. ophthalmol.
(1976) 11:300-303.
foster cs, duncan j: randomized
clinical trial of topically administered
 xxxd1763xxx  for vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. am. j. ophthamol.
(1980) 90:175-181.
montan p, zetterstrom o,
stromquist l-h: topical sodium
 xxxd1763xxx  ( xxxd1763xxx ) relieves ongoing
symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis within
2 minutes. allergy (1994) 49:637-640.

43.

frostad ab, olsen ak: a comparison
of topical  xxxd2469xxx  and sodium
 xxxd1763xxx  in the treatment of topical
 xxxd2469xxx  and sodium  xxxd1763xxx  in
the treatment of pollen-provoked allergic
conjunctivitis. clin. exp. allergy (1993)
23:406-409.

44.

leino m, montan p, njaa f:
a double-blind group comparison study of
ophthalmic sodium  xxxd1763xxx  2% four
times daily and 4% twice daily in the
treatment of seasonal allergic conjunctivitis.
allergy (1994) 49:147-151.

45.

•

46.

47.

yanni jm, miller st,
gamache da, spellman jm, xu s,
sharif na: comparative effects of topical
ocular anti-allergy drugs on human
conjunctival mast cells. ann. allergy asthma
immunol. (1997) 79:541-545.
shows the inhibition of histamine release
of different antiallergic drugs on
conjunctival mast cell cultures.
calonge m, montero ja,
herreras jm et al.: efficacy of
nedocromil sodium and  xxxd1763xxx 
in an experimental model of ocular allergy.
ann. allergy asthma immunol. (1996)
77:124-130.
blumenthal m, casale t,
dockhorn r et al.: efficacy and safety
of nedocromil sodium ophthalmic solution
in the treatment of seasonal allergic
conjunctivitis. am. j. ophthalmol. (1992)
113:56-63.

48.

kjellman mn-i, stevens mt:
clinical experience with tilavist: an
overview of efficacy and safety. allergy
(1995) 50(suppl. 21):14-22.

49.

leonardi a, borghesan f,
avarello a, plebani m,
secchi ag: effect of lodoxamide and
disodium  xxxd1763xxx  on tear eosinophil
cationic protein in vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. br. j. ophthalmol.
(1997) 81:23-26.

50.

51.

santos ci, huang aj,
abelson mb et al.: efficacy of
lodoxamide 0.1% ophthalmic solution in
resolving corneal epitheliopathy associated
with vernal keratoconjunctivitis.
am. j. ophthalmol. (1994) 117:488-497.
caldwell dr, verin p,
hartwich-young r et al.: efficacy
and safety of lodoxamide 0.1% versus
 xxxd1763xxx  4% in patients with
vernal keratoconjunctivitis. am. j.
ophthalmol. (1992) 113:632-637.

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

52.

gunduz k, ucakhan o, budak k,
eryilmaz t, ozkan m: efficacy of
lodoxamide 0.1% versus n-acetyl aspartyl
 xxxd2431xxx  6% ophthalmic solutions in
patients with vernal keratoconjunctivitis.
ophthalmic res. (1996) 28:80-87.

53.

cerqueti pm, ricca v, tosca ma
et al.: lodoxamide treatment of allergic
conjunctivitis. int. arch. allergy immunol.
(1994) 105:185-189.

54.

abelson mb, berdy gj,
mundorf t, amdahl ld,
graves al: pemirolast study group.
pemirolast potassium 0.1% ophthalmic
solution is an effective treatment for allergic
conjunctivitis: a pooled analysis of two
prospective, randomized, double-masked,
placebo-controlled, phase iii studies.
j. ocul. pharmacol. ther. (2002)
18:475-488.

55.

gous p, ropo a: a comparative trial of
the safety and efficacy of 0.1 percent
pemirolast potassium ophthalmic solution
dosed twice or four times a day in patients
with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. j. ocul.
pharmacol. ther. (2004) 20:139-150.

56.

denis d, bloch-michel e,
verin p et al.: treatment of common
ocular allergic disorders; a comparison of
lodoxamide and naaga. br. j.
ophthalmol. (1998) 82:1135-1138.

57.

bouhlal h, blondin c,
haeffner-cavaillon n,
goldschmidt p: n acetyl-aspartyl
 xxxd2431xxx  (naaga) inhibits the
adhesion of leukocytes to activated
endothelial cells and down-modulates the
cytokine-induced expression of adhesion
molecules. j. fr. opthalmol. (2002)
25:993-1000.

58.

abelson mb: a review of olopatadine
for the treatment of ocular allergy. expert
opin. pharmacother. (2004) 5:1979-1994.

59.

cook eb, stahl jl, barney np,
graziano fm: olopatadine inhibits
tnf-alpha release from human
conjunctival mast cells. ann. allergy asthma
immunol. (2000) 84:504-508.

60.

cook eb, stahl jl, barney np,
graziano fm: olopatadine inhibits
anti-immunoglobulin e-stimulated
conjunctival mast cell upregulation of
icam-1 expression on conjunctival
epithelial cells. ann. allergy asthma
immunol. (2001) 87:424-429.

61.

cook eb, stahl jl, barney np,
graziano fm: the promotion of
eosinophil degranulation and adhesion to

517

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

conjunctival epithelial cells by ige-activated
conjunctival mast cells. ann. allergy asthma
immunol. (2004) 92:65-72.
62.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

518

yanni jm, stephens dj, miller st
et al.: the in vitro and in vivo ocular
pharmacology of olopatadine (al-4943a)
and effective anti-allergic/anti-histaminic
agent. j. ocular pharmacol. (1996)
12:389-400.
leonardi a, abelson mb: doublemasked, randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical study of the mast cell-stabilizing
effects of treatment with olopatadine in the
conjunctival allergen challenge model in
humans. clin. ther. (2003) 25:2539-2552.
aguilar aj: comparative study of
clinical efficacy and tolerance in seasonal
allergic conjunctivitis management with
0.1% olopatadine hydrochloride versus
0.05% ketotifen fumarate. acta ophthalmol.
scand. (2000) 78(suppl. 230):52-55.
leonardi a, zafirakis p: efficacy
and comfort of olopatadine versus ketotifen
ophthalmic solutions: a double-masked,
environmental study of patient preference.
curr. med. res. opin. (2004)
20:1167-1173.
butrus s, greiner jv,
discepola m, finegold i:
comparison of the clinical efficacy and
comfort of olopatadine hydrochloride 0.1%
ophthalmic solution and nedocromil
sodium 2% ophthalmic solution in the
human conjunctival allergen challenge
model. clin. ther. (2000) 22:1462-1472.
deschenes j, discepola m,
abelson mb: comparative evaluation of
olopatadine ophthalmic solution (0.1%)
versus ketorolac ophthalmic solution
(0.5%) using the provocative antigen
challenge model. acta ophthalmol. scand.
(1999) 77(228):47-52.
grant sm, goa kl, fitton a,
sorkin em: ketotifen: a review of its
pharmacodynamic and pharmakinetic
properties, and therapeutic use in asthma
and allergic disorders. drugs (1990)
40:412-448.
crampton hj: a comparison of the
relative clinical efficacy of a single dose of
ketotifen fumarate 0.025% ophthalmic
solution versus placebo in inhibiting the
signs and symptoms of allergic
rhinoconjunctivitis as induced by the
conjunctival allergen challenge model.
clin. ther. (2002) 24:1800-1808.
greiner jv, michaelson c,
mcwhirter cl, shams nb: single

epinastine assessed using the conjunctival
antigen challenge model in patients with a
history of allergic conjunctivitis. clin. ther.
(2004) 26:35-47.

dose of ketotifen fumarate.025% versus
2 weeks of  xxxd1763xxx  4% for allergic
conjunctivitis. adv. ther. (2002)
19:185-193.
71.

abelson mb, ferzola nj,
mcwhirter cl, crampton hj:
efficacy and safety of single- and multipledose ketotifen fumarate 0.025% ophthalmic
solution in a pediatric population. pediatr.
allergy immunol. (2004) 15:551-557.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

81.

ciprandi g, buscaglia s,
catrullo a et al.: azelastine eye drops
reduce and prevent allergic conjunctival
reaction and exert anti-allergic activity.
clin. exp. allergy (1997) 27:182-191.

whitcup sm, bradford r, lue j,
schiffman rm, abelson mb:
efficacy and tolerability of ophthalmic
epinastine: a randomized, double-masked,
parallel-group, active- and vehiclecontrolled environmental trial in patients
with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis.
clin. ther. (2004) 26:29-34.

82.

friedlander mh, harris j,
lavallee n et al.: evaluation of the onset
and duration of effect of azelastine eye drops
(0.05%) versus placebo in patients with
allergic conjunctivitis using an allergen
challenge model. ophthalmology (2000)
107:2152-2157.

ballas z, blumenthal m,
tinkelman dg et al.: clinical
evaluation of ketorolac  xxxd3449xxx  0.5%
ophthalmic solution for the treatment of
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. surv.
ophthalmol. (1993) 38(suppl.):141-148.

83.

lenhard g, mivsek-music e,
perrin-fayolle m et al.: doubleblind, randomised, placebo-controlled
study of two concentrations of azelastine eye
drops in seasonal allergic conjunctivitis or
rhinoconjunctivitis. curr. med. res. opin.
(1997) 14:21-28.

tinkelman d, rupp g,
kaufman h et al.: ketorolac
 xxxd3449xxx  0.5% ophthalmic solution in
the treatment of seasonal allergic
conjunctivitis: a placebo-controlled clinical
trial. surv. ophthalmol. (1993)
38(suppl.):133-140.

84.

tauber j, raizman mb, ostrov cs
et al.: a multicenter comparison of the
ocular efficacy and safety of diclofenac 0.1%
solution with that of ketorolac 0.5%
solution in patients with acute seasonal
allergic conjunctivitis. j. ocul. pharmacol.
ther. (1998) 14:137-145.

85.

d’angelo g, lambiase a,
cortes m et al.: preservative-free
diclofenac sodium 0.1% for vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. graves arch. clin. exp.
ophthalmol. (2003) 241:192-195.

86.

tabbara kf, al-kharashi sa:
efficacy of nedocromil 2% versus
 xxxd2132xxx  0.1%: a randomised,
double masked trial comparing the effects
on severe vernal keratoconjunctivitis.
br. j. ophthalmol. (1999) 83:180-184.

87.

dell sj, lowry gm,
northcutt ja et al.: a randomized,
double-masked, placebo-controlled parallel
study of 0.2%  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate in
patients with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (1998)
102:251-255.

88.

abelson m, howes j, george m:
the conjunctival provocation test model of
ocular allergy: utility for assessment of an
ocular corticosteroid,  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate.
j. ocul. pharmacol. ther. (1998)
14:533-542.

89.

bartlett jd, howes jf,
chormley nr et al.: safety and efficacy

sabbah a, marzetto m: azelastine
eye drops in the treatment of seasonal
allergic conjunctivitis or rhinoconjunctivitis
in young children. curr. med. res. opin.
(1998) 14:161-170.
giede c, metzenauer p,
petzold u, ellers-lenz b:
comparison of azelastine eye drops with
 xxxd2469xxx  eye drops in the treatment of
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. curr. med.
res. opin. (2000) 16:153-163.

77.

fraunfelder fw: epinastine
hydrochloride for atopic disease.
drugs today (2004) 40:677-683.

78.

tasaka k: epinastine: an update of its
pharmacology, metabolism, clinical efficacy
and tolerability in the treatment of allergic
diseases. drugs today (2000) 36:735-757.

79.

matsukura m, yajima a,
yamazaki f, yudate t, yamada h,
tezuka t: epinastine inhibits eosinophil
chemotaxis and adhesion molecules in
atopic dermatitis. skin pharmacol. appl.
skin physiol. (2003) 16:405-410.

80.

abelson mb, gomes p,
crampton hj, schiffman rm,
bradford rr, whitcup sm:
efficacy and tolerability of ophthalmic
expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

leonardi

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

of  xxxd2509xxx  etabonate for treatment of
papillae in contact lens associated giant
papillary conjunctivitis. curr. eye res.
(1993) 12:313-321.
90.

leonardi a, papa v, milazzo g,
secchi ag: efficacy and safety of
 xxxd1850xxx  phosphate for the treatment of
allergic conjunctivitis. cornea (2002)
21:476-481.

91.

bundoc vg, keane-myers a:
animal models of ocular allergy. curr. opin.
allergy clin. immunol. (2003) 3:375-379.

92.

••

93.

94.

•

95.

96.

97.

miyazaki d, nakamura t,
toda m, cheung-chau kw,
richardson rm, ono sj:
macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha
as a costimulatory signal for mast cellmediated immediate hypersensitivity
reactions. j. clin. invest. (2005)
115:434-442.
new possible mechanisms of actions of
chemokines as costimulatory signal
necessary for mast cell activation and
degranulation.
keane-myers am, miyazaki d,
liu g, dekaris i, ono s, dana mr:
prevention of allergic eye disease by
treatment with  xxxd2806xxx .
invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. (1999)
40:3041-3046.
miyazaki d, liu g, clark l,
ono sj: prevention of acute allergic
conjunctivitis and late-phase inflammation
with immunostimulatory dna sequences.
invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. (2000)
41:3850-3855.
new approach in the animal model for the
treatment of ocular allergy with
immunostimulatory dna sequences.
leonardi a, cortivo r,
fregona i, plebani m, secchi ag,
abatangelo g: effects of th2
cytokines on expression of collagen,
 xxxg1418xxx , and timp-1 in conjunctival
fibroblasts. invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci.
(2003) 44:183-189.
leonardi a, brun p, sartori mt
et al.: urokinase plasminogen activator, upa
receptor, and its inhibitor in vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. invest. ophthalmol.
vis. sci. (2005) 46:1364-1370.
leonardi a, brun p,
abatangelo g, plebani m,
secchi ag: tear levels and activity of
matrix metalloproteinase (mmp)-1 and
 xxxg1440xxx  in vernal keratoconjunctivitis.
invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. (2003)
44:3052-3058.

•

evidence that mmps play a significant role
in the pathogenesis of vkc.

98.

abelson mb, gomes pj,
vogelson ct et al.: clinical efficacy of
olopatadine hydrochloride ophthalmic
solution 0.2% compared with placebo in
patients with allergic conjunctivitis or
rhinoconjunctivitis: a randomized, doublemasked environmental study. clin. ther.
(2004) 26:1237-1248.

99.

garcia e, pau a, gispert j, riga a
et al.: carebastine eye drops in the
management of seasonal allergic
conjunctivtis (sac). j. allergy clin.
immunol (1998) 101:1 pt 2.

100. mortemousque b, jacquet a,

richard c, depont f, colin j,
moore n: randomized double masked
trial comparing the efficacy and tolerance of
0.05%  xxxd2572xxx  eye drops versus 0.05%
 xxxd2469xxx  and placebo in allergic
conjunctivitis induced by a conjunctival
provocation with dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus. br. j. ophthalmol. (2004)
88:336-340.
101. sekiya t,takamura e, terai t,

ogawa t: safety and efficacy of topical
 xxxd317xxx  besilate in conjunctival allergen
challenge model. international symposium
on ocular pharmacology and therapeutics
(2004).
102. chapin mj, nichols l, ono sn

et al.: evaluation of ev131, a histamine
binding protein, in a murine model of
allergic conjunctivitis. invest. ophthalmol.
vis. sci. (arvo 2002).
103. takada m, yamada t,

nakahara h, sugimoto y,
izushi k, kamei c: experimental
allergic conjunctivitis in guinea pigs
induced by japanese cedar pollen.
biol. pharm. bull. (2000) 23:566-569.
104. sugiyama t, nakajima m: topical

 xxxd3411xxx  induced improvements of
superficial punctate keratitis in two cases of
allergic conjunctivitis. japanese journal of
clinical ophthalmology (1998) 52:137-140.
105. papathanassiou m,

giannoulaki v, tiligada e:
leukotriene antagonists attenuate late phase
 xxxd2738xxx  production during the
hypersensitivity response in the conjunctiva.
inflamm. res. (2004) 53:373-376.
106. lambiase a, bonini s, rasi g,

coassin m, bruscolini a,
bonini s: montelukast, a leukotriene
receptor antagonist, in vernal

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

keratoconjunctivitis associated with asthma.
arch. ophthalmol. (2003) 121:615-620.
107. hashimoto t, igarashi a,

hoshina f et al.: effects of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs on experimental
allergic conjunctivitis in guinea pigs.
j. ocul. pharmacol. ther. (2003)
19:569-577.
108. kato m, imoto k, miyake h,

oda t, miyaji s, nakamura m:
apafant, a potent  xxxd2973xxx 
antagonist, blocks eosinophil activation and
is effective in the chronic phase of
experimental allergic conjunctivitis in
guinea pigs. j. pharmacol. sci. (2004)
95:435-442.
109. bhattacherjee p,

mukhopadhyay p, paterson ca,
graff g, gamache da, yanni jm:
al-2512, a novel corticosteroid: preclinical
assessment of anti-inflammatory and ocular
hypertensive effects. j. ocul. pharmacol.
ther. (2003) 19:353-360.
110. kalpaxis jg, thayer to: double-

blind trial of pentigetide ophthalmic
solution, 0.5%, compared with  xxxd1763xxx 
sodium, 4%, ophthalmic solution for
allergic conjunctivitis. ann. allergy (1991)
66:393-398.
111. babu ks, arshad sh, holgate st:

 xxxd2784xxx , a novel anti-ige therapy in
allergic disorders. expert opin. biol. ther.
(2001) 1:1049-1058.
112. plewako h, arvidsson m,

petruson k et al.: the effect of
 xxxd2784xxx  on nasal allergic inflammation.
j. allergy clin. immunol. (2002) 110:68-71.
113. strauss ec, larson ka,

brenneise i et al.: soluble  xxxg2049xxx 
glycoprotein ligan 1 inhibits ocular
inflammation in a murine model of allergy.
invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. (1999)
40:s1336.
114. jose pj, griffiths-johnson da,

collins pd et al.:  xxxg354xxx : a potent
eosinophil chemoattractant cytokine
detected in a guinea pig model of allergic
airways inflammation. j. exp. med. (1994)
179:881-887.
115. ying s, meng q, zeibecoglou k,

robinson ds et al.: eosinophil
chemotactic chemokines ( xxxg354xxx , eotaxin2,  xxxg363xxx , monocyte chemoattractant
protein-3 ( xxxg364xxx ), and mcp-4), and c-c
 xxxg565xxx  3 expression in
bronchial biopsies from atopic and
nonatopic (intrinsic) asthmatics.
j. immunol. (1999) 163:6321-6329.

519

emerging drugs for ocular allergy

116. leonardi a, jose p, zhan,

•

calder v: tear and mucus  xxxg354xxx  and
 xxxg354xxx -2 in allergic keratoconjunctivitis.
ophthalmology (2003) 110:487-492.
role of  xxxg354xxx  in ocular allergy.

117. dent g, hadjicharalambous c,

yoshikawa t et al.: contribution of
 xxxg354xxx  to eosinophil chemotactic activity
of moderate and severe asthmatic sputum.
am. j. respir. crit. care med. (2004)
169:1110-1117.

expert opin. emerging drugs downloaded from informahealthcare.com by university of melbourne on 10/27/14
for personal use only.

118. nakamura t, larkin f, ikeda y

et al.: cat-213, a specific monoclonal antieotaxin human antibody, inhibits human
conjunctival mast cell activation. in:
immunology (2004). bologna: medimond
international proceedings (2004):527-530.
119. cambridge antibody technology

announces preliminary statement of results
for the year ended 30 september 2003.
cambridge antibody technology group
plc. press release (2003).
120. benezra d, pe’er j, brodsky m,

•

cohen e: cyclosporine eyedrops for the
treatment of severe vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. am. j. ophthalmol.
(1986) 101:278-282.
first open clinical study on the topical use
of cyclosporine for the treatment of vkc.

121. secchi ag, tognon ms,

•

leonardi a: topical use of cyclosporine
in the treatment of vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. am. j. ophthalmol.
(1990) 110:137-142.
first double-blind clinical study on the
topical use of cyclosporine for the
treatment of severe vkc.

122. pucci n, novembre e,

cianferoni a et al.: efficacy and safety
of cyclosporine eyedrops in vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. ann. allergy asthma
immunol. (2002) 89:298-303.
123. hingorani m, calder vl,

buckley rj, lightman s: the
immunomodulatory effect of topical
 xxxd1781xxx  in atopic keratoconjunctivitis.

520

invest. ophthalmol. vis. sci. (1999)
40:392-399.

133. sengoku t, sakuma s, satoh s

et al.: effect of fk506 eye drops on late and
delayed type response in ocular animal
models. clin. exp. allergy (2003)
33:1555-1560.

124. akpek ek, dart jk, watson s et al.:

a randomized trial of topical cyclosporin
0.05% in topical steroid-resistant atopic
keratoconjunctivitis. ophthalmology (2004)
111:476-482.

134. vichyanond p,

125. ito f, toyota n, sakai h et al.:

fk506 and  xxxd1781xxx  inhibit stem cell
factor-dependent cell proliferation/survival,
while inducing upregulation of c-kit
expression in cells of the mast cell line
mc/9. arch. dermatol. res. (1999)
291:275-283.
126. toyota n, hasimoto y, matsuo s

et al.: effects of fk506 and  xxxd1781xxx 
on proliferation, histamine release and
phenotype of murine mast cells. arch.
dermatol. res. (1996) 288:474-480.
127. matsuda s, koyasu s: mechanisms of

action of cyclosporin. immunopharmacology
(2000) 47:119-125.
128. whitcup sm, chan cc, luyo da,

bo p, li q: topical cyclosporine inhibits
mast cell-mediated conjunctivitis. invest.
ophthalmol. vis. sci. (1996) 37:2686-2693.
129. avunduk am, avunduk mc,

erdol h, kapicioglu z, akyol n:
cyclosporine effects on clinical findings and
impression cytology specimens in severe
vernal keratoconjunctivitis. ophthalmologica
(2001) 215:290-293.
130. leonardi a, defranchis g,

fregona ia et al.: effects of cyclosporin
a on human conjunctival fibroblasts.
arch. ophthalmol. (2001) 119:1512-1517.
131. frankel d: tacrolimus of benefit in

atopic dermatitis. lancet (1998) 352:1603.

•

tantimongkolsuk c,
dumrongkigchaiporn p,
jirapongsananuruk o,
visitsunthorn n,
kosrirukvongs p: vernal
keratoconjunctivitis: result of a novel
therapy with 0.1% topical ophthalmic
 xxxd3271xxx  ointment. j. allergy clin. immunol.
(2004) 113:355-358.
first open study on the topical use of
 xxxd3271xxx  for the treatment of severe vkc.

135. ray nf, baraniuk jn, thamer m

et al.: direct expenditures for the treatment
of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis in 1996,
including the contributions of related
airway illnesses. j. allergy clin. immunol.
(1999) 103:401-407.
136. ikeda h, tsukamoto h, sato e,

mishima hk, kihira k: daily cost of
ophthalmic solutions used to treat allergic
conjunctivitis in japan. ophthalmic
epidemiol. (2004) 11:35-42.
137. pitt ad, smith af, lindsell l,

voon lw, rose pw, bron aj:
economic and quality-of-life impact of
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis in
oxfordshire. ophthalmic epidemiol. (2004)
11:17-33.

patents
201. wo-03072034
202. wo-2005007695

132. rikkers sm, holland gn,

drayton ge, michel fk,
torres mf, takahashi s: topical
tacrolimus treatment of atopic eyelid
disease. am. j. ophthalmol. (2003)
135:297-302.

expert opin. emerging drugs (2005) 10(3)

affiliation
andrea leonardi md
university of padua, department of
neuroscience, ophthalmology unit,
via giustiniani 2, 35128 padova, italy
fax: +39 049 875 5168;
e-mail: andrea.leonardi@unipd.it

