blackwell science, ltdoxford, uktaptherapeutic apheresis and dialysis1774-99792005 international society for apheresisaugust 2005
9s1
s35s40

original article
management of shptj cunningham

therapeutic apheresis and dialysis
9(supplement):s35–s40, blackwell publishing asia pty ltd
© 2005 international society for apheresis

management of secondary hyperparathyroidism
john cunningham
the center for nephrology, the royal free and university college medical school, london, uk

abstract: secondary
hyperparathyroidism
(shpt)
remains an inevitable consequence of untreated chronic
uremia. it is the result of a combination of phosphate (p)
retention, failure of calcitriol synthesis, and hypocalcemia.
therapies used to correct these abnormalities, namely
active vitamin d replacement, calcium (ca) supplementation, and phosphate (p) restriction, have moderate efficacy
but are prone to unacceptable side-effects. however, there
have been new developments in the control of p, vitamin
d replacement and modulation of the ca sensing receptor
( xxxg343xxx ) using calcimimetics. sevelamer, and in the near
future lanthanum, are offering a reasonable level of p control without the toxicities inherent with either aluminumor ca-based phosphate binders, and other phosphate
binders are in development. ‘non calcemic’ vitamin d
metabolites include 22-oxacalcitriol,  xxxd2851xxx , and
 xxxd1935xxx . in various experimental models 22oxacalcitriol, in particular, exhibits impressive suppression
of  xxxg1885xxx  (pth) with minimal calcemia,

although it has been less impressive when compared with
calcitriol in controlled studies in hemodialysis (hd)
patients. the advantages of these agents over conventional
treatment with calcitriol or  xxxd109xxx  remain uncertain.
 xxxd1701xxx , a calcimimetic agent that up-regulates the sensitivity of the  xxxg343xxx  in parathyroid and other cells, is a new
type of therapy for shpt that simultaneously reduces the
concentrations of pth, ca, and p in hd patients, enabling
a significant number to achieve k/doqi or other national
guidelines. the extent to which this new therapy will
improve clinical outcomes remains uncertain. in conclusion, with the advent of new therapies the emphasis in the
management of shpt has evolved to incorporate reduction of ca loading, control of pth within specific target
ranges, and avoidance of hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia and elevation of the calcium phosphorus product. key words: calcimimetics, chronic kidney disease,
hyperparathyroidism, vascular calcification, vitamin d
analogs.

the last decade has been a productive one in the
field of bone biology. many new insights have been
gained into the maintenance of skeletal integrity at
both macro and micro levels. in parallel with this has
been an improved understanding of the pathogenesis
of renal osteodystrophy and the development of new
strategies for its management. a close inter-relationship between bone biology and vascular biology in
the uremic environment is now widely appreciated
and is the focus of an intense research effort.

calcium (ca), phosphate (p) and  xxxg1885xxx  (pth). some of these targets conflict with each
other; for example, the treatments used to control p
often jeopardize the ca targets. there are many
national sets of targets and the kidney disease outcomes quality initiative (k/doqi) guidelines (1)
are one example, with other targets in use in the uk,
europe, australia and elsewhere. in japan, targets in
relation to bone and mineral metabolism are in
development. the similarities between all these targets are more obvious than their differences, but
there are some very important differences that reflect
economics, attitudes to delivery of care, scientific
basis, and so on. one of the problems in producing
national targets is that the process is prolonged, so
the data are out of date even before they are published. the k/doqi guidelines are widely used
because they are (i) thorough, although not necessarily right, and (ii) reasonably recent (released in 2003,
although the data were censored in 2001). most of
the recommendations are opinion- rather than evidence-based and concerns with the k/doqi targets
have emerged in many countries. the pth target is

the ‘target culture’ in nephrology
nephrology is a laboratory driven discipline. therapy and outcomes are often evaluated in terms of
‘targets’ for, among other things, blood pressure,
lipid control, adequacy of hemodialysis (hd), hemoglobin and iron status, and serum concentration of
address correspondence and reprint requests to: professor john
cunningham, the center for nephrology, the royal free and
university college medical school, rowland hill st, london
nw3 3qr, uk, email: drjohncunningham@aol.com

s35

s36

j cunningham

set at 150–300 pg/ml, which many nephrologists consider is higher than it should be. there is no argument
about keeping the ca ¥ p product as low as possible
(<55 mg2/dl2). the p target range of 3.5–5.5 mg/dl
is quite challenging, but it is reasonable to aim for a
low concentration. however, a ca concentration in
the range of 8.4–9.5 mg/dl is a difficult goal, because
it is lower than the upper limit of the normal range
in most hospital laboratories; in other words, the k/
doqi group has set a target that is at the lower end
of normal in physiological terms. in fact, 8.4–9.0 mg/
dl is below the parathyroid set point for many normal people and maintaining ca at that level would
immediately induce shpt in those cases unless other
suppressive therapies are given. one other requirement of k/doqi is that the targets should be
achieved without the total ca intake/input exceeding
2 g/day for elemental ca. assuming a dietary intake
of approximately 0.5 g/day, no more than 1.5 g/day
can be introduced via a ca-based phosphate binder
(i.e. three caco3 tablets per day) and few can
achieve the p target on only three tablets per day.
another problem with the target culture is that the
‘evidence’ is based on observational studies only,
which is not the same as establishing cause and effect.
furthermore, the studies were predominantly from
america and clinical practice in the usa at the time
differed greatly from that of other countries in the
use of very high doses of intravenous vitamin d
metabolites. elsewhere, patients were administered
their vitamin d orally in lower doses. one of the
reasons for this difference was commercial because
in the usa the dialysis center can profit from the
drugs used. this also explains why there was a change
from oral therapy in the 1970s to more expensive
injectable therapy. furthermore, nearly all the studies that provided the data sets on which k/doqi and
other targets are based were cross-sectional; for
example, the studies that looked at pth in relation
to bone turnover were based on bone histology and
simultaneous pth measurements and concluded, by
association only, that a particular pth concentration
is most likely to coexist with normal bone turnover.
thus, the evidence for any particular intervention is
not very strong and does not usually prove whether
it does the patients any good. the other problem is
that targets may become ‘set in stone’ for several
reasons. frequent exposure to the data can lead to
unquestioning acceptance (i.e. ‘what i read three
times is true’), and there may be pressure from companies that can see a commercial gain in the implementation of the guidelines. finally there is
publication bias. despite the best intentions of the
editorial process, there is always the temptation to go
ther apher dial, vol. 9, supplement, 2005

for the ‘exciting’ report with positive outcome data,
rather than the equally important negative one. all
these things can undermine the quality of the targets
and ultimately patient care.
calcium and phosphorus
concentrations and the risk of
cardiovascular death
a study by block et al. (2) of about 40 000 patients
from a large dialysis chain in the usa, examined
adjusted-serum ca serum concentration as a predictor of relative risk (rr) of cardiovascular death.
unsurprisingly, a high ca concentration  xxxd1891xxx .5–
11 mg/dl was associated with an increased rr.
however, at subnormal concentrations there was a
tendency for the rr to decrease even further, and it
is this type of information that forms the basis of the
k/doqi and most other recommendations. similarly for phosphate. over a range of concentrations
the rr of cardiovascular death decreases as p
decreases and as p increases the rr increases significantly. these data do not show that the p concentration causes cardiovascular death; they simply tell us
only that a high p concentration is associated with
mortality. cause and effect is  xxxd3237xxx  and it
remains unclear if the rr of a patient with a p concentration of 7 mg/dl decreases or not after successful treatment to reduce the hyperphosphatemia.
with regard to pth concentration, there is an
enormous amount of literature on its relation to cardiovascular disease and bone disease. atsumi et al.
(3) in a relatively small study of 187 men looked at
serum pth concentration and vertebral fractures,
which is one of many markers of skeletal health. they
divided the patients into tertiles of low, medium, and
high-range pth concentration and found that the
mid-range group had the best results; that is, if pth
is either low or high the skeleton is less healthy.
in addition to bone health, soft tissue calcification
has emerged as a significant issue. several important
points came from an observational study by goodman et al. (4) the duration of hd is a strong predictor of both calcification and its severity; after 10 years
of hd, patients have a substantial increase in coronary artery calcification and consequently an increase
in mortality. however, to measure coronary artery
calcification requires electron-beam computed
tomography. increased arterial stiffness is an equally
good predictor of mortality and only requires a measurement of pulse wave velocity or, even more simply,
pulse pressure, which correlates reasonably well with
pulse wave velocity. such information is available
from the dialysis unit and patients with a wide pulse

management of shpt
pressure tend to be those with a high degree of calcification. in the non-renal population, calcification
is a good predictor of stenotic atheromatous disease
in the coronary arteries, but in the uremic population
the angiographic correlation between stenoses and
coronary artery calcification is not strong.
preliminary data from another observational study
by block et al. (5) of 35 570 patients examined the
rr of mortality in relation to the achievement of the
k/doqi guidelines for ca ¥ p product and pth.
the rr was 1 in 6570 patients who achieved both
targets, and achieving one or the other of the targets
was associated with a small or moderate increase in
rr. missing both targets was associated with a 50%
increase in risk—a substantial effect. note that there
are no published data that conclusively show that if
a patient changes from achieving both targets to
missing both targets that the rr necessarily
increases as predicted by the observational studies.
this information is essential for guiding therapeutic
decisions, but will only be found in the context of
large prospective studies. several studies have shown
that the rate of achieving the k/doqi guidelines is
poor; the range is 27–62% for individual goals, but
for all four is generally less than 10%. this probably
reflects the low efficacy of current therapies.
in summary, cardiovascular mortality is associated
with extremes of pth (very high or low), high
plasma concentrations of ca and p, high ca ¥ p, vascular calcification or arterial stiffening. it also may be
associated with a high ca intake, but the observational data are only suggestive. there is a definite
correlation with low bone turnover and aluminum
(al) loading together, although this should no longer
be an issue now that al-based phosphate binders are
obsolete.
spectrum of renal osteodystrophy
treatments such as the vitamin d metabolites or
calcimimetics affect the pth concentration and
should enable the pth to be set more precisely than
has been previously possible. however, the correct
target range is still unclear; for example, not all
patients develop adynamic bone disease when pth
is reduced to low concentrations and conversely,
some patients with pth at 400–800 pg/ml may have
adynamic bone disease. any assessment of bone
health should ideally include both bone quality (i.e.
microarchitecture, turnover, damage accumulation
and mineralization) and bone mineral density
(bmd). each contributes to bone strength and
hence the risk of fractures. the bmd alone is a fairly
good predictor of skeletal outcome in the normal

s37

population, but not for the uremic population in
which it is almost useless. bone turnover can be measured indirectly and imprecisely by the concentrations of bone markers or pth, or directly with a
biopsy. neither bone damage nor mineralization can
be measured except by histological examination, but
we need to measure these parameters in the patient
with renal shpt if we are to make informed
decisions.
progression of secondary
parathyroidism
parathyroid hyperplasia
the pathophysiological concept on which treatment is based is that the acute effects of ca deficiency
act via the  xxxg343xxx , and the sustained effect of hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia or low calcitriol does
two things: augment proliferation of the parathyroid
cells and increase synthesis of pth per cell, the end
result being an enlarged gland and increased circulating pth. as parathyroid hyperplasia progresses
with increasing nodularity, a key functional disturbance arises because of underexpression of the vitamin d and ca-sensing receptors (vdr and  xxxg343xxx )
(6). standard treatments to stimulate either the vdr
or  xxxg343xxx  have a diminished effect when this process
is advanced. the sigmoidal relationship between ca
and pth is disturbed progressively, with a shift
upward and to the right (7). the goal of treatment
then becomes the restoration of the normal relationship and the correction of parathyroid dysregulation
(i.e. shift to the left).
how do we keep calcium in the skeleton and out
of the arteries?
treatment must be able to lower the pth concentration without increasing the ca concentration and
the ca ¥ p product. the three modalities that are
available at present are the ca-free phosphate binders, calcimimetics and the ‘non-calcemic’ vitamin d
analogs.
calcimimetics
mechanism of action
the  xxxg343xxx  is widely expressed in the body, but its
function is best characterized in the parathyroid cells
and renal tubular cells. there are rare mutations of
the receptor. inactivating mutations are associated
with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia ( xxxg343xxx ),
which can be mistakenly diagnosed as primary hyperparathyroidism. the activating mutation produces
autosomal dominant hypocalcemia. the action of the
ther apher dial, vol. 9, supplement, 2005

s38

j cunningham

calcimimetics mimics an activating mutation of the
 xxxg343xxx . the history of the development of calcimimetics began in 1993 when brown et al. cloned the  xxxg343xxx 
(8). nps pharmaceuticals developed the first calcimimetic, r-568, in december 1993 and it was licensed
to amgen in march 1996, which was when kirin
brewery became involved. in may 1998, ind filed
by amgen for amg 073 ( xxxd1701xxx ) and in december 2001 phase iii clinical trials were initiated. the
product license has been available in the usa for
nearly 1 year (october 2003: maa filed with
emea), in europe for a few months and soon in
japan. the first compound was very effective in
experimental and clinical shpt, but was eventually
abandoned because of safety concerns about the
unpredictability of its pharmacokinetics.  xxxd1701xxx 
was similarly very effective and has now moved forward. the  xxxg343xxx  is activated by ca ions (hypercalcemia), whereas in hypocalcemia there is up-regulation
of the release and synthesis of pth. when the calcimimetic is administered it increases the sensitivity of
the  xxxg343xxx  to ca thereby reducing the release of pth.
it does not itself directly stimulate the  xxxg343xxx . functionally, the calcimimetic shifts the sigmoidal relationship between ca and pth down and to the left
in a dose–response manner. this is the exact reverse
of the situation in progressive shpt. there are two
types of calcimimetics. type 1 agents are direct agonists, such as ca and other cations (magnesium (mg),
aluminum (al), lanthanum (la), etc.) and aminoglycosides. aluminum and la are both very potent calcimimetics; al has 100-fold the potency of ca, but its
concentration is very low. type 2 agents are indirect
‘agonists’ that are only active in the presence of a
type 1 calcimimetic; for example,  xxxd1701xxx  acts by
binding to the  xxxg343xxx , allosterically modifying the
extracellular domain to increase its sensitivity to the
type 1 agonists. in the absence of a type 1 agent, the
type 2 will not have an effect. the differences
between vitamin d and the calcimimetics can be
summarized as follows. calcimimetics act on the
 xxxg343xxx  to inhibit pth secretion, have a rapid onset
(minutes) and recovery (hours or days), and decrease
the ca ¥ p product. vitamin d, on the other hand,
acts on the nuclear  xxxg2412xxx  to inhibit pth
synthesis. it has a slow onset and recovery (days to
weeks), and increases the ca ¥ p product. the findings of the published phase iii clinical studies of
 xxxd1701xxx  treatment show a consistent pattern. the
placebo-controlled studies of uremic patients with
shpt who were already on standard treatment of
vitamin d metabolite and phosphate binder, but still
had persistent shpt, were randomized to continue
standard treatment (control group, n = 470) or stanther apher dial, vol. 9, supplement, 2005

dard treatment plus  xxxd1701xxx  (n = 656). in the treatment group there was a marked reduction of pth,
ca ¥ p product and ca and p concentrations. these
variables remained unchanged in the placebo treated
groups (9).
effect of calcimimetics on achieving k/doqi
targets
in those studies, at randomization the mean pth
was nearly 600 pg/ml. after 26 weeks, the control
patients showed no change in pth concentrations,
whereas a substantial proportion of those with the
added  xxxd1701xxx  were within the k/doqi target
range. similarly for the ca ¥ p product. as for ca
and p, the serum ca concentration remained
unchanged in the controls but decreased significantly
in the treatment group. achievement of the k/doqi
target for ca and p was substantially greater in the
treatment group. these are changes that might benefit patients.
which patients should receive calcimimetics?
these are very expensive drugs. in the uk, the cost
of  xxxd1701xxx  at full dose is £9000 pa, so these drugs
will not be a first-line treatment in many countries.
the simplest guide to calcimimetic therapy is the
serum ca concentration in patients with shpt.
patients with hypercalcemia and/or high ca ¥ p
product are the main target group because vitamin
d will only exacerbate the adverse biochemistry.
severe unresponsive hyperparathyroidism is likely to
require both vitamin d and a calcimimetic, which will
have an additive effect.
clinical outcomes of calcimimetic therapy
an important question is whether getting more
patients within the k/doqi guidelines leads to a
better clinical outcome. at present, only limited data
are available. patients who had certain adverse outcomes, including ptx, fractures, hospitalization or
death, were identified from all the phase iii trials in
order to see whether there was a difference between
those treated with a calcimimetic and those randomized to standard treatment (10). although the studies
were not very long, and were not designed to answer
this question, some interesting findings emerged.
there was a 10-fold reduction in the rate of ptx in
 xxxd1701xxx -treated patients (4.1 vs. 0.3 events per 100
subject years). this is a huge change over a relatively
short period of time. the fracture rate was reduced
by 50%. both of these are useful outcomes, especially for fractures, and it will be important to see if
these findings can be supported by prospective studies. evidence of a benefit in cardiovascular hospitalization and mortality is what everyone would like

management of shpt
to see, but so far data are suggestive but not
confirmatory.
clinical indications for calcimimetics
the two main indications are primary and secondary hpt. in phpt, the calcimimetics are effective in
a significant number of patients with hyperplasia,
adenoma or carcinoma. in shpt, calcimimetics are
very efficacious, although cases of severe advanced
disease are yet to be investigated in proper controlled studies; however, the early indications are
encouraging. use in transplanted patients with persistent hpt is logical and potentially good.
phosphate binders
sevelamer hydrochloride: the treat to goal study
and the dialysis clinical outcomes revisited
(dcor) study
the ‘treat to goal’ study by chertow et al. (11)
was a randomized open label investigation in 15 sites
in the usa and europe of 1 years of treatment with
sevelamer vs. calcium acetate/carbonate. there was
no difference between the groups in p control or the
ca ¥ p product. the real difference was in the likelihood of becoming hypercalcemic, which was 3–4-fold
greater in patients given a ca-based phosphate
binder and may be a factor in the development of
soft tissue calcification. furthermore, pth was, at
least by k/doqi standards, oversuppressed in the
ca-treated patients. coronary artery and aortic calcification progressed in the ca-treated patients, but
stabilized in the sevelamer group. although these
findings are of great importance, this the study did
not shed light on whether patients will live longer
and be healthier with sevelamer than with a cabased phosphate binder. a major prospective study
of the consequences of choice of phosphate binder is
in progress. it has almost finished and may shed light
on this important issue. it is a randomized comparison of sevelamer and ca-based phosphate binders in
2000 hd patients who will be treated for an average
of at least 2.5 years. the endpoints are all-cause and
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, which is the
goal that interests both clinicians and patients. the
study has been powered to detect a 25% reduction
in all-cause mortality.
options for severe unresponsive
hyperparathyroidism
patients with severe unresponsive shpt have
extensive nodular change in the parathyroid gland
and down-regulated vdr and  xxxg343xxx . the present

s39

therapeutic options are surgical ablation (ptx), or
chemical ablation using ethanol, direct injection of
calcitriol/maxacalcitol or medical therapy with  xxxd1701xxx  + vitamin d. my colleagues and i are conducting a study of patients who fulfilll the criteria for ptx
(i.e. severe pth dysregulation: very high pth concentration and moderate to severe hypercalcemia).
they are being treated with  xxxd1701xxx , gradually
increasing to the maximum dose, and then with addition of vitamin d at as high a dose as the serum ca
concentration will allow. the expectation was that
the treatment would be unsuccessful given the severity of the underlying disease, but many patients have
had an extremely good response, some of them
reducing the pth from 2000 or 3000 pg/ml with a
ca concentration of 11 mg/ml to acceptable, or even
within, target ranges.
japan is more advanced than other countries in
direct treatments for shpt, with good clinical outcomes reported for ethanol and for calcitriol direct
injection. shiizaki et al. (12) investigated direct
injection with maxacalcitol in rats to explore the
mechanism of the long-lasting effects on the parathyroid. the results showed that the immediate
response is a reduction in pth and calcium and a
slight increase in p. the mrna levels of both the
vdr and  xxxg343xxx  increased compared with the animals treated with vehicle. overall, the technique
seems to reactivate the function of the parathyroid
cells. there were impressive functional improvements in parallel with the up-regulation of the vdr
and  xxxg343xxx .
conclusion
the field of renal osteodystrophy is moving rapidly
at present. improved understanding of the relevant
pathophysiology and the advent of new therapies
bode well for the future care of patients with chronic
kidney disease.
references
1. eknoyan g, levin a, levin nw. bone metabolism and disease in chronic kidney disease. am j kidney dis 2003;42:1–
201.
2. block ga, klassen ps, lazarus jm, ofsthun n, lowrie eg,
chertow gm. mineral metabolism, mortality, and morbidity
in maintenance hemodialysis. j am soc nephrol 2004;
15:2208–18.
3. atsumi k, kushida k, yamazaki k, shimizu s, ohmura a,
inoue t. risk factors for vertebral fractures in renal osteodystrophy. am j kidney dis 1999;33:287–93.
4. goodman wg, goldin j, kuizon bd et al. coronary-artery
calcification in young adults with end-stage renal disease who
are undergoing dialysis. n engl j med 2000;342:1478–83.
5. block ga et al. j am soc nephrol 2003;14:474a.
ther apher dial, vol. 9, supplement, 2005

s40

j cunningham

6. fukuda n, tanaka h, tominaga y, fukagawa m, kurokawa
k, seino y. decreased  xxxg2412xxx 
density is associated with a more severe form of parathyroid
hyperplasia in chronic uremic patients. j clin invest
1993;92:1436–43.
7. malberti f, farina m, imbasciati e. the pth-calcium curve
and the set point of calcium in primary and secondary hyperparathyroidism. nephrol dial transplant 1999;14:2398–406.
8. brown em, gamba g, riccardi d et al. cloning and characterization of an extracellular ca (2+) -sensing receptor from
bovine parathyroid. nature 1993;366:575–80.
9. block ga, martin kj, de francisco al et al.  xxxd1701xxx  for
secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients receiving hemodialysis. n engl j med 2004;350:1516–25.

ther apher dial, vol. 9, supplement, 2005

10. cunningham j, danese m, olson k, klassen p, chertow c.
effects of the calcimimetic  xxxd1701xxx  hcl on cardiovascular
disease, fracture and health-related quality of life in secondary
hyperparathyroidism. kidney international 2005.
11. chertow gm, burke sk, raggi p. treat to goal working
group. sevelamer attenuates the progression of coronary
and aortic calcification in hemodialysis patients. kidney int
2002;62:245–52.
12. shiizaki k, negi s, hatamura i et al. biochemical and cellular
effects of direct maxacalcitol injection into parathyroid gland
in uremic rats. j am soc nephrol 2005;16:97–108.

