role of prostacyclin versus peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor ␤ receptors in
prostacyclin sensing by lung fibroblasts
ferhana y. ali, karine egan, garret a. fitzgerald, béatrice desvergne, walter wahli, david bishop-bailey,
timothy d. warner, and jane a. mitchell
cardiothoracic pharmacology, unit of critical care medicine, national heart and lung institute, imperial college; william harvey research
institute, barts and the london, queen mary’s school of medicine and dentistry, charterhouse square, london, united kingdom; center
for experimental therapeutics, school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pennsylvania; and centre for integrative genomics,
university of lausanne, lausanne, switzerland

prostacyclin and its mimetics are used therapeutically for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. these drugs act via cell surface
prostacyclin receptors (ip receptors); however, some of them can
also activate the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor ␤ (ppar␤). we examined the possibility that ppar␤ is a
therapeutic target for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension.
using the newly approved (for pulmonary hypertension) prostacyclin mimetic  xxxd3415xxx  sodium, reporter gene assays for ppar␤
activation and measurement of lung fibroblast proliferation were
analyzed.  xxxd3415xxx  sodium was found to activate ppar␤ in reporter gene assays and to inhibit proliferation of human lung fibroblasts at concentrations consistent with an effect on ppars but not
on ip receptors. the effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium on human lung
cell proliferation are mimicked by those of the highly selective
ppar␤ ligand gw0742. there are no receptor antagonists for
ppar␤ or for ip receptors, but by using lung fibroblasts cultured
from mice lacking ppar␤ (ppar␤ⴚ/ⴚ) or ip (ipⴚ/ⴚ), we demonstrate
that the antiproliferative effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium are mediated
by ppar␤ and not ip in lung fibroblasts. these observations suggest
that some of the local, longer-term benefits of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium
on reducing the remodeling associated with pulmonary hypertension may be mediated by ppar␤. this study is the first to identify
ppar␤ as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension, which is important because orally active ppar␤
ligands have been developed for the treatment of dyslipidemia.
keywords: fibroblast; nuclear receptors; ppar␤; prostacyclin; pulmonary
hypertension

pulmonary hypertension is deﬁned clinically as a mean pulmonary
artery pressure value exceeding 25 mm hg at rest or 30 mm hg
during exercise. pulmonary hypertension is caused when there
is an imbalance in the release of vasoactive mediators that favor
vasoconstriction, which stimulates the release of growth factors
and subsequent vessel wall (remodeling). remodeling in pulmonary hypertension is characterized by hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the various cells types within the vessel, including ﬁbroblasts, medial smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells (1). in

(received in original form july 26, 2005 and in final form september 19, 2005)
this work was funded by the research advisory board of st. bartholomew’s and
the royal london charitable foundation, and by the british heart foundation.
correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to jane a. mitchell,
cardiothoracic pharmacology, unit of critical care medicine, national heart and
lung institute, imperial college school of medicine, dovehouse street, london
sw3 6ly, uk. e-mail: j.a.mitchell@ic.ac.uk
this article has an online supplement, which is accessible from this issue’s table
of contents at www.atsjournals.org.
am j respir cell mol biol vol 34. pp 242–246, 2006
originally published in press as doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2005-0289oc on october 20, 2005
internet address: www.atsjournals.org

this respect, pulmonary ﬁbroblasts are important because their
migration and differentiation into the vessels contributes signiﬁcantly to the formation of the neointima. arteries within the lung
become narrow, creating increased resistance and blood pressure
and thereby increasing workload for the heart. the prognosis for
patients with pulmonary hypertension is usually poor, with survival
rates of 68% at 1 yr, 48% at 3 yr, and 34% at 5 yr (2).
pulmonary hypertension is treated with a number of therapeutic interventions (1), including administration of the vasodilator prostacyclin. prostacyclin has a short half-life (2–3 min) and
undergoes spontaneous hydrolysis into 6-keto pgf1␣ (3); because of this, therapeutic administrations need to be via continuous intravenous infusion. most recently, the stable prostacyclin
mimetic,  xxxd3415xxx  sodium ( xxxd3415xxx ; united therapeutics
corp., silver spring, md), has been developed for the treatment
of pulmonary hypertension.  xxxd3415xxx  sodium is stable at room
temperature and has a neutral ph, which allows subcutaneous
infusion.
prostacyclin and its analogs activated g protein–coupled cellsurface prostacyclin (ip) receptors. activation of ip receptors
stimulates adenylyl cyclase, leading to an increase in cyclic  xxxd81xxx , which inhibits cell proliferation and inﬂammatory mediator release (4). however, prostacyclin and some
mimetics are capable of activating the peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor ␤ (ppar␤) (3). ppars are a family of three
nuclear receptors (ppar␣, ppar␤/␦, and ppar␥) that have
inﬂuences on many biological processes, including lipid and energy metabolism (5, 6), epidermal wound repair (7), inﬂammation responses, and atherosclerotic plaque formation. the literature describes the function of ppar␥ or ppar␣ in physiologic
and pathophysiologic responses, but much less is known about
the role of ppar␤ in health and disease. nevertheless, activation
of ppar␤ has been found to have anti-inﬂammatory properties
via interactions with the transcriptional repressor  xxxg254xxx  (8).
the potential role of ip versus ppar␤ as therapeutic targets
in pulmonary hypertension has not previously been addressed.
there are no antagonists of ip or ppar␤ receptors. in the
current study, we used selective ligands and cells grown from
the lungs of mice deﬁcient in ip (9) or ppar␤ (10) to address
this question. we show that  xxxd3415xxx  sodium is a ppar␤
ligand and that its antiproliferative effects on lung ﬁbroblasts
are mediated by ppar␤ and not by ip receptors.

materials and methods
origin and genotyping of genetically modified mice
 xxxg1879xxx  and ppar␤/␦ gene-deleted (ip⫺/⫺ and ppar␤/␦⫺/⫺) mice
were generated as previously reported (9, 10). both types of genetically
modiﬁed mice were back bred for seven generations with c57 blk 6
mice. to prepare cultures of lung cells, animals were killed, and their
lungs were removed. the lungs were placed in sealed sterile culture

ali, egan, fitzgerald, et al.: ip versus ppar␤ in lung fibroblasts

tubes containing sterile dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium (dmem)
with penicillin/streptomycin (100 u/ml), l-glutamine (2 mm), nonessential amino acids (1%), and  xxxd164xxx  (2.5 ␮g/ml) and shipped
by overnight courier. lungs taken from c57 blk 6 mice and treated in
the same way were used as controls. the tissue was genotyped by pcr.
details on the methods can be found on the online data supplement.

murine cell culture
lung ﬁbroblasts are an important cell target for antiproliferative agents
in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. we used primary cultures
of human or murine lung ﬁbroblasts to address our questions. lungs
were washed with sterile pbs, chopped, and placed in culture ﬂasks in
supplemented dmem. tissue was incubated in culture until cells had
explanted and achieved more than 80% conﬂuence. cells were seeded
onto separate 96-well plates at 40% (20,000 cells/ml) conﬂuence. after
24 h, the medium was replaced with fresh dmem without fcs but
with bsa (0.1%). drugs were added 2 h later. after 4 h, proliferation
was initiated by the addition of fcs (3%). cells were incubated in an
atmosphere of 5% co2 in air at 37 ⬚c for 72 h, after which time proliferation was quantiﬁed using the cyquant assay (11).

primary cultures of human lung fibroblasts
human lung ﬁbroblasts (american type culture collection ccl-211)
were grown in supplemented dmem containing 10% fcs. cells were
plated at 20,000 cells/ml into 96-well plates. at 40% conﬂuence, the
cells were growth arrested (no fcs) and left for 24 h. drugs were
added and incubated for 4 h, and cells were stimulated with the addition
of fcs (3%). cells were incubated in at 37 ⬚c for 5 d, and proliferation
was quantiﬁed using the cyquant assay.

measurement of cell number
a cyquant cell proliferation assay was used to determine cell proliferation. all medium was removed from the cells, which were frozen
and stored at ⫺80 ⬚c for 1 h. cells were thawed, lysed, and treated
with a ﬂuorescent dye according to manufacturer’s instructions. visual
scoring was performed on all experiments before ﬂuorescence assay.
data were observed as a percentage of conﬂuence. mtt assay was also
used to conﬁrm cell viability after incubation with ligands. details can
be found in the online data supplement.

243

(plymouth meeting, pa). gw0742 and  xxxd3415xxx  sodium were kind
gifts from timothy m. willson (glaxosmithkline, research triangle
park, nc) and carl sterritt (united therapeutics corp.), respectively.
rosiglitazone was purchased from alexis (nottingham, uk). rabbit
anti-ppar␤/␦ antibody was from abcam (cambridge, uk), and goat
anti-rabbit antibody was from dako (glostrup, denmark). ecl detection reagent and hyperﬁlm were from amersham biosciences (buckinghamshire, uk). novafector was from vennnova (pompano beach,
fl). p4xdre-luc reporter gene was a gift from bert vogulstein at
johns hopkins university (baltimore, md), pcmx-mppar␤ plasmid
was a gift from ron evans at the salk institute (san diego, ca), and
pcmx-mppar␥ was a gift from christopher glass at the university
of california (san diego, ca).

statistics
all results are represented in the text and ﬁgures as mean ⫾ sem.
statistical differences between groups of data were tested using appropriate tests, which are described in the relevant ﬁgure legends. a
p value of ⬍ 0.05 was considered to be statistically signiﬁcant.

results
effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium, traditional ip ligands,
and traditional ppar ligands on human lung
fibroblast proliferation

 xxxd3415xxx  sodium inhibited, in a concentration-dependent
manner, the proliferation of human lung ﬁbroblasts induced by a
submaximal concentration of fcs (3%). inhibitory effects became
statistically signiﬁcant at concentrations of 10⫺7 m and higher
(figure 1). similarly, the ppar␤-speciﬁc ligand gw0742 inhibited human lung cell proliferation, with two clear concentrationrelated effects being noted. at low concentrations, gw0742

western blotting
standard protocols were used to blot for ppar␤ in cells. details can
be found in the online supplement.

ppar reporter gene assay
hek293 cells were seeded onto six-well plates in 10% dmem. at
50% conﬂuence, cells were transfected with the desired plasmids (dre-1
[p4xdre-luc] and pcdna or dre-1 and ppar␤ [pcmx-mpparb/d]
or ppar␥ [pcmx-mpparg]; 2 ␮g total). plasmids were initially
made up to 200 ␮l of serum-free dmem. transfection reagent (novafector) (4 ␮l) was added, and the mixture was incubated at room
temperature for 15 min to allow for binding of plasmid to transfection
reagent. just before transfection, cells were washed with pbs, and 800 ␮l
of dmem was added. the plasmid–reagent complex was added to each
corresponding well dropwise and incubated for 3 h at 37 ⬚c. medium
was removed, and cells were washed with pbs, trypsinized, and transferred onto 96-well plates at 100% conﬂuence in dmem containing
10% serum. cells were incubated overnight before the addition of
drugs. drugs were incubated overnight. the supernatant was removed,
and 50 ␮l of reporter lysis buffer (promega, southampton, uk) was
added to each well and incubated at room temperature for 15 min.
twenty-ﬁve microliters of this sample was used to measure protein
(bca), and 25 ␮l was used to measure reporter gene activation in a
luciferase assay as previously described (12, 13).

reagents
dmem, bsa, and mayer’s hematoxylin stain were purchased from
sigma (dorset, uk); all other cell culture materials and pcdna were
purchased from invitrogen (paisley, uk). cyquant cell proliferation
assay kit was from cambridge bioscience ltd. (cambridge, uk), and
15-deoxy-⌬12,14-prostaglandin j2 (15 d-pgj2) was purchased from biomol

figure 1. importance of ip versus ppar␤ in human lung fibroblast proliferation. (a ) effect of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium and (b ) gw0742 on human
lung fibroblast proliferation. proliferation is expressed as percentage of
control response induced by 3% fcs. data are means ⫾ sem; n ⫽ 9.
*p ⬍ 0.05 by one sample t test. (c ) expression of ppar␤ protein in
human lung fibroblasts using cells cultured from two separate donors.

244

american journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology vol 34

inhibited proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner,
which was maximal  xxxd1891xxx ⫺6 m (25 ⫾ 6% inhibition) (figure 1).
at high concentrations (10⫺4 m), gw0742 induced an additional
and dramatic inhibition of cell proliferation. all results were
conﬁrmed by visual scoring of cells and by mtt assay, which
showed a reduction in cell number and no effects of cell death
(data not shown). western blotting demonstrated that human
lung ﬁbroblasts contain ppar␤ (figure 1). in addition to  xxxd3415xxx  sodium (figure 1), cicaprost,  xxxd2331xxx , and carbaprostacyclin inhibited proliferation of human lung ﬁbroblasts but at
concentrations above those expected to activate ip receptors
(10⫺4 m) (figure 2). in addition to the ppar␤ ligand gw0742,
the putative endogenous ppar ligand 15 d-pgj2 and the ppar␥
ligand rosiglitazone inhibited human ﬁbroblast cell proliferation
(figure 2). however, the ppar␣ ligand wy-14643 or the mixed
ppar␣/ppar␤ ligand bezaﬁbrate had no inhibitory effects on
cell proliferation (figure 2).
role of ppar␤ versus ip receptors in the normal growth
and morphology of murine lung fibroblasts

the genotypes of ip⫺/⫺ and ppar␤⫺/⫺ mice were conﬁrmed by
pcr (figure 3). lung cells cultured from each type of mouse
seemed to be similar in morphology to those from control wildtype (c57 blk 6) mice, with a typical ﬁbroblast phenotype
(figure 3). lung ﬁbroblasts cultured from control mice and
from ppar␤⫺/⫺ mice proliferated in response to fcs similarly,
whereas lung ﬁbroblasts from ip⫺/⫺ mice seemed to proliferate
at approximately twice the rate of the control cells. as seen in
human lung ﬁbroblasts, the prostacyclin mimetics  xxxd3415xxx 
sodium (figure 4), cicaprost, or carbaprostacyclin (10⫺4 m; data
not shown) inhibited proliferation of murine lung ﬁbroblasts.
the inhibitory effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium on proliferation
were signiﬁcantly reduced in cells derived from ppar␤⫺/⫺ animals (figure 4). no signiﬁcant differences were seen in the ability
of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium to inhibit proliferation in cells from control
versus ip⫺/⫺ mice (figure 4). the inhibitory effects of rosiglitazone on lung ﬁbroblast proliferation were unaffected by ppar␤
(figure 4b) or ip gene deletion (data not shown).  xxxd3415xxx 
sodium had no effect on cell viability at concentrations up to
10⫺4 m measured by mtt (data not shown).
effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium of ppar␤/␦ versus ppar␥
receptor activity

plasmids for ppar␤ or ppar␥ could not be successfully transfected into primary cultures of pulmonary ﬁbroblasts (human
or murine). we therefore performed reporter gene assays in

figure 2. effects of prostacyclin or ppar ligands on proliferation of human lung fibroblasts. each drug was used  xxxd1891xxx ⫺4 m. proliferation is
inhibition of control response induced by 3% fcs. data are means ⫾
sem. n ⫽ 9 for  xxxd3415xxx  sodium, gw0742, and 15 d-pgj2; n ⫽ 6
and for rosiglitazone and  xxxd331xxx ; and n ⫽ 3 determinations for all
other mimetics.

2006

hek293 cells.  xxxd3415xxx  sodium (figure 4) or gw0742 (data
not shown) but not rosiglitazone (data not shown) increased
ppar␤ in a reporter gene assay. by contrast,  xxxd3415xxx  sodium
had no effect on ppar␥ activation (figure 4).

discussion
the treatment of pulmonary hypertension is aimed at two
pathologies: (1 ) the vasoconstriction and (2 ) the profound remodeling that characteristically mediates lung vessel narrowing.
prostacyclin therapy can reduce vasoconstriction in pulmonary
hypertension, but its key mode of action is on reducing vascular
remodeling. lung ﬁbroblasts, which inﬁltrate and proliferate
within the blood vessel (14–16), are important target cells for
antiproliferative treatments used for pulmonary hypertension.
prostacyclin is thought to relieve some of the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension via an action on cell-surface ip receptors.
however, some prostacyclin mimetics are also ligands for the
nuclear receptor ppar␤. in the current study, we demonstrate,
for the ﬁrst time, that ppar␤ is expressed in human lung ﬁbroblasts and that its activation leads to reduced proliferation. using
cells from genetically modiﬁed animals, we show that some of
the antiproliferative effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium, which was
recently approved for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension,
are via ppar␤.
we found that the proliferation of human lung ﬁbroblasts
was inhibited by a number of prostacyclin mimetics, including the
newly introduced  xxxd3415xxx  sodium. in contrast to observations
using vascular smooth muscle cells (17), the inhibitory effects
of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium (and other mimetics) were seen only at
concentrations above those associated with activation of ip receptors (i.e., ⬎ 10⫺7 m) but within the range observed for prostacyclin mimetics on ppar␤ receptors (i.e., ⬎ 10⫺6 m) (18). these
data suggest that although ip receptors may mediate the vasodilator properties of prostacyclin and its mimetics, it is not the
receptor target that mediates inhibition of ﬁbroblasts growth. we
found that human lung ﬁbroblasts expressed detectable levels of
ppar␤ and that proliferation of these cells was inhibited by
the highly selective ppar␤ ligand gw0742. proliferation of
these cells was also inhibited by ppar␥, but not ppar␣, ligands.
these observations suggest that  xxxd3415xxx  sodium, like some
other prostacyclin mimetics, could be a ligand for ppar␤. this
was conﬁrmed in the current study using our standard reporter
gene assay (12). by contrast, using similar reporter gene assays,
we show that  xxxd3415xxx  sodium did not activate ppar␥. because ppar␣ ligands did not limit proliferation in these cells,
it seems clear that, in the micromolar range,  xxxd3415xxx  sodium
inhibits lung ﬁbroblast proliferation by an action on ppar␤.
there are no selective antagonists of ppar␤ or ip receptors.
therefore, we used lung ﬁbroblasts cultured from mice deﬁcient
in either receptor to further identify the role of each in proliferation. as seen with human cells, proliferative responses in murine
lung ﬁbroblasts cultured from control animals were inhibited by
 xxxd3415xxx  sodium and other  xxxg1879xxx  ligands. similarly, the
inhibitory effects were seen only at high concentrations, suggesting that ip receptors were not involved in the effects of
 xxxd3415xxx  sodium on lung cell proliferation. this hypothesis
was substantiated by our ﬁndings that the inhibitory effects of
 xxxd3415xxx  sodium were unaffected by  xxxg1879xxx  deletion.
however, the inhibitory effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium were reduced in cells derived from ppar␤⫺/⫺ animals. these observations strongly suggest that the prostacyclin mimetics can inhibit
lung ﬁbroblast proliferation independently of ip receptors and
via activation of ppar␤, in accordance with previous observations using other cell types (17, 19). deletion of the  xxxg1879xxx 
resulted in an increased amount of proliferation in the lung

ali, egan, fitzgerald, et al.: ip versus ppar␤ in lung fibroblasts

245

figure 3. phenotype and genotype characterization
of murine lung fibroblasts cultured from control wildtype mice or from mice lacking ip or ppar␤ genes.
(a ) morphology of murine lung fibroblasts. cells were
grown in a sterile 96-well plate, washed with pbs
(without calcium and magnesium), and incubated at
room temperature for 10 min with mayer’s hematoxylin stain. original magnification: ⫻10. (b ) proliferative
responses of cells from each type of animal in response
to fcs (0–20%). the amount of fluorescence detected
is directly proportional to the amount of dna in each
sample. data are means ⫾ sem; n ⫽ 6 experiments
using cells grown from two animals for each cell type.
(c ) pcr genotyping of genetically modified mice. for
genotyping of ppar␤, pcr reactions were performed
using primers allowing an amplification of a 500-bp
dna fragment of the wild-type ppar␤/␦ allele and
no amplification of the mutant allele or primers
allowing the amplification of a 650-bp dna fragment
of the mutant allele and no amplification of the wildtype allele. for genotyping of ip⫺/⫺ and control wildtype mice, pcr reactions were performed from genomic dna isolation from mice toes. pcr reactions were
performed using primers for the wild-type allele,
which result in a 425-bp product.

ﬁbroblasts compared with wild-type cells, indicating that the ip
receptor may serve a role in controlling the proliferation of lung
ﬁbroblasts. however, the increased rate of ip⫺/⫺ cells was not
deterred in the presence of indomethacin, which blocks prostacyclin production via an action on cyclo-oxygenase-1 or  xxxg1884xxx  (20). this suggests that the increased proliferation

figure 4. role of ppar␤ versus ip in the effects of  xxxd3415xxx  sodium
on lung cell proliferation. proliferation responses in cells from control
or ppar␤⫺/⫺ mice (a ) or ip⫺/⫺ mice (b ) were induced by 3% fcs and
are expressed as percentage of control. data are means ⫾ sem; n ⫽ 6
for each data point. *p ⬍ 0.05 by two-way anova. effects of  xxxd3415xxx 
sodium (ts) on ppar␤ (c ) or ppar␥ (d ) luciferase reporter gene activity
in hek293 cells. data show fold activation normalized to control relative
light units. data are means ⫾ sem; n ⫽ 3–8.

is not dependent on an interaction of the receptor with prostacyclin per se, but rather is due to some intrinsic activity or to
an unrelated phenotypic difference in these cells.
prostacyclin and related therapy is the gold standard for the
treatment of pulmonary hypertension. many of the beneﬁts of
prostacyclin in this disease are associated with the arrest and
reversal of the profound remodeling that occurs in the pulmonary
vascular wall. the observations presented in this article suggest
that prostacyclin mimetics limit lung ﬁbroblast proliferation via
an action of ppar␤ receptors. however, the therapeutic concentrations of these drugs in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension are in the nanomolar ( xxxg1879xxx ) range. the effects of
prostacyclin mimetics on blood pressure (via  xxxg1879xxx  pathways) limits the amount of drug that can be delivered safely.
prostacyclin therapy has another important limitation: it must
be give by injection or infusion. the data presented in this article
suggest that some of the effects of prostacyclin-like therapies
may occur independently of the classical  xxxg1879xxx  and at
the level of ppar␤ activation. these observations suggest that
ppar␤ may be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of
pulmonary hypertension, which is important because orally active agonists of ppar␤ have already been synthesized and are
in development for the treatment of dyslipidemia.
conflict of interest statement : f.y.a. does not have a financial relationship with
a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript. k.e.
does not have a financial relationship with a commercial entity that has an interest
in the subject of this manuscript. g.a.f. has received $6,000 from merck, $13,000
from glaxosmithkline, $15,000 from nicox, $7,000 from altana, $5,000 from
fujisawa, and $6,500 from cv therapeutics over the past two years. he serves
on the advisory boards for arcoxia and the medal study, for which he has received
$11,000. b.d. does not have a financial relationship with a commercial entity
that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript. w.w. does not have a
financial relationship with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject
of this manuscript. d.b.-b. does not have a financial relationship with a commercial
entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript. t.d.w. does not have
a financial relationship with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject
of this manuscript. j.a.m. does not have a financial relationship with a commercial
entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript.
acknowledgments : the authors thank jessica wray for her assistance with the
reporter gene assays.

246

american journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology vol 34

references
1. jeffery tk, wanstall jc. pulmonary vascular remodeling: a target for
therapeutic intervention in pulmonary hypertension. pharmacol ther
2001;92:1–20.
2. d’alonzo ge, barst rj, ayres sm, bergofsky eh, brundage bh, detre
km, fishman ap, goldring rm, groves bm, kernis jt. survival in
patients with primary pulmonary hypertension: results from a national
prospective registry. ann intern med 1991;115:343–349.
3. lim h, dey sk. a novel pathway of prostacyclin signaling-hanging out
with nuclear receptors. endocrinology 2002;143:3207–3210.
4. wort sj, mitchell ja, woods m, evans tw, warner td. the prostacyclinmimetic cicaprost inhibits endogenous  xxxg674xxx  release from human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. j cardiovasc pharmacol
2000;36(suppl 1)s410–s413.
5. berger j, moller de. the mechanisms of action of ppars. annu rev
med 2002;53:409–435.
6. desvergne b, wahli w. peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors: nuclear control of metabolism. endocr rev 1999;20:649–688.
7. wahli w. peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (ppars): from
metabolic control to epidermal wound healing. swiss med wkly 2002;
132:83–91.
8. lee c-h, chawla a, urbiztondo n, liao d, boisvert wa, evans rm.
transcriptional repression of atherogenic inﬂammation: modulation by
 xxxg1806xxx . science 2003;302:453–457.
9. cheng y, austin sc, rocca b, koller bh, coffman tm, grosser t,
lawson ja, fitzgerald ga. role of prostacyclin in the cardiovascular
response to thromboxane a2. science 2002;296:539–541.
10. tan ns, michalik l, noy n, yasmin r, pacot c, heim m, fluhmann b,
desvergne b, wahli w. critical roles of pparbeta /delta in keratinocyte response to inﬂammation. genes dev 2001;15:3263–3277.

2006

11. jones lj, gray m, yue st, haugland rp, singer vl. sensitive determination of cell number using the cyquant cell proliferation assay.
j immunol methods 2001;254:85–98.
12. bishop-bailey d, hla t. endothelial cell apoptosis induced by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar) ligand 15-deoxy-delta
12,14-prostaglandin j2. j biol chem 1999;274:17042–17048.
13. bishop-bailey d, hla t, warner td. intimal smooth muscle cells as a
target for  xxxg1807xxx  ligand
therapy. circ res 2002;91:210–217.
14. stenmark kr, mecham rp. cellular and molecular mechanisms of pulmonary vascular remodeling. annu rev physiol 1997;59:89–144.
15. stenmark kr, fasules j, hyde dm, voelkel nf, henson j, tucker a,
wilson h, reeves jt. severe pulmonary hypertension and arterial
adventitial changes in newborn calves at 4,300 m. j appl physiol 1987;
62:821–830.
16. murphy jd, rabinovitch m, goldstein jd, reid lm. the structural basis
of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn infant. j pediatr
1981;98:962–967.
17. hatae t, wada m, yokoyama c, shimonishi m, tanabe t. prostacyclindependent apoptosis mediated by  xxxg1806xxx . j biol chem 2001;276:
46260–46267.
18. forman bm, chen j, evans rm. hypolipidemic drugs, polyunsaturated
 xxxd2154xxx , and eicosanoids are ligands for peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptors alpha and delta. proc natl acad sci usa 1997;94:
4312–4317.
19. wise h. multiple signalling options for prostacyclin. acta pharmacol sin
2003;24:625–630.
20. mitchell ja, akarasereenont p, thiemermann c, flower rj, vane jr.
selectivity of nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs as inhibitors of constitutive and inducible cyclooxygenase. proc natl acad sci usa 1993;
90:11693–11697.

