int j gynecol cancer 2005, 15, 1213–1217

benign metastasizing leiomyoma responsive to
 xxxd2557xxx : case report and review of the literature
g.k. wentling*, b.-u. seviny, x.j. geigerz & m.d. bridges§
*section of general surgery and departments of yobstetrics and gynecology, zlaboratory medicine and
pathology; and §radiology, mayo clinic, jacksonville, florida

abstract.

wentling gk, sevin b-u, geiger xj, bridges md. benign metastasizing leiomyoma responsive to
 xxxd2557xxx : case report and review of the literature. int j gynecol cancer 2005;15:1213–1217.

benign metastasizing leiomyoma (bml) is an unusual condition typically treated by surgical resection and
hormonal therapy. a 37-year-old woman presented with dyspnea 6 years after uterine myomectomy. computed tomographic scans showed pelvic and right-sided lung masses. total abdominal hysterectomy and right
salpingo-oophorectomy revealed only leiomyomas and benign ovarian cysts. thoracotomy revealed multiple
nodules consistent with leiomyomas. estrogen and progesterone receptors on lung and uterine tissue were
positive. a 21- 3 18-mm residual area of neoplasm in the lung completely resolved 3 months after treatment
with  xxxd2557xxx . the patient remains free of disease 3 years after lung resection. we present a rare case of bml
in which the lung neoplasm responded to  xxxd2557xxx  alone in the setting of intact ovarian function.
keywords:

benign metastasizing leiomyoma, lung neoplasm,  xxxd2557xxx , progesterone.

benign metastasizing leiomyoma (bml) is an unusual
disorder with only approximately 80 cases documented in the literature. the disorder is characterized
by a histologically benign smooth muscle tumor that
originates in the uterus and spreads elsewhere, usually
to the lung. controversy exists regarding whether
lung leiomyomas represent metastases of a benign
uterine primary tumor or synchronous or metachronous development of an independent lung lesion.
optimum therapy for bml is also unclear, although
obliteration of the sex steroid stimulus by oophorectomy or hormonal therapy is generally recommended
in addition to surgical resection of the lung lesions. we
present a case of a patient after lung resection for bml
whose residual pulmonary tumor resolved during
progesterone therapy before she underwent completion oophorectomy.

case
a 37-year-old, gravida 0, woman presented with
progressive shortness of breath over 2–3 months. six
address correspondence and reprint requests to: bernd-uwe sevin,
md, phd, department of obstetrics and gynecology, mayo clinic,
4500 san pablo road, jacksonville, fl 32224, usa. email: sevin.bernduwe@mayo.edu
#

2005 igcs

years earlier, she had undergone uneventful myomectomy for symptomatic uterine leiomyomata. computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis
at presentation showed right upper and middle lobe
masses abutting the pleura and pelvic mass (fig. 1).
the patient’s past medical history was significant for
only hypertension and non–insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus controlled with oral hypoglycemic agents.
gynecological surgery and thoracic surgery consults
were obtained. an attempt was made to biopsy the
lung mass percutaneously, but this yielded an acellular
specimen and was deemed non-diagnostic. owing to
concern that the lung lesions might be metastatic leiomyosarcoma from a pelvic primary, the decision was
made to explore the patient’s abdomen surgically. a
5.0-cm mass clinically consistent with a fibroid was
found in the uterine fundus. in addition, the right ovary
appeared to contain multiple cysts, and the appendix was dilated though not inflamed. the left ovary
contained a benign-appearing cyst and otherwise appeared normal. a hysterectomy and right salpingooophorectomy with appendectomy were done leaving
the left ovary because of the patient’s young age and
desire to retain ovarian function.
final pathologic results demonstrated a 5.0-cm leiomyoma in the uterine fundus and a 0.5-cm leiomyoma
in the posterior uterine wall. histologic findings

1214 g.k. wentling et al.

figure 1. computed tomogram of the chest demonstrates multiple
right-sided lung lesions.

showed relatively uniform, cytologically bland, spindle cells with areas of myxoid change (fig. 2). the
right ovary contained only multiple small benign corpus luteum and follicular cysts. the appendix contained
a mucinous cystadenoma. review of the pathologic
report from the patient’s prior myomectomy done
elsewhere showed a benign leiomyoma with no atypical
or malignant features.
approximately 1 week after abdominal surgery, the
patient underwent thoracotomy and attempted resection of the right lung lesions. the right upper and middle lobe lesions were excised, leaving a small amount
of residual tumor that was adherent to major hilar
vascular structures and deemed unresectable by the
surgeon. final pathologic results confirmed benign
leiomyomas (fig. 3). estrogen and  xxxg1737xxx  immunohistochemical studies performed on the

figure 2. uterine leiomyoma. cytologically bland, relatively uniform,
spindle-shaped smooth muscle cells with anastomosing fascicles and
hyaline fibrosis (hematoxylin and eosin; original magnification, 3100).
#

2005 igcs, international journal of gynecological cancer 15, 1213–1217

figure 3. lung leiomyoma. anastomosing fascicles of uniform cytologically bland spindle cells with hyaline fibrosis and small vessels,
similar to the uterine neoplasm (hematoxylin and eosin; original
magnification, 3100).

lung and uterine lesions were positive, with strong
nuclear staining (fig. 4).
given the diagnosis of bml, removal of the remaining (left) ovary was recommended. surgery was
deferred for a time to allow the patient to recover from
successive major operations, and  xxxd2557xxx  therapy
(40 mg three times a day) was initiated given the
strongly positive estrogen and  xxxg1737xxx 
status of the uterine and lung lesions. the use of a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist was initially
entertained but then dismissed because of the patient’s
reluctance to experience menopausal symptoms and
the prohibitive cost of the medication. during  xxxd2557xxx  treatment, the patient was followed with serial
computed tomographic scans of the chest, abdomen,

figure 4. lung leiomyoma immunohistochemistry. diffuse positive
nuclear staining for  xxxg1737xxx  (pr) (immunoperoxidase,
anti-pr antibody; original magnification, 3400).

benign metastasizing leiomyoma responsive to  xxxd2557xxx 

1215

cysts, consistent with intact ovarian function. the
patient has now been followed with computed tomographic scans and remains asymptomatic and free of
disease on imaging 3 years after the abdominal exploration and hysterectomy.

and pelvis, and the residual 21- 3 18-mm soft tissue
mass in the right upper lobe completely resolved
3 months after oral progestin was begun (fig. 5). at
the patient’s request, the medication was continued
until after completion oophorectomy. pathologic examination of the resected ovary revealed benign follicular

discussion
since the first case report of bml by steiner in 1939,
approximately 80 cases have been published(1,2). many
questions remain, however, regarding this rare entity.
bml generally occurs in women of childbearing age
who have a history of hysterectomy or myomectomy
for uterine fibroids. the lung is the most common site
of involvement, although lesions of the skin, bones,
mediastinum, lymph nodes, and retroperitoneum have
also been described(3). the disorder is distinct from
disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis, in which
multiple benign smooth muscle or myofibroblastic
nodules are present on the pelvic and abdominal peritoneal surfaces. in contrast to this disorder, in which
spread is by direct peritoneal seeding, the mode of
spread in bml is considered to be hematogenous. furthermore, the lung lesions in bml are usually incidentally discovered, and symptoms, if present, consist
of only mild cough, dyspnea, or chest pain. rarely do
patients progress to frank respiratory failure. the lung
lesions tend to be well-circumscribed, multiple bilateral
nodules that range from several millimeters to centimeters. these nodules are not typically calcified.
the term ‘‘benign metastasizing leiomyoma’’ is contradictory, reflecting the unclear cause of this disease.
several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the
histogenesis of bml. one possible explanation is that
the pulmonary lesions actually represent low-grade
leiomyosarcomas of the uterus(4,5). histologically, it
can be extremely difficult to differentiate benign leiomyomas from well-differentiated malignant leiomyosarcomas in other tissues in which these tumors occur,
and similar difficulties are encountered when evaluating the malignant potential of the pulmonary lesions
in bml. in general, histologic factors determining soft
tissue tumor malignancy include degree of cellularity,
cellular pleomorphism, mitotic activity, degree of necrosis, and invasive or infiltrative growth pattern. for
soft tissue smooth muscle tumors, mitotic activity has
been considered the most reliable factor, and generally
five or more mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields
(hpf) is regarded as malignant(6). not all tumors obey
these rules, however, and malignant potential is probably not as simple as a well-defined continuum of
increasing mitotic activity. for example, in younger
premenopausal
women
uterine
leiomyomas

figure 5. computed tomographic images of the chest in a patient
after lung resection for benign metastasizing leiomyoma. a) note
residual tumor before treatment with  xxxd2557xxx . b) after  xxxd2557xxx 
treatment, residual tumor has resolved.
#

2005 igcs, international journal of gynecological cancer 15, 1213–1217

1216 g.k. wentling et al.

designated mitotically active can have five or more
mitotic figures per 10 hpf (with occasional reports of
10–20 mitotic figures per 10 hpf) and still display
a completely benign course. furthermore, mitotic
activity in uterine leiomyomas is not static but fluctuates during the menstrual cycle, with the highest
counts found in the early secretory phase(5). given
that the benign pulmonary nodules in bml often
behave in a malignant fashion by being multiple,
bilateral, and sometimes progressing to cause respiratory failure and death, it is reasonable to consider that
the lung nodules are actually extremely well differentiated but malignant leiomyosarcomas.
in contrast to the theory that the lung nodules represent late metastases from a low-grade, well-differentiated
leiomyosarcoma, another potential explanation for
the origin of bml is that benign uterine smooth
muscle tissue embolizes to the lungs(7). the lack of
cellular atypia, necrosis, and nuclear heterogeneity in
cells from the lung nodules supports this theory of
benign tissue embolization. given the large percentage of patients who have had prior hysterectomy or
myomectomy, perhaps the surgical procedure facilitates the spread of benign cords of myomatous cells
by disrupting venous channels in the pelvis(8). a
third explanation is that smooth muscle neoplasms
arise de novo in the lung as part of a more generalized systemic leiomyomatosis under control of sex
hormones(3).
several entities are classified as smooth muscle neoplasms of the lungs and need to be considered in the
differential diagnosis of pulmonary nodules: primary
or metastatic leiomyosarcomas, primary leiomyomas,
pulmonary hamartomas with a prominent smooth
muscle component, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, leiomyomatous hyperplasia, and bml. radiographic and
histologic characteristics can help differentiate among
these diagnoses. primary pulmonary leiomyomas typically occur in females but are extremely rare. primary
pulmonary leiomyosarcomas are also rare, and cellular atypia, increased mitotic activity, and rapid growth
can help distinguish them from benign leiomyomas.
primary pulmonary leiomyosarcomas also tend to be
solitary lesions, whereas metastatic leiomyosarcomas
are usually multiple.
hamartomas are quite common and often present as
calcified solitary lung lesions in males. these are benign
neoplasms composed of mesenchymal elements with
entrapped lung epithelium. when the dominant element is a smooth muscle, termed ‘‘leiomyomatous’’ or
‘‘fibroleiomyomatous hamartoma,’’ careful inspection
is necessary to identify other mesenchymal elements
and epithelial inclusions. leiomyomatous hyperplasia,
#

2005 igcs, international journal of gynecological cancer 15, 1213–1217

on the other hand, is a metaplastic process frequently
found in chronically damaged or fibrosed lungs. it
does not present as a discrete mass but as a diffuse
lung process.
lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a diffuse lung condition as well, but it is quite rare, is seen exclusively
in females, and can exhibit a rapidly progressive
and fatal course. distinguishing pathologic features
of this disease include cystic spaces and smooth
muscle proliferation around endothelial spaces without the formation of gross nodules, as is typically seen
in bml. additionally, the smooth muscle cells in lymphangioleiomyomatosis are hmb45 antibody positive,
whereas conventional smooth muscle cells are not.
after surgical resection of the pulmonary nodules,
additional treatment for bml varies. the lung lesions
are generally recognized to be sex hormone responsive,
as evidenced by reports of regression of lung nodules
during pregnancy or after menopause(9,10). therapeutic
options primarily consist of hormonal manipulation via
medical or surgical oophorectomy(11). the use of luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone analogs to effect
gonadal suppression has also resulted in tumor regression, as reported by hague et al.(12) and jacobson et al.(13).
the literature is mixed on the use of progesterone to
treat bml. cohen and robins(14) reported a patient
whose pulmonary nodules increased in size while first
receiving medroxyprogesterone and then  xxxd2557xxx 
acetate. the lesions later regressed when the progestin
was discontinued. they concluded that progestins
have a ‘‘permissive or stimulatory effect on the growth
of bml tumor.’’ hague et al.(12) commented on a
patient who had undergone hysterectomy and whose
pulmonary nodules regressed rather than grew while
receiving progesterone therapy, but they gave no further details. cramer et al.(15) mentioned a patient who
received progesterone therapy and had an equivocal
response to treatment. in our patient, the administration of oral progesterone resulted in complete regression of the residual tumor despite the fact that one
ovary remained (table 1).
our rationale for using an oral progestin to treat this
patient comes from the long-standing, well-documented
hormonal treatment of other sex steroid-responsive
tumors. breast and endometrial cancers are treated
with hormonal therapy, and the presence or absence of
estrogen and progesterone receptors has a key role in
their management. in particular, endometrial cancer
represents the classic hormonally responsive neoplasm,
in which progesterone is thought to be antagonistic to
estrogen-mediated cell proliferation and the principal
promoter of cellular differentiation. patients who have
endometrial cancer with low or absent estrogen or

benign metastasizing leiomyoma responsive to  xxxd2557xxx 

1217

table 1. benign metastasizing leiomyoma

references

etiology
metastatic: low-grade malignant uterine leiomyosarcoma
metastases
embolic: benign uterine (leiomyoma) emboli
primary: de novo smooth muscle proliferation
differential diagnosis of smooth muscle neoplasms of the lung
leiomyosarcoma (primary or metastatic)
leiomyoma (primary)
benign metastasizing leiomyoma
hamartoma with a prominent smooth muscle component
lymphangioleiomyomatosis
leiomyomatous hyperplasia
treatment
lung resection in combination with
surgical oophorectomy or
medical oophorectomy (eg, use of gnrh agonists)
consider progesterone therapy, if tumor is pr positive

1 steiner pe. metastasizing fibroleiomyoma of the uterus: report of
a case and review of the literature. am j pathol 1939;15:89–110.
2 sabatini r, ferreri r, distante g, loizzi v, loizzi p. benign metastasizing leiomyoma in the lung: a case report. eur j gynaecol oncol
2002;23:445–6.
3 kayser k, zink s, schneider t et al. benign metastasizing leiomyoma
of the uterus: documentation of clinical, immunohistochemical and
lectin-histochemical data of ten cases. virchows arch 2000;437:
284–92.
4 wolff m, silva f, kaye g. pulmonary metastases (with admixed
epithelial elements) from smooth muscle neoplasms: report of nine
cases, including three males. am j surg pathol 1979;3:325–42.
5 jautzke g, müller-ruchholtz e, thalmann u. immunohistological
detection of estrogen and progesterone receptors in multiple and
well differentiated leiomyomatous lung tumors in women with
uterine leiomyomas (so-called benign metastasizing leiomyomas): a
report on 5 cases. pathol res pract 1996;192:215–23.
6 weiss sw, goldblum jr. enzinger and weiss’s soft tissue tumors, 4th
edn. st. louis, mo: mosby, 2001:727–48.
7 tedeschi lg. multiple pulmonary fibroleiomyomas. am j obstet
gynecol 1980;138:468–70.
8 abu-rustum nr, curtin jp, burt m, jones wb. regression of uterine low-grade smooth-muscle tumors metastatic to the lung after
oophorectomy. obstet gynecol 1997;89:850–2.
9 horstmann jp, pietra gg, harman ja, cole ng, grinspan s. spontaneous regression of pulmonary leiomyomas during pregnancy.
cancer 1977;39:314–21.
10 arai t, yasuda y, takaya t, shibayama m. natural decrease of
benign metastasizing leiomyoma [communications to the editor].
chest 2000;117:921–2.
11 banner as, carrington cb, emory wb et al. efficacy of oophorectomy in lymphangioleiomyomatosis and benign metastasizing
leiomyoma. n engl j med 1981;305:204–9.
12 hague wm, abdulwahid na, jacobs hs, craft i. use of  xxxg930xxx 
analogue to obtain reversible castration in a patient with benign
metastasizing leiomyoma. br j obstet gynaecol 1986;93:455–60.
13 jacobson tz, rainey ej, turton cwg. pulmonary benign metastasising leiomyoma: response to treatment with  xxxd2229xxx . thorax
1995;50:1225–6.
14 cohen jd, robins hi. response of ‘‘benign’’ metastasizing leiomyoma
to progestin withdrawal: case report. eur j gynaecol oncol 1993;14:
44–5.
15 cramer sf, meyer js, kraner jf, camel m, mazur mt, tenenbaum
ms. metastasizing leiomyoma of the uterus: s-phase fraction,  xxxg730xxx , and ultrastructure. cancer 1980;45:932–7.
16 dai d, kumar ns, wolf dm, leslie kk. molecular tools to reestablish progestin control of endometrial cancer cell proliferation. am j
obstet gynecol 2001;184:790–7.
17 bodner k, bodner-adler b, kimberger o, czerwenka k, leodolter s,
mayerhofer k. estrogen and  xxxg1737xxx  expression in
patients with uterine leiomyosarcoma and correlation with different
clinicopathological parameters. anticancer res 2003;23:729–32.
18 zhai y.-l, kobayashi y, mori a et al. expression of steroid receptors, ki-67, and p53 in uterine leiomyosarcomas. int j gynecol
pathol 1999;18:20–8.
19 wade k, quinn ma, hammond i, williams k, cauchi m. uterine
sarcoma: steroid receptors and response to hormonal therapy. gynecol oncol 1990;39:364–7.
20 sutton gp, stehman fb, michael h, young pcm, ehrlich ce. estrogen and progesterone receptors in uterine sarcomas. obstet gynecol
1986;68:709–14.
21 soper jt, mccarty ks jr, hinshaw w, creasman wt, mccarty ks
sr, clarke-pearson dl. cytoplasmic estrogen and progesterone
receptor content of uterine sarcomas. am j obstet gynecol 1984;150:
342–8.
22 rein ms. advances in uterine leiomyoma research: the progesterone hypothesis. environ health perspect 2000;108(suppl. 5):
791–3.
23 andersen j. growth factors and cytokines in uterine leiomyomas.
semin reprod endocrinol 1996;14:269–82.

gnrh,  xxxg930xxx ; pr, progesterone
receptor.

 xxxg1737xxx  levels are known to have a
poorer prognosis, and downregulation of progesterone receptors is associated with advanced endometrial
tumors that do not respond to progestin therapy(16). it
is unclear whether hormonal manipulation is effective
against uterine leiomyosarcomas, although the presence of receptors in these tumors suggests that there
may be a role for hormonal therapy. unfortunately,
only a few studies with small numbers of patients
have investigated  xxxg1603xxx  levels in leiomyosarcomas of the uterus, with expression between 11%
and 60%(17–21).
the role of estrogen in the growth of uterine leiomyomas has been well documented, but recent investigations have focused on the critical role of progesterone
in the regulation of mitotic activity and the induction
of certain growth factors, such as epidermal growth
factor and insulin-like growth factor and their receptors(22,23). in light of the estrogen and progesterone
positive receptor status of the lung nodules in our
patient, we treated her with  xxxd2557xxx , and this resulted in complete residual tumor regression despite
the intact left ovary. whether progesterone acted by
inhibiting the effects of estrogen, by downregulating
estrogen receptors, or through a completely different
cellular effect of its own is uncertain. certainly, the
complex interaction of sex steroid hormones in the
regulation of leiomyoma growth has yet to be clearly
defined. however, from our experience,  xxxd2557xxx 
should be considered as a simple treatment for residual  xxxg1737xxx –positive bml.

accepted for publication june 30, 2004

#

2005 igcs, international journal of gynecological cancer 15, 1213–1217

