hepatic very-low-density lipoprotein and  xxxg175xxx  production are increased following in vivo induction of betaine-homocysteine s-methyltran...  we have previously reported a positive correlation between the expression of  xxxg262xxx  (betaine-homocysteine s-methyltransferase) and apob ( xxxg175xxx ) in rat hepatoma mca (mcardle rh-7777) cells [sowden, collins, smith, garrow, sparks and sparks (1999) biochem. j. 341, 639-645]. to examine whether a similar relationship occurs in vivo, hepatic  xxxg262xxx  expression was induced by feeding rats a met ( xxxd2595xxx )-restricted betaine-containing diet, and parameters of apob metabolism were evaluated. there were no generalized metabolic abnormalities associated with met restriction for 7 days, as evidenced by control levels of serum glucose, ketones,  xxxg941xxx  and l-homocysteine levels. betaine plus the met restriction resulted in lower serum insulin and non-esterified fatty acid levels. betaine plus met restriction induced hepatic  xxxg262xxx  4-fold and apob mrna 3-fold compared with met restriction alone. no changes in percentage of edited apob mrna were observed on the test diets. an increase in liver apob mrna correlated with an 82% and 46% increase in apob and triacylglycerol production respectively using in vivo  xxxd3458xxx . increased secretion of vldl (very-low-density lipoprotein) with met restriction plus betaine was associated with a 45% reduction in liver triacylglycerol compared with control. nuclear run-off assays established that transcription of both  xxxg262xxx  and apob genes was also increased in met-restricted plus betaine diets. no change in apob mrna stability was detected in  xxxg262xxx -transfected mca cells. hepatic apob and  xxxg262xxx  mrna levels were also increased by 1.8- and 3-fold respectively by betaine supplementation of met-replete diets. since dietary betaine increased apob mrna, vldl apob and triacylglycerol production and decreased hepatic triacylglycerol, results suggest that induction of apob transcription may provide a potential mechanism for mobilizing hepatic triacylglycerol by increasing apob available for vldl assembly and secretion.