british journal of pharmacology (2006) 147, s127–s135

& 2006 nature publishing group all rights reserved 0007 – 1188/06 $30.00
www.nature.com/bjp

histamine and its receptors
*,1mike e. parsons & 2c. robin ganellin
1
department of life sciences, university of hertfordshire, hatfield, hertfordshire al10 9ab and 2department of chemistry,
christopher ingold laboratories, university college london, london wc1h oaj

keywords:
abbreviations:

this article reviews the development of our knowledge of the actions of histamine which have taken
place during the course of the 20th century. histamine has been shown to have a key physiological role
in the control of gastric acid secretion and a pathophysiological role in a range of allergic disorders.
the synthesis of, and pharmacological studies on, selective agonists and antagonists has established
the existence of four types of histamine receptor and histamine receptor antagonists have found very
important therapeutic applications. thus, in the 1940s, h1-receptor antagonists (‘the antihistamines’)
yielded and still provide valuable treatment for allergic conditions such as hay fever and rhinitis. in
the late 1970s and 1980s, h2-receptor antagonists (in the discovery of which the two authors were
personally involved) revolutionised the treatment of peptic ulcer and other gastric acid-related
diseases. the h3-receptor antagonists, although available since 1987, have been slower to find a
therapeutic role. however, the discovery of nonimidazole derivatives such as brain-penetrating h3
antagonists has provided drugs that are in early-phase clinical trials, possibly for application in
obesity, and a variety of central nervous system disorders, such as memory, learning deficits and
epilepsy. finally, the most recently (1999) discovered  xxxg1081xxx  promises the potential to provide
drugs acting on the immunological system with possible applications in asthma and inflammation.
british journal of pharmacology (2006) 147, s127–s135. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706440
antihistamines; h2-receptor antagonists; h3-receptor antagonists; h4 receptors constitutive activity; gastric acid
secretion; allergy;  xxxd3050xxx ; burimamide; cimetidine; thioperamide; jnj 7777120
cns, central nervous system; ecl, enterochromaffin-like cell; gaba, gamma amino butyric acid; gord,
gastroesophageal reflux disease; gpcr, g-protein-coupled receptor;  xxxg2318xxx /5, transmembrane region 3/5

introduction
it is now almost one hundred years since sir henry dale
(figure 1) and his colleagues at the wellcome laboratories
isolated histamine from the mould ergot. they then went on to
carry out a ground-breaking series of experiments to explore
its biological actions. they found that it had a stimulant effect
on smooth muscle from the gut and respiratory tract, caused
vasodepression, stimulated cardiac contractility and induced a
shock-like syndrome when injected into animals (dale &
laidlaw, 1910; 1919). popielski (1920) demonstrated that
histamine had a marked stimulant effect on the secretion of
acid from the stomach of dogs. in 1924, lewis described the
classic ‘triple response’ to histamine consisting of a red spot
due to vasodilatation, a wheal which was the consequence of
increased permeability and flare due to an axon reflex (lewis
& grant, 1924).
however, it was not until 1927, when best et al. (1927)
isolated histamine from samples of liver and lungs, that this
amine was found to be a natural constituent of the body,
although some people thought that it had arisen simply due
to the breakdown of histidine. subsequently, the release of
histamine in association with the anaphylactic reaction was
demonstrated by showing the difference in histamine content
of the lung before and after shock. similarly, the marked

*author for correspondence at: department of life sciences,
university of hertfordshire, c.p. snow building, college lane,
hatfield, hertfordshire al10 9ab, u.k.;
e-mail: m.e.parsons@herts.ac.uk

increase in the histamine content of blood after anaphylaxis
was sufficient to explain the shock.

the first antihistamines
the evidence that histamine had an active role in allergy and
anaphylaxis was the stimulus for the search for compounds
being able to counteract the pathological effects of histamine,
which began at the pasteur institute in paris, in the 1930s,
where bovet was working. he had access to  xxxd3266xxx ’s bank
of compounds and, as he stated in his nobel lecture:
‘‘considering the number of features that histamine, acetylcholine, and epinephrine have in common, we looked for
antagonism comparable to that exhibited by sympatholytic
compounds toward epinephrine and by parasympatholytic
compounds toward acetylcholine’’. the first compound reported as an antihistamine by ungar, parrot and bovet was the
adrenolytic benzodioxan, piperoxan (933f), in 1937, which
blocked the effect of histamine on the guinea-pig ileum. this
was followed shortly afterwards by the report by bovet &
staub (1937) of structurally related aryl ethers such as the
thymol ether 929f, which protected the guinea-pig from the
lethal effects of histamine-induced anaphylaxis. the latter
compound proved to be too toxic for clinical development, but
replacement of the ether oxygen by an amino group led to the
discovery of aniline ethylene diamine derivatives. for his work
on antihistamines and curare, bovet was awarded the 1957
nobel prize for physiology or medicine.

s128

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

histamine and its receptors

 xxxd1906xxx  (benadrylt),  xxxd3443xxx , chlorpheniramine
and promethazine.
after 1945, these antihistamines became widely used in the
treatment of various allergic disorders such as hay fever,
allergic rhinitis and urticaria. however, side effects were not
uncommon and sedation was a drawback to their use (however, see below). some side effects were put to good use; thus,
antihistamines such as  xxxd1774xxx  (marzinet) and diphenhydramine in the form of its 8-chlorotheophyllinate (dramaminet) are used mostly as antiemetics for travel sickness.

histamine receptors

figure 1 (a) sir henry dale, (b) professor heinz schild, (c) sir
james black, (d) professor jean-charles schwartz.

beta

4

nualpha
alpha n h2

n nupi

nutau hn
2

histamine numbering

the classical antihistamines antagonised the effects of histamine on a variety of smooth muscles, but it became apparent
that some of the actions of histamine were refractory to
inhibition by these drugs. in vitro studies showed that
histamine’s ability to increase heart rate and inhibit contraction
of the rat uterus was not blocked by  xxxd3050xxx  and related
drugs. similarly, histamine-stimulated gastric secretion was
shown to be unresponsive to three different antihistamines
(ashford et al., 1949). folkow et al. (1948) found that the
vasodilator response to lower doses of histamine in the
anaesthetised cat could be antagonised by benadryl but higher
doses were completely refractory, and this led the authors in the
summary of their article to suggest, for the first time, that ‘there
are two types of receptors sensitive to histamine only one of
which can be blocked by benadryl and related compounds’.
one year prior to folkow’s work, a paper was published in
the british journal of pharmacology by schild (1947) (figure 1),
which has contributed considerably to the analysis of
histamine receptor populations. it described the development
of a new scale for the measurement of drug antagonism – the
pa2 value (see also rang, this issue). in the introduction to the
paper, schild stated that

ncn
n

n

ch2ch2nme2
ch2sch2ch2nhcnhme

me

ch2

 xxxd3050xxx 

n

hn

cimetidine

ome
s
n

hn

n

cl
nh

thioperamide

o
n
h

jnj 7777120

n
n
me

figure 2 the structures of histamine and of key antagonist ligands.

the work on anilino compounds was followed up in france
in collaboration with rhone-poulenc and, independently
during the war years (1939–1945), by researchers in the
u.s.a. the first antihistamine to be used in man in 1942
was antergant (phenbenzamine, rp 2339), but this was
subsequently replaced by neoantergant ( xxxd3050xxx ,  xxxd3050xxx ,  xxxd3050xxx ; figure 2), which is still in use topically to
counteract the unpleasant effects of histamine release in the
skin. many other antihistamines followed, such as diphenbritish journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

when the activity of a new drug or drug antagonist has
to be defined in terms of some other drug or of some of
its own effects, the results are not equally reproducible
since the apparent activity varies in successive experiments even though conditions are kept as constant as
possible. the difficulty of making results of one
laboratory available to another is aggravated by the
multiplicity of methods used and frequently by the lack
of information of their variability: this applies particularly to methods of expressing drug antagonism. it
would obviously be of advantage if some common
method of expressing drug antagonism could be agreed
upon. in the present paper it is proposed to introduce a
new measure of drug antagonism pa.
the introduction of the pa measurement strongly supported
the concept of the existence of at least two distinct receptors
for histamine, since the value for  xxxd3050xxx  in antagonising
the positive chronotropic effect of histamine on the guinea-pig
heart differed from that obtained against the contractile
response of the isolated guinea-pig ileum.

histamine storage and release
although evidence for histamine receptor heterogeneity had
been provided in the 1940s, much of the research activity on

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

histamine at this time was devoted to the study of its storage,
release and metabolism. this involved several of the doyens of
british pharmacology, such as blaschko, feldberg, gaddum,
mongar, paton, perry, riley, schild, trendelenburg and west.
much of this work was brought together at a ciba
foundation symposium jointly with the physiological society
and the british pharmacological society on histamine in
honour of sir henry dale and published in 1956. detailed
discussion of the research in this period would be out of place
here and readers are referred to the proceedings of this ciba
symposium (schayer, 1956).
however, some of the highlights of histamine research in
the 1950s and early 1960s will be considered. the storage of
histamine in mast cells was established by riley and west
when they found that chemicals capable of inducing histamine
release also disrupted mast cells and this was accompanied
by a fall in tissue histamine content (riley & west, 1952).
further, there was a strong positive correlation between
histamine content and mast cell populations in a variety of
tissues. many of the studies on histamine release were
performed using compound 48/80 and first described in detail
by paton in 1951 (feldberg & mongar, 1954). however, riley
and west were careful to point out that some tissues contained
too few mast cells to account for their histamine content, and
suggested that other cells may store histamine. subsequently,
it was shown that the blood basophil, blood platelets in
some species and the enterochromaffin-like cell (ecl) in the
stomach were additional sources of histamine. in mammalian
species, histamine is now known to be present in all tissues in
amounts ranging from less than 1 to over 100 mg g1 and, in
general, the skin, connective tissue, lung and much of the
gastrointestinal tract are rich in histamine.

histamine metabolism
the origin and fate of histamine in the body was extensively
studied during this period and schayer (1956) showed that
histamine is formed from 1-histidine by the action of the
enzyme  xxxg1040xxx  and specific inhibitors of this
enzyme such as a-fluoromethyl histamine have been described.
the two major pathways for the catabolism of histamine were
shown to be via  xxxg167xxx  and histamine methyl
transferase. the study of the former pathway was greatly
facilitated by the availability of a potent and highly specific
inhibitor of  xxxg167xxx ,  xxxd2951xxx . the half-life of
pharmacologically active doses of histamine is less than 10 s in
the rat and 20–30 s in the dog. in the early studies histamine
levels were measured by bioassay, but subsequently fluorometric and radio-enzymatic techniques were employed.

histamine h2 receptors
the pharmacological actions of histamine continued to be
studied. in particular, its stimulant effect on gastric acid
secretion was intensively studied by code (1956) and
colleagues, and they concluded that this action was not simply
a pharmacological phenomenon but that histamine had a
physiological role in controlling acid secretion, a suggestion to
be confirmed some 16 years later, with the discovery of
histamine h2-receptor antagonists.

histamine and its receptors

s129

although histamine was confirmed as a potent vasodilator,
its role in various vasodilator phenomena exhibited by the
peripheral circulation, for example, immersion in cold water,
was  xxxd3237xxx . this was, in part, because of negative
results with the antihistamines available at the time and before
the discovery of h2 receptors on the vasculature. the existence
of histaminergic nerves was also proposed, but their functions
would have to wait until the discovery of histamine h3
receptors and their agonists and antagonists.
the findings that the classical antihistaminic drugs failed
to block all of the actions of histamine led to a research
programme being commenced at the laboratories of smithkline and french in welwyn garden city, u.k., under the
direction of dr james black (figure 1). the objective of the
programme was to confirm histamine receptor heterogeneity
and to discover an antagonist of the histamine receptor
refractory to conventional antihistamines. it was argued that
such an agent might be used to inhibit histamine-stimulated
gastric acid secretion and thereby provide a potential therapy
for acid-related diseases such as peptic ulcer and gastrooesophageal reflux disease (gord). this was a brave decision
for a pharmaceutical company because, at this time (mid1960s), the hormone gastrin had been isolated and sequenced
at liverpool university and this gastric secretagogue received
the attention of most gastric physiologists and pharmaceutical
companies.
in this search for an antagonist of the ‘other’ histamine
receptor, the chemical starting point was based on an analogy
with the catecholamine field; a-adrenoceptor antagonists are
structurally unrelated to the adrenergic transmitters, adrenaline and noradrenaline, whereas the early b-receptor antagonists resembled them quite closely chemically. similarly, the
classical antihistamines are bulky molecules structurally very
different from the simple imidazole ring and ethylamine side
chain of histamine, although, like histamine, they possess a
basic amino group. therefore, it was decided that the chemical
starting point in the search for an antagonist of the
hypothecated second class of histamine receptor would be
the structure of histamine itself (figure 2).
five bioassays were established, two (guinea-pig ileum
in vitro and the rat stomach in vivo) in which the responses
to histamine were antagonised by drugs such as  xxxd3050xxx 
and three (guinea-pig atrium and rat uterus in vitro and rat
gastric secretion in vivo) where histamine responses were
refractory to available antihistamines.
at a relatively early stage, these assays were used to study
the agonist activity of a range of methylated histamines and
some degree of selectivity for molecules having a methyl group
on either the 2 or 4 position of the imidazole ring was
established. the former had 17% of the potency of histamine
of the ileum, but only 4% on the atrium. the difference was
more dramatic for 4-methylhistamine, which had 40% the
activity of histamine on the atrium but only 0.2% the potency
in contracting the ileum. in vivo, this was confirmed by
measuring gastric acid secretion and contraction of the
stomach wall simultaneously in the anaesthetised rat. a dose
of 4-methylhistamine which produced a secretory response
comparable to that produced by 2 mg kg1 histamine by i.v.
bolus injection failed to cause contraction of the stomach wall
(figure 3). these data provided further support for the
concept of two histamine receptor populations. similar studies
were performed by ash & schild (1966) and they proposed
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s130

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

figure 3 effects of i.v. bolus injections of histamine (h, 2 mg kg1)
and 4-methylhistamine (4mehnh2, 5 mg kg1) upon secretion of
gastric acid and stomach wall contraction in an anaesthetised rat.

the term h1 for the receptor blocked by the known
antihistamines. however, to confirm the existence of a
second class of histamine receptor, a selective antagonist was
required.

h2-receptor antagonists
the breakthrough in the search for such a ligand came
with the synthesis of na-guanylhistamine, which was found
to be a weak partial agonist on the heart, uterus and
gastric secretion. in these days of combinatorial chemistry
and robotic screening, it may seem strange that in the
years between 1964 and 1972 only 700 compounds were
synthesised and tested but success was achieved with the
discovery of burimamide, which was 100 times more potent
than na-guanylhistamine and did not act as a partial
agonist. burimamide was shown to be a highly specific,
competitive antagonist of the actions of histamine on non-h1
receptor-containing tissues and allowed the definition of these
receptors as histamine h2 receptors and characterised burimamide as an h2-receptor antagonist (black et al., 1972). the
human pharmacology of burimamide was studied, but the
compound lacked sufficient oral activity to explore its
clinical potential.
a second, more potent compound with good oral bioavailability, was soon developed.  xxxd2622xxx  was taken into the
clinic and proved to be of therapeutic value in duodenal ulcer
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

histamine and its receptors

disease. however, the occurrence of a reversible granulocytopenia in a small number of patients precluded its commercial
exploitation. at first it was thought that this toxic effect might
be a consequence of the pharmacology of  xxxd2622xxx , since h2
receptors had been identified on a range of white cells but,
in fact, it was the chemistry of the molecule and, in particular,
the thiourea group in the side chain that was the cause of
the toxicity.
subsequently, a molecule in which the thiourea group was
replaced with a cyanoguanidine group was developed, which
lacked the toxicity of  xxxd2622xxx . cimetidine (figure 2) was
shown to be a competitive antagonist against histamine on the
atrium and uterus and to produce a dose-related inhibition
after oral and intravenous administration of histaminestimulated gastric acid secretion (brimblecombe et al., 1975).
a large number of clinical trials demonstrated that cimetidine
was effective in the treatment of acid-related diseases such as
peptic ulcer and gord and it was marketed under the trade
name tagamet. it should be noted that the structural similarity
between the early histamine h2-receptor antagonists and
histamine itself vindicated the original analogy with the
a- and b-receptor antagonists in the catecholamine system.
however, whereas the first b-receptor antagonist required a
structural change to the ring of the agonist ( xxxd2398xxx ) while
retaining an unaltered side chain, for the first h2 antagonist, it
was the ring that had to be retained while the side chain was
modified. although one works by analogy, nature is always
ready to fool the scientist!
not only did the development of h2-receptor antagonists
revolutionise the treatment of peptic ulcer and gord, but it
placed histamine in the forefront of the physiological control
of gastric acid secretion. as early as 1938, it had been proposed
that histamine in the gastric mucosa might be the local
common mediator for stimulation of secretion, a proposition
championed by code and others throughout the 1950s and
1960s. controversy raged during this period with many
gastroenterologists placing the hormone gastrin, released from
the antrum of the stomach, and acetylcholine, released from
the vagal nerves, at the centre of secretory control. however,
the fact that histamine h2-receptor antagonists could inhibit
acid secretion stimulated not only by histamine but also that
by gastrin and acetylcholine firmly placed histamine as the key
transmitter. this was further supported by the ability of h2
antagonists to inhibit vagally stimulated secretion and that to
the more physiological stimulus of food ingestion. it was the
ability of h2 antagonists to inhibit nearly all forms of
stimulated and basal secretion in man that led to their clinical
efficacy.
after cimetidine, several other h2-receptor antagonists were
developed (cooper et al., 1990) and in particular ranitidine
(bradshaw et al., 1979). this compound was more potent than
cimetidine and, unlike cimetidine, did not affect the cytochrome p450 enzymes in the liver. it therefore did not have the
propensity for drug interactions, which, to a limited extent,
had occurred with cimetidine. in excess of 20 h2 antagonists
entered clinical development but only three in addition to
cimetidine and ranitidine ( xxxd2082xxx ,  xxxd2744xxx  and  xxxd3149xxx ) were marketed, reflecting the high attrition rate in drug
development. sir james black shared the 1988 nobel prize for
physiology or medicine for his work on b-receptor antagonists
at ici and on the histamine h2-receptor antagonists at
smithkline & french.

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

the search for other roles for histamine
the advent of the histamine h2-receptor antagonists led to an
enormous revival of interest in the role of histamine in
physiology and pathology. in the decade after the first
publication on burimamide in 1972, over 1000 papers reported
work on aspects of h2 receptors. much of this work is brought
together in a book entitled ‘pharmacology of histamine
receptors’ published in 1982 (ganellin & parsons, 1982). at
this time, investigation into the effects of histamine in a range
of biological systems was assisted by the availability of
relatively selective histamine h1- and h2-receptor agonists
such as 2-thiazolylethylamine (h1) and dimaprit (h2). subsequently, highly selective agonists were developed, such as
2-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)histamine and histaprodifen for
the  xxxg1078xxx  (pertz et al., 2004) and impromidine and
arpromidine for the  xxxg1079xxx  (cooper et al., 1990).
a highlight during this period was the establishment of
adenylate cyclase/ xxxd1773xxx  as the primary second messenger
system for the action of histamine at h2 receptors (hill et al.,
1997). perhaps surprisingly, it was not until the early 1990s
that it was established that activation of the histamine h1
receptor led to either inositol phosphate accumulation or intracellular calcium mobilization (see also nahorski, this issue). at
both receptor subtypes histamine acts via g-proteins, but in
the case of the  xxxg1078xxx  this is pertussis toxin-insensitive
and is probably related to the gq/11 family, whereas histamine
h2 receptors are generally accepted to act via the gs family of
g-proteins (see also milligan & kostenis, this issue).
major advances were made in the understanding of the role
of histamine and its receptors in the cardiovascular system.
unlike the stimulation of gastric secretion where solely h2
receptors are involved, both h1 and h2 receptors mediate the
effects of histamine on the cardiovascular system. for
example, systemic administration of histamine lowers blood
pressure by interaction with h1 and h2 receptors. further
studies have indicated that the interaction between histamine
and h1 and h2 receptors is, in part, time dependent. infusions
of histamine caused an immediate large fall in blood pressure,
which persisted for the duration of the infusion. h1-receptor
blockade with  xxxd3050xxx  significantly reduced the immediate fall in blood pressure with little effect on the sustained
response, whereas h2-receptor blockade with cimetidine had
little or no effect on the immediate response, but significantly
reduced the sustained response. combined h1 and h2
blockade abolished the histamine responses throughout the
infusion. in the heart, the chronotropic response to histamine
is h2 mediated, whereas the inotropic effects are predominantly through the  xxxg1078xxx .
in the lung, the application of selective h1- and h2-receptor
agonists and antagonists established the concept that the two
receptor populations may mediate opposing physiological and
pharmacological effects in the pulmonary system. h1 receptors
mediate actions such as bronchoconstriction, vasoconstriction
and oedema formation, effects which may be deleterious in
nature. stimulation of pulmonary h2 receptors plays a modulatory role, causing bronchodilation and inhibiting mediator
release. histamine also plays a major role in immunologically
mediated inflammation, having multiple pro- and anti-inflammatory effects involving the histamine-containing basophils.
the use of histamine h1 antagonists in the therapy of some
allergic disorders had been established in the early 1950s and

histamine and its receptors

s131

the advent of h2-receptor antagonists, some 20 years later,
revolutionised the treatment of acid-related diseases. however,
other potential therapeutic uses for h1 and h2 antagonists
proved elusive. for example, a role for histamine in the
aetiology of migraine and cluster headache had been
suggested, but clinical studies with an h2 antagonist showed
no clinical benefit. similarly, evidence existed to suggest that
combined treatment with an h1 and h2 antagonist might be
beneficial in the treatment of inflammatory skin disorders such
as pruritis and urticaria, but these conditions do not appear to
be targets for combined antihistamine therapy. this presumably reflects the multiplicity of inflammatory mediators, in
addition to histamine, that are involved in these disorders.

histamine and the brain
the brain was one of the last organs in which histamine
receptors were identified. this was partly because systemically
applied histamine does not pass through the blood–brain
barrier and it was believed that the function of histamine
receptors in the brain was to respond to the action of
endogenously released mediator. subsequently, histaminergic
neurones have been identified in a number of areas of the
brain. schwartz (figure 1) and his colleagues used lesioning
techniques to predict the existence of histaminergic neurones
(schwartz, 1975). thus, unilateral lesions of the median
forebrain bundle in the lateral hypothalamus resulted in the
decrease of  xxxg1040xxx  (hdc) activity (used as a
marker of histamine neurones) in various ipsilateral regions of
the rat forebrain. the existence of histaminergic neurones was
confirmed by immunohistochemistry using anti-hdc antibodies by watanabe et al. (1984). histaminergic neurones are
localized in the tuberomammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus, project to all major areas of the brain and are involved in
many functions including the regulation of sleep/wakefulness,
feeding and memory processes. the existence of h1 receptors
underlies the sedative effects of many of the classical h1
antagonists, even at therapeutic dosage. most of the h1receptor antihistamines are lipophilic compounds that readily
penetrate into the brain; however, several drugs are now
available that penetrate poorly, such as fexofenadine and
cetirizine, which appear to be devoid of central depressant
effects.
there are also h2 receptors in the brain, but their function
has not been identified. one problem hindering their study is
that most of the available h2-receptor antagonists are very
polar substances which do not really penetrate the blood–brain
barrier. however, one compound, zolantidine, was specifically
designed to penetrate (cooper et al., 1990), but, so far, it has
only provided evidence for a possible involvement of h2
receptors in opioid antinociception.

histamine h3 receptors
schwartz (1975) and his colleagues also studied histamine
release from cerebral neurones in rat cortex. they discovered
that histamine could inhibit its own release, and they used h1
and h2 antagonists to characterise the receptor involved. this
effect was competitively inhibited by burimamide at nanomolar concentrations (which is far below the concentration
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s132

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

required for  xxxg1079xxx  antagonism), but more potent h2
receptor antagonists were much less active; h1 antihistamines
were ineffective. this led them to suggest, in 1983, the
possibility of a h3 receptor. their suggestion was confirmed
and the receptor definitively characterised in 1987 by their
discovery that (r)-a-methylhistamine was a potent agonist
(chirally selective since the s isomer is much less potent) and
that thioperamide (figure 2) was a very specific competitive
antagonist (arrang et al., 1987). interestingly, thioperamide
can be considered as a homologue of burimamide in which
the side chain has been cyclised into a piperidine ring and
the thiourea-n-methyl group has been replaced by a thiourean-cyclohexyl group.
histamine h3 receptors act as presynaptic autoreceptors
that inhibit the synthesis and release of histamine in the
histaminergic neurones in the central nervous system (cns).
they also occur as hetero-receptors on nonhistaminergic
neurones, modulating the release of other neurotransmitters
such as 5-hydroxytryptamine, dopamine, acetylcholine, noradrenaline and gaba in the cns and periphery. ligands for
the h3 receptor have been reviewed (stark et al., 2001; leurs
et al., 2005) and potential therapeutic applications, which
have been proposed for an antagonist, include obesity and a
variety of cns disorders such as memory and learning
deficits, alzheimer’s disease, epilepsy, schizophrenia and
sleep disturbance.
thioperamide has been widely used for investigating the
involvement and role of h3 receptors in physiology. although
thioperamide is very potent in vitro (ki ¼ 4.3 nm), relatively
high doses are required in vivo (e.g. ed50 values of about
2 mg kg1 i.p. and about 5 mg kg1 p.o. in rats) to enhance
histamine release in the brain. this could be due to the
pharmacokinetic properties of thioperamide, and also might
suggest a possible low penetration of the blood–brain barrier.
unfortunately, thioperamide was not suitable for human
studies because of potential liver toxicity. many other potent
and relatively selective h3-receptor agonists and antagonists
have been developed by various academic and industrial
laboratories (stark et al., 2001; leurs et al., 2005) and some
have been taken into clinical studies. the first h3 agonist to be
investigated in man was the prodrug of (r)-a-methylhistamine,
bp2-94, from schunack and colleagues, developed by bioprojet. the first h3 antagonist to be taken into man was
perceptint (gt-2331, cipralisant) from gliatch, which
reached phase ii studies for treatment of attention deficit
disorders, but results have not been reported. other h3
antagonists from other laboratories are under clinical investigation, but there is no information available about the possible
indications or about the results.

h3-receptor antagonists without an imidazole
group
brain penetration is greatly reduced by the presence of polar
hydrogen-bonding groups and this led to the search for a
nonimidazole h3-receptor antagonist (cowart et al., 2004).
this proved to be quite difficult and for many years all the
potent h3-receptor ligands were imidazole derivatives.
starting from first principles, ganellin et al. (1998) devised a
surprisingly simple series of compounds in which a cyclic
aliphatic amine effectively replaced the imidazole ring. thus,
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

histamine and its receptors

histamine was converted into a nonimidazole h3-receptor
histamine antagonist by addition of a 4-phenylbutyl group on
the side chain n, followed by removal of the imidazole ring.
the resulting compound, n-ethyl-n-(4-phenylbutyl)amine,
remarkably had a ki ¼ 1.3 mm as an h3 antagonist. using
this as a lead compound, structure–activity studies furnished
n-(5-p-cyanophenoxypentyl)pyrrolidine (ki ¼ 19 nm, ed50 ¼
1.0 mg kg1 p.o. in the mouse). further molecular modifications furnished ucl 2173, n-(3-p-acetylphenoxy-propyl)-3,5dimethyl-piperidine (ki ¼ 1.8 nm, ed50 ¼ 0.12 mg kg1), which,
in vivo, is considerably more potent than the reference drug,
thioperamide. at least 8 pharmaceutical companies have since
had patents published showing compounds containing this
aminopropoxyphenyl pharmacophore.
following the cloning of the human h3-receptor cdna
in 1999 by lovenberg and colleagues (see below) and the
resulting availability of the human recombinant receptor,
many pharmaceutical companies set up high-throughput
screens to seek other nonimidazole h3-receptor antagonists.
several such compounds have now entered the drug development process. remarkably, it transpires that many of the
imidazole compounds have much lower affinity for the human
recombinant receptor than for the rat receptor, whereas the
nonimidazole compounds all retain their potencies. thus,
ucl 2173 (vide supra) had a ki ¼ 1.0 nm at human h3
receptors, comparable to the value reported above (1.8 nm),
whereas thioperamide was about 10 times less potent on the
human h3 receptor than on the rat. furthermore, thioperamide also possesses affinity for the  xxxg1081xxx , in contrast to
many of the nonimidazole compounds which are devoid of h4receptor activity. thus, in general, the nonimidazoles are more
potent at the human h3 receptor and more selective.

receptor cloning
the influence of molecular biology on the histamine receptor
field made its first impact in the early 1990s. remarkably,
molecular cloning of the cdna and gene encoding for the
bovine h1 and canine h2 receptors occurred in the same year,
in 1991. it proved to be much more difficult, however, to find
the h3 receptor, and this was not cloned until 1999 by
lovenberg et al. (1999) in johnson and johnson in san diego,
u.s.a. phylogenetic and homology analysis of the h3 receptor
showed it to be very different from the previously cloned h1
and h2 receptors (19–22 and 18–20%, respectively). heterogeneity among h3 receptors had been suspected based on
agonist kinetics and radioligand-binding characteristics, and
this was confirmed by molecular studies showing that a single
form of the h3 gene gave rise to multiple mrna isoforms. the
receptor variants are known to differ in the structure of their
third cytoplasmic loops (leurs et al., 2005). this led to a
search for new proteins that might be related to the h3
receptor and resulted in the discovery of the histamine h4
receptor, which was cloned by at least 6 research laboratories
and published during the period 2000–2001.

histamine h4 receptors
the  xxxg1081xxx  (jablonowski et al., 2004) is preferentially
expressed in various cells of the immune system and mast cells

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

and induces the chemotaxis of, for example, eosinophils and
mast cells. it has also been identified on lymphocyte t cells,
dendritic cells and basophils. it is suggested that the h4
receptor is involved, along with the  xxxg1079xxx , in the control
of il-16 release from human lymphocytes, and it has been
speculated that an h4-selective antagonist might be useful in
helping to treat asthma. antagonists, such as jnj 7777120
(figure 2), have also been reported to be effective in various
models of inflammation. the  xxxg1081xxx  shows considerable
homology with the h3 receptor (58% for the transmembrane
regions, but 34–35% overall) and many of the known h3
agonists and antagonists also bind to the  xxxg1081xxx . there
appears to be considerable species variation in the receptor
affinities, however. across human, mouse, rat and guinea-pig
receptors, the h4 receptors only have 65–70% homology, in
contrast to the h3 receptor which retains more than 92%
sequence homology.

mutagenesis studies
site-directed mutagenesis studies have investigated the molecular basis for binding of histamine and its antagonists. it is
suggested (shin et al., 2002) that, in the transmembrane region
 xxxg2318xxx , a conserved  xxxd233xxx  (amino acid position 107 in
human h1, position 98 in human h2, position 114 in human h3
and position 94 in human h4) is essential for binding of both
histamine and basic antagonists, presumably by providing a
negative counter-ion for the protonated amine group of the
ligand. residues in another transmembrane region,  xxxg2318xxx , have
also been shown to be required for histamine binding. asn207
of the  xxxg1078xxx  hydrogen bonds to the nt nitrogen atom of
histamine, whereas asp186 in the  xxxg1079xxx  and glu187 in the
 xxxg1081xxx  form an ion pair with the same nt nitrogen atom.
in addition, thr190 in  xxxg2318xxx  of the  xxxg1079xxx  is thought to
hydrogen bond to the np nitrogen atom of histamine.
sequence analysis, molecular modelling and pharmacological
analysis of human and rat h3 receptors suggest that key amino
acids at positions 119 and 122 in  xxxg2318xxx  play important roles in
ligand recognition and are primarily responsible for the
table 1

s133

histamine and its receptors

pharmacological differences between the rat and human
receptors. thus, mutant receptors in which these amino acids
in the rat receptor are changed to those of the human receptor
(119 ala to thr, 122 val to ala) exhibited changed ligandbinding potencies of the imidazole-containing antagonists, to
levels similar to those of the human receptor (ligneau et al.,
2000).

constitutive activity
the presently known histamine receptors (h1, h2, h3 and
h4; table 1) are all members of the g-protein-coupled
receptor (gpcr) family (see also hill, this issue) and they
transduce extracellular signals via the g-proteins, gq, gs, gi/o
and gi/o, respectively (hough, 2001; see also milligan &
kostenis, this issue). whereas at the  xxxg1079xxx  histamine is a
potent stimulant of camp accumulation, at the h3 receptor
activation leads to inhibition of camp production. the
signalling mechanisms for the  xxxg1081xxx  are still being
explored, but they appear to involve increases in intracellular
calcium levels. in common with other gpcrs, three recombinant histamine receptors (h1, h2 and h3) show constitutive
activity, that is, spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist,
and, under these circumstances, the antagonists may be
reclassified as inverse agonists. it is noteworthy, however,
that constitutive activity has been demonstrated to occur
in vivo for native h3 receptors present in the rodent brain
and that it controls histaminergic neuronal activity (morisset
et al., 2000).
a discussion of the classification of histamine receptors
(now out of date because it only deals with h1–h3) was
published by the iuphar committee on receptor nomenclature (hill et al., 1997).

future expectations
the past few years have seen a great flurry of activity from
the pharmaceutical companies who have now become very

the activitiesa of histamine receptor ligands across four receptors kd/ki (nm)

 xxxd3050xxx  ( xxxd3050xxx )
diphenhydramine
cimetidine
ranitidine
dimaprit
impromidine
thioperamide
clobenpropit
ucl 2138e
r-(a)-methylhistamine
imetit
jnj 7777120
histamine

ileumb
h1

atriumb
h2

hc
h3

hc
h4

0.4
1.0
410,000
410,000
410,000
3400
410,000
410,000

5,200
410,000
800
200
1,100
63
410,000
410,000

410,000c

410,000g

410,000
410,000
410,000
410,000
825
67
60d
0.6
11f
0.7
0.3
5125
5.4

410,000
410,000
410,000
410,000
377
12
27
12
410,000
146
2.7
4.1
8.1

a

data from hough (2001).
guinea-pig.
c
recombinant human receptor.
d
ligneau et al. (2000).
e
n-(3-p-cyanophenoxypropyl)piperidine, ed50 (p.o., h3, mouse) ¼ 0.2 mg kg1.
f
rat synaptosomes (cowart et al., 2004).
g
recombinant guinea-pig receptor.
b

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s134

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin

interested in developing compounds as h3- or h4-receptor
antagonist drugs. the stimulus for this has been the availability of the recombinant human receptors and the use of highthroughput screens. the companies have become particularly
interested in nonimidazole compounds and patents claiming
nonimidazole h3-receptor antagonists have appeared from at
least 12 companies. the therapeutic uses for h3 antagonists are
rather uncertain at present, but it is very likely that at least one
of the following possibilities will become established.
one possibility is in the treatment of cognitive disorders:
claims have been made for improvement in cognitive
dysfunction and in memory performance, and these could
apply to treatments for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(adhd) or alzheimer’s disease. other options are for
treatments in sleep-related disorders such as narcolepsy, and
in some forms of epilepsy. a substantial effort has also been
put into investigating h3-receptor antagonists in various
preclinical models of obesity and there have been claims made
for a significant reduction in abdominal and subcutaneous fat
in rodents. there appears to be a clear difference between the
h3-receptor antagonists tested, and those that are active in
anti-obesity models do not always work in models of cognition
and vice versa. the reasons for the observed discrepancies have
yet to be identified, but one suggestion has been that it may be
related to the different isoforms of the receptor. a possible
peripheral h3-receptor blockade to relieve nasal congestion,
since h3 receptors inhibit noradrenaline release from sympa-

histamine and its receptors

thetic nerve terminals in the nasal mucosa, is being pursued in
combination with an h1-receptor antihistamine, to improve
the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
the  xxxg1081xxx  is much more recent in its discovery, but the
prospect of therapeutic application to inflammatory disease
looks very promising. the possibility for a use in helping to
treat asthma is very attractive and there is also a strong
suggestion for a use in treating other common inflammatory
conditions such as allergic rhinitis and rheumatoid arthritis. if
these were to become reality, then there would be a host of
grateful patients.
the big open-ended question is whether we have seen the
last of the histamine receptors or are there more to come
(beyond the four currently known). a few years ago, there was
some discussion about the possible existence of intracellular
histamine receptors, but this idea did not seem to get much
support from noninvolved scientists. however, the past
century has been an extremely exciting one for pharmacologists in general and histamine researchers in particular, with
the recognition of the vital role for histamine as a mediator of
numerous physiological and pathological responses. this has
led to the development of histamine h1- and h2-receptor
antagonists, which have proved to be valuable therapeutic
agents for diseases such as allergy and peptic ulcer. hopefully,
therapeutic goals will be achieved with ligands directed at the
h3 and h4 receptors, thus continuing the pharmacological and
therapeutic success of the ‘histamine story’.

references
arrang, j.-m., garbarg, m., lancelot, j.-c., lecomte, j.-m.,
pollard, h., robba, m., schunack, w. & schwartz, j.-c.

dale, h.h. & laidlaw, p.p. (1910). the physiological actions of

(1987). highly potent and selective ligands for histamine h3receptors. nature, 327, 117–123.
ash, a.s.f. & schild, h.o. (1966). receptors mediating some actions
of histamine. br. j. pharmacol., 27, 427–439.
ashford, c.a., heller, h. & smart, g.a. (1949). the action
of histamine on hydrochloric acid and pepsin secretion in man.
br. j. pharmacol., 4, 153–161.
best, c.h., dale, h.h., dudley, h.w. & thorpe, w.v. (1927). the
nature of the vaso-dilator constituents of certain tissues. j physiol.,
62, 397.
black, j.w., duncan, w.a.m., durant, g.j., ganellin, c.r. &
parsons, m.e. (1972). definition and antagonism of histamine
h2-receptors. nature, 236, 385–390.
bovet, d. & staub, a.-m. (1937). action protectrice des éthers
phénoliques an cours de l’intoxication histaminique. c. r. soc. biol.
(paris), 124, 547–549.
bradshaw, j., brittain, r.t., clitherow, j.w., daly, m.j., jack,
d., price, b.j. & stables, r. (1979). ranitidine (am19065),
a new potent, selective histamine h2-receptor antagonist. br. j.
pharmacol., 66, 464.
brimblecombe, r.w., duncan, w.a.m., durant, g.j., ganellin,
c.r., parsons, m.e. & black, j.w. (1975). the pharmacology of
cimetidine, a new histamine h2-receptor antagonist. br. j. pharmacol.,
53, 435–436.
code, c.f. (1956). histamine and gastric secretion. in: ciba foundation symposium on histamine. ed. wolstenholme, g.e.w. &
o’connor, c.m. pp. 189–220. london: j and a churchill ltd.
cooper, d.g., young, r.c., durant, g.j. & ganellin,
c.r. (1990). histamine receptors. in: comprehensive medicinal
chemistry. ed. emmett, j.c. vol. 3, pp. 323–442. new york:
pergamon press.
cowart, m., altenbach, r., black, l., faghih, r., zhoa, c. &
hancock, a.a. (2004). medicinal chemistry and biological
properties of non-imidazole h3-antagonists. mini-rev. med. chem.,
4, 979–992.

dale, h.h. & laidlaw, p.p. (1919). histamine shock. j. physiol., 52,

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

b-iminazolethylamine. j. physiol., 41, 318–344.
355–390.
feldberg, w. & mongar, j.l. (1954). comparison of histamine

release by compound 48/80 and octylamine in perfused tissues.
br. j. pharmacol., 9, 197–201.
folkow, b., haeger, k. & kahlson, g. (1948). observations
on reactive hyperaemia as related to histamine on drugs antagonising vasodilatation induced by histamine and the vasodilator
properties of  xxxd83xxx . acta physiol. scand., 15,
244–278.
ganellin, c.r., leurquin, f., piripitsi, a., arrang, j.-m.,
garbarg, m., ligneau, x., schunack, w. & schwartz,
j.-c. (1998). synthesis of potent non-imidazole histamine h3receptor antagonists. arch. pharm. pharm. med. chem., 331,
395–404.
ganellin, c.r. & parsons, m.e. (1982). pharmacology of histamine receptors. bristol, london, boston: wright psg.
hill, s.j., ganellin, c.r., timmerman, h., schwartz, j.-c.,
shankley, n.p., young, j.m., schunack, w., levi, r. &
haas, h.l. (1997). international union of pharmacology, xiii,
classification of histamine receptors. pharm. rev., 49, 253–278.
hough, l.b. (2001). genomics meets histamine receptors: new
subtypes, new receptors. mol. pharm., 59, 415–419.
jablonowski, j.a., carruthers, n.i. & thurmond, r.l.
(2004). the histamine  xxxg1081xxx  and potential therapeutic uses
for h4 ligands. mini-rev. med. chem., 4, 993–1000.
leurs, r., bakker, r.a., timmerman, h. & de esch, i.j.p.
(2005). the  xxxg1080xxx : from gene cloning to h3 receptor
drugs. nat. rev. drug discov., 4, 107–120.
lewis, t. & grant, r.t. (1924). vascular reactions of the skin
to injury. part 11. the liberation of histamine-like substance
in the injured skin, the underlying cause of factitious urticaria
and of wheals produced by burning: and observations upon
the nervous control of certain skin reactions. heart, 11,
209–265.

m.e. parsons & c.r. ganellin
ligneau, x., morriset, s., tardivel-lacombe, j., gbahou,
f., ganellin, c.r., stark, h., schunack, w., schwartz,
j.-c. & arrang, j.-m. (2000). distinct pharmacology of the rat and

human histamine h3 receptors. br. j. pharmacol., 131, 1247–1250.
lovenberg, t.w., roland, b.l., wilson, s.j., jiang, x., pyati,
j., huvar, a., jackson, m.r. & erlander, m.g. (1999).

cloning and functional expression of the human histamine h3
receptor. mol. pharmacol., 55, 1101–1107.
morisset, s., rouleau, a., ligneau, x., gbahou, f., tardivellacombe, j., stark, h., schunack, w., ganellin, c.r.,
schwartz, j.-c. & arrang, j.-m. (2000). high constitutive
activity of the native h3 receptor regulates histamine neurons in the
brain. nature, 408, 860–864.
pertz, h.h., elz, s. & schunack, w. (2004). structure activity
relationships of histamine h1-receptor agonists. mini rev. med.
chem., 4, 935–940.
popielski, l. (1920). b-imidazolylathylamin und die organextrakte
erster teil: b-imidazolylathylamin als mechtiger errezer der
magendrucken. pfluegers arch., 178, 214–236.
riley, j.f. & west, g.b. (1952). histamine in tissue mast cells.
j. physiol., 117, 72.

histamine and its receptors

s135

schayer, r.w. (1956). the origin and fate of histamine in the body.

in: ciba foundation symposium on histamine. ed. wolstenholme,
g.e.w. & o’connor, c.m. pp. 183–188. london: j. and a.
churchill ltd.
schild, h.o. (1947). pa, a new scale for the measurement of drug
antagonism. br. j. pharmacol., 2, 189–206.
schwartz, j.-c. (1975). histamine as a transmitter in the brain. life
sciences, 17, 503–518.
shin, n., coates, e., murgolo, n.j., morse, k.l., bayne, m.,
strader, c.d. & monsma jr, f.j. (2002). molecular modelling
and site-specific mutagenesis of the histamine-binding site of the
histamine  xxxg1081xxx . mol. pharmacol., 62, 38–47.
stark, h., arrang, j.-m., ligneau, x., garbarg, m., ganellin,
c.r., schwartz, j.-c. & schunack, w. (2001). the histamine h3
receptor and its ligands. progr. med. chem., 38, 279–308.
watanabe, t., taguchi, y., shiosaka, s., tanaka, j., kubota,
h., terano, y., tohyama, m. & wada, h. (1984). distribution of the histaminergic neuron system in the central
nervous system of rats; a fluorescent immunohistochemical
analysis with  xxxg1040xxx  as a marker. brain res., 295,
13–25.

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

