british journal of pharmacology (2006) 147, s72–s81

& 2006 nature publishing group all rights reserved 0007 – 1188/06 $30.00
www.nature.com/bjp

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia
*nicholas p. franks
biophysics section, the blackett laboratory, imperial college london, london sw7 2az

keywords:
abbreviations:

the discovery of general anaesthesia, over 150 years ago, revolutionised medicine. the ability to
render a patient unconscious and insensible to pain made modern surgery possible and general
anaesthetics have become both indispensible as well as one of the most widely used class of drugs.
their extraordinary chemical diversity, ranging from simple chemically inert gases to complex
barbiturates, has baffled pharmacologists, and ideas about how they might work have been equally
diverse. until relatively recently, thinking was dominated by the notion that anaesthetics acted
‘nonspecifically’ by dissolving in the lipid bilayer portions of nerve membranes. while this simple idea
could account for the chemical diversity of general anaesthetics, it has proven to be false and it is now
generally accepted that anaesthetics act by binding directly to sensitive target proteins. for certain
intravenous anaesthetics, such as propofol and etomidate, the target has been identified as the
gabaa receptor, with particular subunits playing a crucial role. for the less potent inhalational
agents, the picture is less clear, although a relatively small number of targets have been identified
as being the most likely candidates. in this review, i will describe the work that led up to the
identification of the gabaa receptor as the key target for etomidate and propofol and contrast this
with current progress that has been made in identifying the relevant targets for other anaesthetics,
particularly the inhalational agents.
british journal of pharmacology (2006) 147, s72–s81. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706441
anaesthetic mechanisms; ion channels; receptors
lhwr, loss of hindlimb withdrawal reflex; lorr, loss of righting reflex

discovery of general anaesthesia
the discovery of general anaesthesia is a remarkable story rich
with human tales of serendipity, impropriety, noble ambition
and inflated egos. at its most attractive, it features a dedicated
and modest country doctor, crawford long, who was clearly
the first practitioner of modern general anaesthesia, and whose
only failing was his timidity in making his work using ether
in the early 1840s more generally known. a few years later,
and in ignorance of crawford long, the connecticut dentist
horace wells hit upon the idea of using nitrous oxide while
watching a public demonstration of its powers of intoxication
(figure 1a). having satisfied himself by self-administration
that it ameliorated the pain of tooth extraction, he conducted
an abortive demonstration at the massachusetts general
hospital, and was publicly humiliated by this failure. a
former apprentice and colleague of wells, another dentist
called william morton subsequently took up wells’ basic idea
of a gaseous anaesthetic agent, together with the suggestion of
chemist and physician charles jackson to use ether, a much
more potent drug, and this culminated in the widely known
public demonstration of ether anaesthesia on 16 october 1846
(figure 1b). there followed several years of unedifying
wrangling between jackson, morton and wells as to who
deserved credit for the discovery of general anaesthesia, with
wells eventually committing suicide, jackson dying in an
insane asylum and morton dying penniless of a heart attack at

*author for correspondence at: biophysics section, the blackett
laboratory, imperial college london, london sw7 2az, u.k.;
e-mail: n.franks@imperial.ac.uk

the age of 48. a sad backdrop to one of the most momentous
discoveries of modern pharmacology.

definition of general anaesthesia
before describing the development of ideas about how general
anaesthetics act, it is worth considering the state itself and how
it might best be defined. considerable and unnecessary
confusion has been introduced when considering this question,
often by practising anaesthetists who for perfectly good
reasons are concerned with defining the most appropriate
clinical state for their patients. hence, discussions about
anaesthesia ideally providing immobility, analgesia, amnesia,
and muscle relaxation, for example, are transmuted into
becoming a definition of a general anaesthetic. this is to
confuse what is desirable clinically with what might be a logical
and commonsense definition of a general anaesthetic. the
drugs that we commonly class as general anaesthetics
(figure 2) vary greatly in their ability to cause analgesia,
muscle relaxation and amnesia and really only have one
defining feature in common – they induce a reversible loss of
consciousness at low concentrations. they also cause an
increasing lack of responsiveness at higher concentrations.
thus, a definition of general anaesthesia might simply be ‘a
reversible, drug-induced loss of consciousness’, recognising
that we will also need to specify a number of behavioural end
points to characterise lack of responsiveness as the anaesthetic
concentration increases.

n.p. franks

for example, in humans, a loss of response to a verbal
command occurs at about 100 mm for the inhalational
anaesthetic isoflurane (in free aqueous solution) and at about
9 mm for the barbiturate thiopental. essentially the same
concentrations cause a loss of righting reflex (lorr) in
rodents. for both humans and rodents, concentrations
approximately three times higher are required to prevent a
purposeful response to a painful stimulus (i.e. about 300 mm
for isoflurane and 23 mm for thiopental). three things are

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

s73

reflected in these data that are generally true. the anaesthetic
ec50 concentration depends upon the end point and the
anaesthetic, but not upon the animal species (at least for
mammals). more specifically, loss of consciousness in humans
(failure to respond to a verbal command) occurs at about the
same concentration as lorr in rodents, and both occur at
considerably lower concentrations than the loss of a purposeful response to a painful stimulus, although this ratio
of concentrations does vary somewhat between different
anaesthetics.
finally, the temptation to refer to the loss of behavioural
end points in animals as ‘anaesthesia’, or ‘sedation’ or
‘hypnosis’ has engendered considerable confusion and is
probably best avoided, although admittedly this is often hard
to resist as a useful shorthand.
in this review, i will focus specifically on which molecular
targets are responsible for the principal actions of general
anaesthetics and leave the question of where they act at an
anatomical level for another day.

early ideas about mechanisms
ideas as to how general anaesthetics might work followed soon
after their introduction into clinical practice. an early
suggestion, made within a year of the public demonstration
in boston, was that anaesthetics might actually be extracting
fatty substances from the brain. happily, this idea proved to
be false. nonetheless, the first theory that wielded a major
influence also involved lipids. it was put forward by meyer
and overton, who had independently observed that the
potency of an anaesthetic increased in direct proportion to

figure 1 (a) a playbill from 1824 advertising an entertainment at
the savoy theatre in london in which a demonstration of the
‘exhilarating effects’ of laughing gas (nitrous oxide) was promised to
‘any of the audience who may chuse [sic] to inhale it’. it was at
a similar occasion in hartford connecticut in december 1844 that
horace wells had seen nitrous oxide demonstrated and where
he observed that a volunteer, samuel cooley, a clerk at the local
drugstore, had injured his leg without any apparent pain.
reproduced with permission from the victoria and albert museum.
(b) a re-enactment of the first public demonstration of the use of
ether in surgery. this photograph, dated 1847 is a staging of the
original event at the massachusetts general hospital, in october
1846 by some of the participants. william morton is at the head of
the patient holding his flask of ether. the surgeon, john collins
warren, is facing the camera with his hands on the patient’s leg. the
photograph is a daguerreotype by albert sands southworth and
josiah johnson hawes and is in the j. paul getty museum, los
angeles, r the j. paul getty museum.

figure 2 a selection of general anaesthetics that are used clinically
shown as space-filling models. the top row are intravenous
anaesthetics, the middle row are volatile inhalational agents and
the bottom row are inorganic gases. the older agents are on the left
and the most recently introduced are on the right. (a distinction is
sometimes made between ‘vapours’ such as isoflurane and ‘gases’
such as nitrous oxide. however, the physical states of a vapour and a
gas are indistinguishable; strictly speaking, a vapour only exists
lower than a ‘critical temperature’, below which a high enough
pressure can condense it into a liquid. the critical temperature of
nitrous oxide, for example, is 36.41c, which strictly makes it a
vapour at room temperature, but a gas at body temperature.) the
molecular models were drawn using pymol (delano scientific, san
carlos, ca, u.s.a.).

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s74

n.p. franks

its oil/water partition coefficient. once the role that lipids
played in membrane structure became understood, this
striking correlation was interpreted as meaning that the site
of action of general anaesthetics was the lipid bilayer portion
of nerve membranes (figure 3a). the fact that the correlation
had a unit slope made a simple molecular interpretation
possible – during general anaesthesia, the concentration of all
anaesthetics within the bilayer would be the same; so they must
simply be acting by disrupting the normal state of the bilayer,
with all anaesthetics being equally potent at this ‘site’. what

figure 3 general anaesthetics act by binding directly to proteins.
(a) the famous meyer/overton correlation has traditionally been
interpreted as meaning that the primary target sites are the lipid
portions of nerve membranes. in its modern form, shown here, a
good correlation is seen to exist between the potency of an
anaesthetic (reciprocal of its molar ec50 concentration for
anaesthesia) and its lipid/water partition coefficient. (b) general
anaesthetic potencies in animals can be correlated equally well with
their ability to inhibit the activity of certain soluble enzymes, such as
firefly luciferase, whose crystal structure is shown in the inset
(franks & lieb, 1994). reprinted with permission from nature.

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

then followed were many years of speculation as to what form
this disruption might take.

refinement of lipid hypotheses and their
shortcomings
in 1982, when my colleague bill lieb and i reviewed work on
molecular mechanisms (franks & lieb, 1982), thinking was
dominated by lipid theories of one sort or another. broadly,
they fell into four different camps. anaesthetics were said
either to increase lipid fluidity, trigger lipid phase transitions,
change lipid bilayer dimensions or to alter bilayer permeability. all of these ideas had serious problems, some
quantitative, some qualitative. the major quantitative problem is easy to state – at anything like a pharmacologically
relevant concentration, the proposed changes in the bilayer
were implausibly small; for example, they could usually be
mimicked by a very small rise in temperature. the reason why
so many theories could be criticised on this basis had to do
with a lack of attention to which anaesthetic concentrations
are pharmacologically relevant. unfortunately, this problem
persists and i shall return to this point later.
aside from quantitative problems, there were also significant qualitative difficulties with most of the lipid hypotheses.
for example, they generally predicted that anaesthetic potency
would increase with increasing temperature, because temperature mimicked the proposed effects of anaesthetics; yet, the
reverse is generally true. they also, almost invariably, ignored
the well-established ‘cutoff effect’, which was the observation
that, above a certain point in an homologous series,
anaesthetic potency abruptly disappears. finally, although
this line of argument emerged some years later, lipid theories
have major difficulties in accounting for the fact that
anaesthetic enantiomers usually display different anaesthetic
potencies in animals (see later).
perhaps the most serious problem of all with lipid theories
was the fact that it was rarely, if ever, explained how the
proposed perturbation in the lipid bilayer would then result in
a dysfunctional membrane protein, which almost all theories
agreed had to be the ultimate result. this crucial step in the
chain of events was always rather along the lines of ‘and then
a miracle happens’. to be fair, the permeability theories held
that lipids alone were the mediator, and permeability changes
led to compromised neurotransmitter uptake. like other lipid
theories, however, this idea has not stood the test of time.
why were lipid theories so popular? the main reason, of
course, was the fact that they accounted for the observations
of meyer and overton, leaving aside the various exceptions
mentioned above. they also had a beguiling simplicity. but
they also promised a solution to an intriguing observation that
had transfixed the field for many years, but which is now
largely consigned to history – pressure reversal. since this is an
historical review, i will spend a few moments reviewing this
intriguing phenomenon.
the basic observation is that high pressure (of the order of
100 atm) appears to reverse general anaesthesia. this work
originated with observations in the 1940s on the effects of
pressure on luminescent bacteria, which was subsequently
extended to aquatic animals, and eventually mammals. the
fact that an anaesthetised mouse will regain its motor activity
when exposed to 100 atm of helium does indeed sound like a

n.p. franks

remarkable phenomenon. however, when one appreciates
that the concentration–response curve for general anaesthesia
is very steep, a relatively small change in anaesthetic potency is
all that is needed to affect this dramatic ‘reversal’. for mice,
for example, the change in anaesthetic potency for a range of
simple anaesthetic gases at 100 atm is only about 30%. the
question then is whether pressure is causing a true pharmacological antagonism, by directly reversing the molecular
effects of anaesthetics, or whether the effect is physiological,
with pressure causing incidental changes in the animal, such
as increasing the general level of excitability, which leads
to a reduced anaesthetic potency.
as pressure, at constant temperature, can only act by
reducing the volume, the simplest possible theory consistent
with a direct pharmacological antagonism is one that supposes
that anaesthetics act by simply increasing volume. this indeed
was a popular theory (the critical volume hypothesis), first put
forward by lorin mullins, but then quantitatively refined and
strongly advocated by brian smith and keith miller and their
colleagues. although bill lieb and i pointed out (franks &
lieb, 1982) that the data, at least for the simple gases, might
equally well be explained in terms of displacing the anaesthetic
from protein-binding sites, pressure reversal has never really
been satisfactorily explained. the possibility that it is caused
by a physiological antagonism remains a perfectly plausible
explanation, and i recall brian smith conceding that an
anaesthetised mouse restored to ‘normality’ by pressure ‘didn’t
look like it would be too good at mental arithmetic’. indeed,
it is well known that pressure, in the absence of anaesthetics,
causes an increased excitability and it might be that a
generalised increase in excitable tone is sufficient to counteract
the depressant effects of the anaesthetic. this would explain
why pressure can reverse the actions of not just simple gases
but also highly selective intravenous agents which bind to
specific receptors with minimal changes in system volume,
where a pharmacological antagonism is most difficult to
imagine.

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

s75

figure 4 propofol-binding sites on human  xxxg124xxx  (bhattacharya et al., 2000). approximately 98% of propofol binds to
blood constituents following administration. the major binding is to
the carrier protein  xxxg124xxx . a crystallographic analysis shows
two possible binding sites (pr1 in subdomain iiia and pr2 in
subdomain iiib), but it is likely that only site pr1 is occupied under
physiological conditions because of the strong binding of  xxxd2154xxx 
to the pr2 site. the dashed line in the close-up view on the right
represents a hydrogen bond. propofol binds to a pre-formed cavity
with very little perturbation of the local structure.

of the anaesthetics binding to a common site with a volume of
about 250 ml mol1. the circumscribed dimensions of the
binding pocket meant that the enzyme displayed a cutoff
effect, and this provided a simple molecular interpretation of
the cutoff effect observed with animals. the competitive nature
of the inhibition, subsequently confirmed by crystallographic
analysis, allowed these data to be readily extrapolatable to
other proteins.
crystallographic studies with other proteins (figure 4) have
reinforced the notion that anaesthetics act by binding to
specific pockets or clefts on their protein targets, with probably
only modest changes in local structure (bhattacharya et al.,
2000). however, crystallographic data on anaesthetics binding
to ion channels are still some way off and these data will be
required before this picture can be confirmed.

work on model proteins

anaesthetic concentrations

by the early 1980s, there were strong reasons for doubting the
validity of lipid-based theories of general anaesthesia, but the
evidence to support the obvious alternative, that anaesthetics
acted by binding directly to protein targets, was lacking.
however, work with a number of model proteins gave some
encouragement (franks & lieb, 1982) and one class of
proteins appeared to be particularly sensitive – the luciferase
enzymes.
a good deal of work had been carried out on luminescent
bacteria, but simple molecular interpretations in terms of
protein or lipid targets were no easier than they were with
whole animals. work on cell-free systems was extremely
limited, but what little there was suggested that the sensitivity
of luciferase systems might have a simple interpretation at the
molecular level. subsequent work using the firefly luciferase
enzyme showed (franks & lieb, 1984) that a wide variety of
simple general anaesthetics could inhibit this enzyme by direct
binding and there was an excellent correlation between the
concentrations required for enzyme inhibition and those
required for anaesthesia in animals (figure 3b). the inhibition
was competitive in nature and the data were consistent with all

before moving on to discuss the most likely targets in the
central nervous system, i want to address the issue of
appropriate anaesthetic concentrations to use for in vitro
experiments which have, more than any other single factor,
bedevilled this field. anaesthetics are unusual in a number of
respects, of which one is their relatively low therapeutic
indices. for the inhalational agents, this is as low as 2–4. in
other words, concentrations that are much higher than those
used clinically are bound to be recruiting anaesthetic targets
that are involved in unwanted side effects and many of these
targets will not be important for anaesthesia itself, as defined
above. with intravenous drugs it is obviously essential to take
account of binding to blood proteins because this can greatly
reduce the free aqueous concentration; in the case of propofol,
protein binding reduces the effective concentration by a factor
of nearly 50. it is also equally obvious that one cannot refer to
the peak blood concentration following a bolus injection as the
‘relevant’ concentration for in vitro experiments, because
pharmacokinetic factors greatly reduce the concentrations
reaching the brain. however, for at least a few intravenous
agents, quasi steady state concentrations required for various
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s76

n.p. franks

end points have been determined and the corresponding free
aqueous concentrations provide the appropriate benchmarks
(franks & lieb, 1994).
a more subtle problem arises when dealing with volatile or
gaseous anaesthetics, which invariably show a relatively large
temperature dependence in their animal potencies, with
potencies increasing as the temperature is lowered. this is an
inevitable consequence of the anaesthetic molecule being
transferred from the gas phase to their (condensed phase)
targets, a physical effect which very largely accounts for
changes in animal potencies. at low enough temperatures,
hypothermia per se will also affect anaesthetic end points, but
this is in addition to the inevitable increases in binding affinity
with temperature. a simple practical solution to this problem
is to express all anaesthetic concentrations as aqueous
concentrations, which show a very much smaller temperature
dependence (franks & lieb, 1994) than gas-phase concentrations.
all of the above problems have conspired together to result
in hundreds of papers being published in which inappropriately high concentrations have been used. during the last
decade or so, the situation has greatly improved and there is
now a wide, although not universal, appreciation that, in this
area of pharmacology in particular, concentrations matter.

criteria for deciding which protein targets are
relevant to general anaesthesia and which
are not
there are a number of criteria, some more powerful than
others, against which the relevance of a particular target can
be judged. the first of these is plausibility. is the protein
expressed in appropriate anatomical locations to be relevant to
the anaesthetic end point being studied (in so far as this
judgement can be made), and are the effects of anaesthetics
plausible in a qualitative sense? for example, if anaesthetics
were to inhibit a receptor whose actions are known to be
predominantly inhibitory, this would detract from its plausibility, while not, admittedly, ruling it out. second, following
the discussion above, the target protein should be significantly
affected at pharmacologically relevant concentrations. but
what is significant? there is no simple answer to this other
than to say that targets that are very sensitive are, all other
things being equal, more likely to be relevant than targets that
are relatively insensitive. the third criterion takes advantage of
the fact that many anaesthetics are chiral and their enantiomers usually show significantly different potencies in animals.
if this difference in animal potency is reflected in the putative
target, this adds greatly to its plausibility.
the last criterion is the most powerful of all, but the most
difficult to utilise in practice. if an animal can be genetically
manipulated so that it contains a putative target that has been
modified in such a way as to make it insensitive to an
anaesthetic, but without affecting its behaviour in any other
way, and this animal is found to be insensitive to that
anaesthetic, then this constitutes direct evidence for the
relevance of that target. this so-called ‘knock-in’ approach
differs from the more conventional ‘knock-out’ approach,
where animals are genetically manipulated such that individual
proteins or protein subunits are not expressed. the obvious
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

problem here is that knocking out a single gene can often cause
numerous changes in the animal in addition to the one
intended, which in this case is removing a putative anaesthetic
target.
finally, investigating the effects of ‘specific’ receptor
inhibitors or activators on anaesthetic potency can be helpful,
particularly for identifying targets that are not relevant. for
example, if a putative target can be markedly inhibited without
affecting anaesthetic potency, then it is unlikely to be relevant.
the problem comes when the anaesthetic potency is affected.
here it is difficult to distinguish between a change in potency
that occurs because a relevant target has been affected and
a change in anaesthetic potency that occurs due to an effect
on a parallel pathway which has no relevance to the action
of the anaesthetic being tested.

a road map to understanding anaesthetic
mechanisms – how propofol and etomidate act
work on two intravenous general anaesthetics, propofol and
etomidate, illustrate how these various criteria have been used
to identify unambiguously their primary target, the gabaa
receptor (see also bowery & smart, this issue). this receptor
channel is found throughout the central nervous system, and is
the most abundant, fast inhibitory, ligand-gated, ion channel
in the mammalian brain. it is a member of the so-called ‘cysloop’ superfamily of receptors because of a characteristic motif
in the primary sequence. the receptor is formed from a
pentamer of subunits (so far, six a, three b, one d, one e, one p
and three r subunits have been cloned), with the vast majority
(485%) being composed of a1b2g2 (the most abundant), a2b3g2
or a3b1–3g2 combinations. the most predominant location for
gabaa receptors is in the postsynaptic membrane, but
extrajunctional gabaa receptors are also known to exist in
many brain areas.
pioneering work by several investigators, most notably
roger nicoll, jeff barker, bob macdonald and richard olsen,
had established by 1980 that the gabaa receptor was a likely
target for anaesthetic barbiturates (macdonald & barker,
1978; nicoll, 1978; leeb-lundberg et al., 1980). these studies
showed that barbiturates could enhance gabaergic inhibitory
responses, and that this occurred at the molecular level by
allosterically modulating the gabaa receptor complex. given
the widespread distribution of the gabaa receptor and its
likely role in many brain functions, its plausibility as an
anaesthetic target was self-evident. during subsequent years,
the case for the gabaa receptor being a key target for a
variety of general anaesthetics was advanced, particularly by
adron harris, neil harrison and jerry lambert. prior to the
widespread use of heterologous expression systems to study
receptor pharmacology, there were generally two different
approaches. one was to use electrophysiological techniques to
study native tissue, where the molecular basis for some of the
responses was often ill-defined, while the other was to measure
the effects of anaesthetics on the binding of receptor-specific
ligands, where only surrogate measures of function could be
assessed. electrophysiological approaches have proven, in my
view, to have been the most influential, and definitive evidence
that the gabaa receptor might be particularly sensitive to
etomidate and propofol came from two such studies.
etomidate was shown (proctor et al., 1986) to markedly

n.p. franks

prolong the decay of gabaergic ipsps in hippocampal slices,
while having a relatively small effect on their amplitudes. the
ipsc was prolonged by about four-fold by 10 mm etomidate;
a similar effect was found with 100 mm pentobarbital. with
propofol, low micromolar concentrations were shown (hales
& lambert, 1991) to enhance greatly gaba-activated
chloride currents in both chromaffin cells and spinal neurones.
subsequent estimates of anaesthetic concentrations of both
propofol and etomidate of a few micromolar or less confirm
that these effects on the gabaa receptor certainly satisfy the
criterion of adequate sensitivity.
propofol is a simple hindered phenol and does not contain a
chiral carbon; so stereoselectivity cannot be used in this case as
a way of assessing the relevance of a putative target. on the
other hand, etomidate is a complex carboxylated imidazole
with a single chiral carbon and therefore exists as two mirrorimage enantiomers, an r( þ ) enantiomer which is used
clinically and the less potent s() enantiomer. the ratio of
potencies of the two enantiomers as general anaesthetics was
mimicked by their potencies as gaba modulators, strongly
supporting the case that the gabaa receptor was the key
target (tomlin et al., 1998). also, both enantiomers were
equally effective in disrupting lipid bilayers, adding a further
nail in the coffin of lipid theories.
as gabaa receptors can be composed of many different
combinations of subunits (although as mentioned above, a
relatively limited number predominate in vivo), the next
question was whether etomidate and propofol were more
effective at some gabaa receptors than others. the development of heterologous expression systems such as xenopus
oocytes and hek 293 cells allowed this question to be
addressed, and there has been a bewildering amount of data on
the effects of most general anaesthetics on many of the possible
gabaa receptor subunit combinations that are likely to be
physiologically relevant, as well as many that are not. it is
impossible here to catalogue this body of work, but some
relatively simple findings have emerged regarding the actions
of etomidate and propofol. for both drugs it would appear
that the b subunit plays a critical role. this is particularly clear
in the case of etomidate, which has a roughly 10-fold greater
effect on gabaa receptors that contain b2 or b3 subunits
rather than b1 subunits. this important discovery by jerry
lambert and his colleagues (hill-venning et al., 1997) was
followed within a year by two landmark papers published in
the same month. one paper (belelli et al., 1997) showed how
the potentiating actions of etomidate could be greatly reduced
when a single amino acid in the b3 subunit (asn289) was
mutated to its b1 equivalent (ser). impressively, when this
b1 ser was replaced by asn, the converse occurred and
anaesthetic sensitivity was enhanced. the second paper (mihic
et al., 1997) used a sophisticated combination of chimeric
receptors and site-directed mutagenesis to identify amino acids
that were critical to the potentiating actions of alcohols and
volatile anaesthetics. subsequent work refined the importance
of the various identified amino acids and it has become clear
that different amino acids affect different anaesthetics in
different ways. for the two intravenous agents i am
considering here, it appears that, while the sensitivity of
gabaa receptors to etomidate greatly depends upon the type
of b subunit, propofol shows curiously little subunit dependence but, nonetheless, the same mutations in b2 or b3 subunits
affect both anaesthetics (siegwart et al., 2002).

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

s77

the importance of this last point is that this has led to the
most exciting development in the field for some years, the
production of ‘knock-in’ mice (jurd et al., 2003; reynolds
et al., 2003) that contain mutations in either b2 or b3 subunits
that were expected, on the basis of the in vitro studies
mentioned above (figure 5a), to render the animals insensitive
to etomidate, and/or propofol. the b3(n265m) mice were
dramatically less sensitive to both etomidate and propofol
(figure 5b) when the anaesthetic end point was withdrawal
from a painful stimulus, while they retained their normal
sensitivity to alphaxalone. these data reflected the in vitro
data in a remarkable way and show that a single target
is responsible for this anaesthetic end point (at least for
etomidate and propofol). the mice were also less sensitive to
etomidate and propofol when the duration of lorr was
measured, but here by only a factor of about three.
interestingly, very similar reductions in durations of lorr
were observed with the b2(n265s) knock-in mice (using
intravenous injections) as well as some reduction in responses
to a painful stimulus. in addition, subanaesthetic concentrations of etomidate were less effective in reducing locomotor
activity in the b2(n265s) mice, but this was not investigated
with the b3(n265m) mice.
a significant problem with most of these in vivo experiments
is that times for loss of a reflex were recorded, rather than the
ec50 concentrations at which the reflex is just lost. this is an
important distinction because pharmacokinetic factors become
critically important, and sleep times will only indirectly reflect
differences in target sensitivities. nonetheless, this caveat
aside, these papers represent a major advance from which it
can be concluded that b3-containing gabaa receptors are by
far the most important target for etomidate and propofol for
the loss of response to a painful stimulus (lhwr) and that the
lorr caused by etomidate is mediated by both b2- and
b3-containing gabaa receptors. whether other targets are
involved, such as b1-containing gabaa receptors, cannot be
assessed until a double knock-in is studied.
our understanding of how propofol and etomidate act is
more advanced than for any other anaesthetic, with the
possible exception of dexmedetomidine, which is a highly
selective a2 adrenergic agonist with anaesthetic properties
(correa-sales et al., 1992), but several key questions remain.
at the molecular level, where are the binding sites on the
gabaa receptor? some indications have come from the
labelling of substituted cysteines (bali & akabas, 2004), but
perhaps this question will ultimately be answered using
photoactivatable analogues (husain et al., 2003). at the
cellular level, are the relevant gabaa receptors synaptic or
extrajunctional (bai et al., 2001)? finally, and perhaps most
challenging of all, which neuronal structures are most
important for the anaesthetic end points of interest? for
example, are endogenous sleep pathways recruited (nelson
et al., 2002), and what is the balance of importance between
spinal and supraspinal sites (sonner et al., 2003)?

inhalational general anaesthetics
in this short review, it is obviously impossible to cover all of
the work carried out on trying to identify the most likely
molecular targets for inhalational general anaesthetics, and i
will therefore concentrate only on those that i think are most
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s78

n.p. franks

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

excess of those needed for anaesthesia. i believe that there are
currently three prime candidates.

gabaa receptors

figure 5 (a) in vitro data showing the potentiating actions of the
intravenous anaesthetics, propofol (prop) and etomidate (etom)
on a2b3g2 gabaa receptors (siegwart et al., 2002), and the effects of
a b-subunit mutation, b3(n265m). this mutation substantially,
although not completely, reduces the potentiations by etomidate and
propofol (but has little, if any, effect on the actions of alphaxalone –
not shown). reproduced with permission from blackwell publishing. (b) behavioural responses to the same two anaesthetics in
wild-type and b3(n265m) knock-in mice (jurd et al., 2003). durations
for lorr and lhwr were determined. etom and prop had
essentially no effect on lhwr in the b3(n265m) mice and a
reduced effect on lorr (corresponding to a rightward shift in the
dose–response curve of about three-fold or less). alphaxalone had
the same effect for both end points in the wild-type and b3(n265m)
mice – not shown. wild-type mice (black shading), b3(n265m) mice
(gray shading). **po0.01, ***po0.001 compared to wild type.
reproduced with permission from faseb.

important. for these drugs, probably more than any other,
attention to pharmacologically relevant concentrations is
critical because their relatively low selectivities mean that
many targets are affected at concentrations only slightly in
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

as potentiation of gaba acting on gabaa receptors
containing b2 and b3 subunits is sufficient at least for certain
anaesthetic end points (see above), and because many
inhalational anaesthetics, such as halothane, isoflurane and
 xxxd3197xxx , potentiate (figure 6a) exactly the same receptors
(see, e.g. nishikawa et al., 2002), it seems more than
reasonable that this will contribute to the anaesthesia caused
by these agents. this is not the case for xenon and nitrous
oxide, however, which show little, if any, activity at gabaa
receptors. there are two caveats, however. the first is that the
potentiation caused by volatile anaesthetics is usually smaller
(typically half) than that observed by etomidate and propofol
(at equi-anaesthetic concentrations), so gabaa receptors
containing b2 and b3 subunits cannot be the only target. the
second, more subtle, caveat is that actions at other sites could
antagonise these effects (for example, activation of potassium
channels in gabaergic interneurones).
perhaps not surprisingly in view of the low potencies of
volatile anaesthetics, stereoselectivity has provided less
guidance as to which targets are most likely. nonetheless,
stereoselectivity has been observed in animals with isoflurane,
although this might depend upon the end point, and a similar
degree of stereoselectivity is found in potentiating the gabaa
receptor.
the demonstration that specific amino acids were necessary
for volatile anaesthetics to potentiate the gabaa receptor was
an important breakthrough (mihic et al., 1997). the first two
key amino acids were identified in the  xxxg220xxx  – ser270 and
ala291, but subsequently other amino acids have been
identified which, when mutated, alter the sensitivity of the
receptor to volatile anaesthetics. a plausibility case has been
built up, which argues that some of these amino acids line an
anaesthetic binding pocket (jenkins et al., 2001). however,
direct structural evidence for this is lacking, although the
clever use of site-directed mutagenesis (specifically the
introduction of cysteines at putative anaesthetic binding sites)
and thiol reagents, which irreversibly bind to these amino
acids, provides some support (mascia et al., 2000). a major
difficulty with most experiments that are designed to identify
anaesthetic binding sites on these ligand-gated ion channels
using chimeras, mutagenesis or chemical modification is their
allosteric nature. firstly, it is extremely difficult to distinguish
between effects on gating and binding even under the most
favourable circumstances, but secondly, when anaesthetics
enhance activity, any binding site is almost certainly going to
be a transduction site as well because binding must lead to
changes in channel gating. the fact that specific mutations
lead to effects on some anaesthetics but not others broadly
supports the idea that anaesthetic binding sites are being
disrupted, but the complexity of these receptor channels means
that such a conclusion can only be considered to be tentative.
volatile anaesthetics show no absolute requirement for any
particular gabaa subunit for their potentiating effects and
generally show little subunit dependence. this has meant that
the knock-in approach that has proven so successful with
etomidate (see above) is unlikely to be so straightforward for
these agents. nonetheless, the b3(n265m) mice discussed

n.p. franks

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

s79

targets for different anaesthetic end points, but also support
the idea that gabaa receptors play some role in the actions of
volatile agents.

glycine receptors
often colocalised with gabaa receptors, and of particular
importance in lower brain centres and the spinal cord, glycine
receptors are a highly plausible target (figure 6b and c) for
inhalational agents (harrison et al., 1993; downie et al., 1996;
mascia et al., 1996). glycine receptors present a much more
homogeneous population of targets than gabaa receptors
because there are only four a subunits and a single b subunit,
with substantial developmental changes resulting in the
predominance of a1 and b subunits in the adult. glycine
receptors can exist as ab heteromers or a homomers. their
plausibility as a target is particularly strong for the loss of
response to a painful stimulus, which appears to be determined
predominantly by actions in the spinal cord (sonner et al.,
2003). in both expression systems (mascia et al., 1996) as well
as neurons (harrison et al., 1993; downie et al., 1996),
potentiation of glycine receptors is seen at low concentrations
for all of the volatile agents, although there is no evidence of
stereoselectivity (downie et al., 1996).
so far genetic approaches have not been particularly
productive, and definitive data proving the role of glycine
receptors in general anaesthesia have yet to be published.

two-pore-domain potassium channels

figure 6 two likely targets for inhalational general anaesthetics.
(a) the gabaa receptor (nishikawa et al., 2002). reprinted with
permission from elsevier. these data show typical potentiations
by halothane and isoflurane of a1b2g2 gabaa receptors, and how
these potentiations are virtually abolished by a single mutation in
the  xxxg220xxx  (s270w). (b) the  xxxg904xxx . these data show
percentage potentiations by volatile agents acting on glycine
receptors expressed in xenopus oocytes (mascia et al., 1996) and
(c) in medullary neurons (downie et al., 1996).

above show a significantly reduced sensitivity to halothane,
 xxxd1993xxx  and isoflurane in their responses to a painful
stimulus, although there are no changes in their lorr
(lambert et al., 2005). these data reinforce the fact that
anaesthetics are likely to recruit a different set of molecular

a new target for inhalational general anaesthetics has emerged
relatively recently – the so-called two-pore-domain potassium
channels. anaesthetic-activated potassium channels were first
characterised in the late 1980s in identified neurons of the
pond snail lymnaea stagnalis (franks & lieb, 1988) and their
mammalian counterparts form a diverse family of channels
that are characterised by having two pore-forming domains in
their primary sequences, while having only moderate sequence
homologies outside these regions. among the 15 subunits so
far identified, two subfamilies, trek and task, have
members that are activated by volatile and gaseous anaesthetics, although the activation is agent specific (patel &
honore, 2001; see also jenkinson, this issue). most work has
been carried out with halothane because it usually has the
greatest effect. these anaesthetic-activated potassium channels
are certainly plausible targets because they are thought to act
as regulators of membrane excitability and they are, indeed,
among the most richly modulated of all ion channels. they
have complex distributions in the central nervous system and
are found at both pre- and post-synaptic sites. although the
anaesthetic activations are never very large at clinically
relevant concentrations, there is good evidence that they may
be sufficient to cause substantial changes in neuronal excitability. for example, excellent work by doug bayliss and his
colleagues has shown that halothane reduces firing activity by
hyperpolarising neurons by activating a task-like current
(figure 7a and b) at sites that may well play a role in
anaesthesia, such as the locus coeruleus and the hypoglossal
nucleus (sirois et al., 2000).
perhaps the strongest case has been made for the role of
 xxxg1256xxx , based on data from a knock-out mouse from michel
lazdunski’s laboratory (heurteaux et al., 2004). this work
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

s80

n.p. franks

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

responses to a painful stimulus (figure 7c), but only slightly
less sensitive when lorr was measured. an important
control showed that the animals were equally sensitive to
pentobarbital (which does not activate  xxxg1256xxx ), but this was
only looked at in the lorr assay. as with all knock-out data,
one has to be cautious because, as mentioned above, many
compensatory changes can occur. in this study, an impressive
array of tests were performed to look for this, and the authors
concluded that the phenotypic changes observed could be
interpreted as being due simply to the absence of  xxxg1256xxx 
channels. data on knock-in animals, if they can be devised, or
on conditional knock-outs where  xxxg1256xxx  expression is
eliminated only in certain anatomical sites will be required
before these exciting data on  xxxg1256xxx  knock-out animals can
be considered as the final word on the role of this channel in
general anaesthesia.

other possible targets for inhalational anaesthetics
the number of different targets that have been proposed over
the years as targets for inhalational agents is very large
(franks & lieb, 1994; campagna et al., 2003; sonner et al.,
2003), although many can safely be discounted because effects
are often only seen at unreasonably high concentrations. some
targets that i would class as interesting, but as yet unproven,
include nmda receptors (which seem a likely target for
nitrous oxide and xenon), hcn channels (chen et al., 2005)
and some subtypes of the sodium channel (wu et al., 2004).
there is unfortunately no space here to consider these
possibilities, but hopefully definitive data will emerge in the
next few years which bear on their relevance.

concluding remarks

figure 7 the most recently identified target for inhalational
anaesthetics – two-pore domain potassium channels. (a) these data
are from rat motoneurons showing the extent of halothane-induced
hyperpolarisation and (b) halothane-activated currents due to the
anaesthetic activation of a task-like  xxxg1232xxx  (sirois
et al., 2000). copyright 2000 by the society of neuroscience. (c) in
vivo data showing how  xxxg1256xxx  knock-out mice are significantly
less sensitive to halothane than wild-type controls (heurteaux et al.,
2004). reprinted with permission.

was the culmination of a series of studies from patel & honore
(2001) and their colleagues from the same laboratory which
had shown that  xxxg1256xxx  was sensitive to a wide variety of
inhalational anaesthetics, and had identified the c-terminal
domain as an important modulatory region for anaesthetic
action (as well as most other modulatory influences). the
knock-out animals were considerably less sensitive in their
british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

in this review, i have described how the field of anaesthetic
mechanisms has changed dramatically over the last 30 years.
the days when anaesthetics were thought to act nonspecifically by simply dissolving in membranes are long gone. the
full spectrum of sophisticated techniques available to the
pharmacologist has been brought to bear on one of the most
intriguing class of drugs – those that remove consciousness –
and have shown a degree of specificity that was undreamt of
only a few years ago. as far as which molecular targets are
responsible, i have concentrated on those anaesthetics (such as
propofol and etomidate) where we have the most complete
picture, together with those about which we know least (the
inhalational agents). i have barely mentioned those anaesthetics that sit in between (such as the barbiturates) about
which we know a great deal, but not the whole story. i think in
the next few years the issue about which targets are important
and which are not will have been essentially resolved for most,
if not all, anaesthetics. the next set of questions about where
these targets are located at the cellular and anatomical levels
and how these drugs affect their changes at the molecular level
will keep those interested in this branch of pharmacology busy
for many years to come.

i would like to dedicate this article to the late bill lieb, with whom
i collaborated for over 30 years. i thank the mrc for support and
robert dickinson for helpful comments on the manuscript.

n.p. franks

molecular targets underlying general anaesthesia

s81

references
bai, d., zhu, g., pennefather, p., jackson, m.f., macdonald,
j.f. & orser, b.a. (2001). distinct functional and pharmacological

properties of tonic and quantal inhibitory postsynaptic currents
mediated by gabaa receptors in hippocampal neurons. mol.
pharmacol., 59, 814–824.
bali, m. & akabas, m.h. (2004). defining the propofol binding
site location on the gabaa receptor. mol. pharmacol., 65,
68–76.
belelli, d., lambert, j.j., peters, j.a., wafford, k. &
whiting, p.j. (1997). the interaction of the general anesthetic
etomidate with the gabaa receptor is influenced by a single amino
acid. proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a., 94, 11031–11036.
bhattacharya, a.a., curry, s. & franks, n.p. (2000). binding
of the general anesthetics propofol and halothane to human serum
albumin. high resolution crystal structures. j. biol. chem., 275,
38731–38738.
campagna, j.a., miller, k.w. & forman, s.a. (2003). mechanisms of actions of inhaled anesthetics. n. engl. j. med., 348,
2110–2124.
chen, x., sirois, j.e., lei, q., talley, e.m., lynch iii, c. &
bayliss, d.a. (2005). hcn subunit-specific and camp-modulated
effects of anesthetics on neuronal pacemaker currents. j. neurosci.,
25, 5803–5814.
correa-sales, c., rabin, b.c. & maze, m. (1992). a hypnotic
response to dexmedetomidine, an alpha 2 agonist, is mediated in the
locus coeruleus in rats. anesthesiology, 76, 948–952.
downie, d.l., hall, a.c., lieb, w.r. & franks, n.p. (1996).
effects of inhalational general anaesthetics on native glycine
receptors in rat medullary neurones and recombinant glycine
receptors in xenopus oocytes. br. j. pharmacol., 118, 493–502.
franks, n.p. & lieb, w.r. (1982). molecular mechanisms of general
anaesthesia. nature, 300, 487–493.
franks, n.p. & lieb, w.r. (1984). do general anaesthetics act by
competitive binding to specific receptors? nature, 310, 599–601.
franks, n.p. & lieb, w.r. (1988). volatile general anaesthetics
activate a novel neuronal k+ current. nature, 333, 662–664.
franks, n.p. & lieb, w.r. (1994). molecular and cellular mechanisms of general anaesthesia. nature, 367, 607–614.
hales, t.g. & lambert, j.j. (1991). the actions of propofol on
inhibitory amino acid receptors of bovine adrenomedullary
chromaffin cells and rodent central neurones. br. j. pharmacol.,
104, 619–628.
harrison, n.l., kugler, j.l., jones, m.v., greenblatt, e.p. &
pritchett, d.b. (1993). positive modulation of human gabaa
and glycine receptors by the inhalation anesthetic isoflurane. mol.
pharmacol., 44, 628–632.
heurteaux, c., guy, n., laigle, c., blondeau, n., duprat,
f., mazzuca, m., lang-lazdunski, l., widmann, c.,
zanzouri, m., romey, g. & lazdunski, m. (2004).  xxxg1256xxx ,
a k+ channel involved in neuroprotection and general anesthesia.
embo j., 23, 2684–2695.
hill-venning, c., belelli, d., peters, j.a. & lambert, j.j.
(1997). subunit-dependent interaction of the general anaesthetic
etomidate with the gabaa receptor. br. j. pharmacol., 120,
749–756.
husain, s.s., ziebell, m.r., ruesch, d., hong, f., arevalo, e.,
kosterlitz, j.a., olsen, r.w., forman, s.a., cohen, j.b. &
miller, k.w. (2003). 2-(3-methyl-3h-diaziren-3-yl)ethyl 1-(1phenylethyl)-1h-imidazole-5-carboxylate: a derivative of the stereoselective general anesthetic etomidate for photolabeling ligandgated ion channels. j. med. chem., 46, 1257–1265.
jenkins, a., greenblatt, e.p., faulkner, h.j., bertaccini,
e., light, a., lin, a., andreasen, a., viner, a., trudell,
j.r. & harrison, n.l. (2001). evidence for a common binding
cavity for three general anesthetics within the gabaa receptor.
j. neurosci., 21, rc136.

jurd, r., arras, m., lambert, s., drexler, b., siegwart, r.,
crestani, f., zaugg, m., vogt, k.e., ledermann, b.,
antkowiak, b. & rudolph, u. (2003). general anesthetic

actions in vivo strongly attenuated by a point mutation in the
gaba(a) receptor  xxxg838xxx  subunit. faseb j., 17, 250–252.
lambert, s., arras, m., vogt, k.e. & rudolph, u. (2005).
isoflurane-induced surgical tolerance mediated only in part by
 xxxg838xxx -containing gabaa receptors. eur. j. pharmacol., 516, 23–27.
leeb-lundberg, f., snowman, a. & olsen, r.w. (1980).
barbiturate receptor sites are coupled to benzodiazepine receptors.
proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a., 77, 7468–7472.
macdonald, r.l. & barker, j.l. (1978). different actions of
anticonvulsant and anesthetic barbiturates revealed by use of
cultured mammalian neurons. science, 200, 775–777.
mascia, m.p., machu, t.k. & harris, r.a. (1996). enhancement of
homomeric  xxxg904xxx  function by long-chain alcohols and
anaesthetics. br. j. pharmacol., 119, 1331–1336.
mascia, m.p., trudell, j.r. & harris, r.a. (2000).
specific binding sites for alcohols and anesthetics on ligandated
ion channels. proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a., 97, 9305–9310.
mihic, s.j., ye, q., wick, m.j., koltchine, v.v., krasowski,
m.d., finn, s.e., mascia, m.p., valenzuela, c.f., hanson,
k.k., greenblatt, e.p., harris, r.a. & harrison, n.l.
(1997). sites of alcohol and volatile anaesthetic action on gabaa
and glycine receptors. nature, 389, 385–389.
nelson, l.e., guo, t.z., lu, j., saper, c.b., franks, n.p. &
maze, m. (2002). the sedative component of anesthesia is
mediated by gabaa receptors in an endogenous sleep pathway.
nat. neurosci., 5, 979–984.
nicoll, r.a. (1978). pentobarbital: differential postsynaptic actions
on sympathetic ganglion cells. science, 199, 451–452.
nishikawa, k., jenkins, a., paraskevakis, i. & harrison,
n.l. (2002). volatile anesthetic actions on the gabaa receptors:
contrasting effects of  xxxg830xxx (s270) and  xxxg837xxx (n265) point mutations. neuropharmacology, 42, 337–345.
patel, a.j. & honore, e. (2001). anesthetic-sensitive 2p domain k+
channels. anesthesiology, 95, 1013–1021.
proctor, w.r., mynlieff, m. & dunwiddie, t.v. (1986). facilitatory action of etomidate and pentobarbital on recurrent inhibition in
rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons. j. neurosci., 6, 3161–3168.
reynolds, d.s., rosahl, t.w., cirone, j., o’meara, g.f.,
haythornthwaite, a., newman, r.j., myers, j., sur, c.,
howell, o., rutter, a.r., atack, j., macaulay, a.j.,
hadingham, k.l., hutson, p.h., belelli, d., lambert, j.j.,
dawson, g.r., mckernan, r., whiting, p.j. & wafford,
k.a. (2003). sedation and anesthesia mediated by distinct gabaa
receptor isoforms. j. neurosci., 23, 8608–8617.
siegwart, r., jurd, r. & rudolph, u. (2002). molecular
determinants for the action of general anesthetics at recombinant
a2b3g2 g-aminobutyric acida receptors. j. neurochem., 80, 140–148.
sirois, j.e., lei, q., talley, e.m., lynch iii, c. & bayliss, d.a.
(2000). the  xxxg1257xxx  two-pore domain k+ channel is a molecular
substrate for neuronal effects of inhalation anesthetics. j. neurosci.,
20, 6347–6354.
sonner, j.m., antognini, j.f., dutton, r.c., flood, p., gray,
a.t., harris, r.a., homanics, g.e., kendig, j., orser, b.,
raines, d.e., rampil, i.j., trudell, j., vissel, b. & eger ii,
e.i. (2003). inhaled anesthetics and immobility: mechanisms,
mysteries, and minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration. anesth.
analg., 97, 718–740.
tomlin, s.l., jenkins, a., lieb, w.r. & franks, n.p. (1998).
stereoselective effects of etomidate optical isomers on gabaa
receptors and animals. anesthesiology, 88, 708–717.
wu, x.s., sun, j.y., evers, a.s., crowder, m. & wu, l.g. (2004).
isoflurane inhibits transmitter release and the presynaptic action
potential. anesthesiology, 100, 663–670.

british journal of pharmacology vol 147 (s1)

