molecular and cellular biology, feb. 2006, p. 990–1001
0270-7306/06/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/mcb.26.3.990–1001.2006
copyright © 2006, american society for microbiology. all rights reserved.

vol. 26, no. 3

tgif inhibits retinoid signaling
1

laurent bartholin, shannon e. powers,1 tiffany a. melhuish,1 samuel lasse,2 michael weinstein,2
and david wotton1*
department of biochemistry and molecular genetics and center for cell signaling, university of virginia, charlottesville, virginia,1
and department of molecular genetics and division of human cancer genetics, ohio state university, columbus, ohio2
received 18 april 2005/returned for modification 17 june 2005/accepted 4 november 2005

noic acid response elements do not have tgif sites, and in
vivo, retinoid responsive genes are not known to be regulated
by tgif.
transforming growth factor ␤ (tgf-␤) binds to and activates a cell surface receptor complex, which phosphorylates
and activates the intracellular mediators of tgf-␤ signaling,
the smad proteins. receptor-activated smads complex with
 xxxg2171xxx , enter the nucleus and bind to dna, either directly or
via interactions with other factors (13, 21, 22, 51). transcriptional activation by smads relies on their interaction with general coactivators, such as p300/cbp (23). tgif is a transcriptional corepressor for tgf-␤-activated smads, which
competes with coactivators for smad interaction, and recruits
corepressors, resulting in active repression of tgf-␤/smad
target genes (47).
the human tgif gene was mapped to the minimal critical
region at 18p11.3, which was deleted in a panel of holoprosencephaly (hpe) patients (11). hpe is a prevalent human genetic disease affecting craniofacial development, with an incidence of up to 1:250 conceptions but, due to a high level of
intrauterine lethality, a much lower frequency at birth (12, 29).
the primary defect in hpe is a failure of the ventral forebrain
to divide, with concomitant defects in midline structures which
can result in cyclopia and proboscosis (10, 37). many genetic
loci have been implicated in hpe, including those encoding
the morphogen  xxxg2067xxx  (shh) and the transcription
factors zic2, six3, and tgif (29, 36). as with other hpe
mutations, loss of tgif is only partially penetrant with respect
to the hpe phenotype, suggesting that the genetics of hpe are
complex. hpe can also be caused by environmental factors,
and only around half of hpe can be attributed to known
genetic lesions (36, 45). in both mice and humans, prenatal
exposure to  xxxd3417xxx  has been shown to cause developmental defects, including hpe (17, 42). thus, it may be the

tgif (tg-interacting factor) is a member of the tale
(three-amino-acid loop extension) superfamily of homeodomain proteins (3, 4). in the tale superfamily, the first two
helices are separated by a loop, which is likely to affect interactions with other proteins but not alter dna binding properties (4, 31, 34). homeodomain proteins regulate numerous
developmental processes and do so by activating or repressing
gene expression through interactions either with dna or with
other dna-bound proteins (8, 24, 25). functional analysis has
demonstrated that tgif is a transcriptional repressor which
interacts with general corepressor proteins, including  xxxg540xxx ,
msin3, and histone deacetylases (27, 40, 46, 48).
 xxxd3417xxx  binds to members of the nuclear receptor
family of transcription factors: the retinoid x receptors
(rxrs), which bind only 9-cis  xxxd3417xxx , and the retinoic
acid receptors (rars), which bind several forms of retinoic
acid (1, 14, 19). binding of  xxxd3417xxx  to rar or rxr
induces a conformational change in the receptors which alters
the balance between coactivator and corepressor interactions,
allowing a switch from repression to activation of target gene
expression (2, 5, 9). the receptors can both homo- and heterodimerize and then interact with bipartite dna binding
sites. the relative spacing of half sites within a retinoid response element can determine which rar/rxr heterodimer
or homodimer it binds (18, 35, 44). tgif was isolated by its
ability to bind adjacent to a retinoid response element
(rxre) from the rat cellular retinol binding protein ii
(crbpii) gene (3). binding of tgif to this specific rxre
decreased activation of gene expression. however, most reti-

* corresponding author. mailing address: center for cell signaling,
university of virginia, box 800577, hsc, charlottesville, va 22908.
phone: (434) 243-6752. fax: (434) 924-1236. e-mail: dw2p@virginia
.edu.
990

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

tgif (tg-interacting factor) represses transforming growth factor ␤ (tgf-␤)-activated gene expression
and can repress transcription via a specific retinoid response element. mutations in human tgif are
associated with holoprosencephaly, a severe defect of craniofacial development with both genetic and environmental causes. both tgf-␤ and  xxxd3417xxx  signaling are implicated in craniofacial development. here, we
analyze the role of tgif in regulating retinoid responsive gene expression. we demonstrate that tgif
interacts with the ligand binding domain of the rxr␣ retinoid receptor and represses transcription from
retinoid response elements. tgif recruits the general corepressor,  xxxg540xxx , to rxr␣, and this recruitment is
required for full repression by tgif. interaction between tgif and rxr␣ is reduced by the addition of
 xxxd3417xxx , consistent with a role for tgif as an rxr␣ transcriptional corepressor. we created a tgif null
mutation in mice and tested the sensitivity of mutant mice to increased levels of  xxxd3417xxx . tgif mutant
embryos are more sensitive to  xxxd3417xxx -induced teratogenesis, and retinoid target genes are expressed at
a higher level in tissues from tgif null mice. these results demonstrate an important role for tgif as a
transcriptional corepressor, which regulates developmental signaling by  xxxd3417xxx , and raises the possibility
that tgif may repress other rxr-dependent transcriptional responses.

vol. 26, 2006

tgif and rxr

materials and methods
plasmids. the dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  luciferase reporters were created by first ligating
a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing a tata element into pgl2-basic.
oligonucleotides containing either the dr1 element (gtacgctgtcacag
gtcacaggtcacaggtcacaggtcac) or a  xxxg1057xxx  response element (ga
tcagggttcaccgaaagttcactcgct) were then inserted upstream of
the tata sequence (upper strands only are shown, the rar/rxr half sites are
underlined). all expression constructs were created in pcmv5 with either a flag
or t7 epitope tag and contained the entire coding sequences of tgif, rar␣ or
rxr␣, ppar␥, or  xxxg540xxx . deletion mutants were made by pcr and were ligated
into pcmv5 with flag or t7 epitope tags. the ⌬af1 rxr␤ and rxr␥ constructs were created by pcr in t7-pcmv5. the estrogen response element
(ere) reporter was created in  xxxg2041xxx  (promega) and contained two eres. the
tgif small interfering rna (sirna) was created in psuper and contained
the same target sequence as previously reported (39).
luciferase assays. hepg2 cells were maintained in dulbecco’s minimal essential medium with 10% fetal bovine serum and transfected using exgen 500
(mbi fermentas) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cells were transfected with the appropriate luciferase reporter, phcmvrluc, and the indicated
expression constructs. after 48 h, firefly luciferase activity was assayed using a
luciferase assay kit (promega) and renilla luciferase was assayed with 0.09 ␮m
coelenterazine (biosynth) using a berthold lb953 luminometer. for experiments with the sirna vector, luciferase activity was assayed 60 h after transfection.  xxxd3417xxx  (ra) ( xxxd3417xxx  [9c-ra] or all-trans-ra [ xxxd3417xxx ]; sigma)
was added for the final 24 h or as indicated.
immunoprecipitation and western blotting. cos1 cells were maintained in
dulbecco’s minimal essential medium with 10% bovine growth serum (hyclone)
and were transfected using lipofectamine (invitrogen). at 36 h after transfection, cells were lysed by sonication in 75 mm nacl, 50 mm hepes, ph 7.8, 20%
glycerol, 0.1% tween 20, 0.5% np-40 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors.
immunocomplexes were precipitated with flag m2-agarose (sigma). following
sodium  xxxd3215xxx -polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, proteins were electroblotted to immobilon-p (millipore) and incubated with antisera specific for
flag (sigma) or t7 (novagen). proteins were visualized with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (pierce) and
enhanced chemiluminescence (amersham pharmacia biotech). endogenous
protein complexes were precipitated using a mouse monoclonal rxr␣-specific
antibody (a kind gift of c. rochette-egly), and tgif was detected using a rabbit
polyclonal tgif-specific antiserum (47).
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. for electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
0.75 ng of radiolabeled double-stranded oligonucleotide probe containing a
perfect tgif binding site (actctgcctgtcaagcgagg) was incubated
with 1.5 ␮l of mini nuclear extract from cos1 cells transfected with either a
control vector or a tgif expression plasmid, together with 1 ␮g poly(di-dc) ·
poly(di-dc) and 500 ng single-stranded dna with or without specific competitor
oligonucleotides. reaction mixtures were incubated on ice in binding buffer (20
mm hepes, ph 7.9, 50 mm nacl, 5 mm mgcl2, 1 mm edta, 20% glycerol,
1 mm dithiothreitol) for 30 min and separated on a 4% polyacrylamide gel in
0.5⫻ tris-borate-edta. gels were dried and visualized on a phosphorimager.
tgif gene disruption. a lambda phage 129/svj genomic library was screened
for mouse tgif, and positive clones were analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion

and sequencing. we removed most of the second and third exons of the tgif gene
and fused the coding sequence for the green fluorescent protein (gfp) in frame
with the ninth codon of the tgif gene. correct integration of this targeting vector
removes all tgif coding sequence after the ninth codon and results in expression
from the tgif promoter of a fusion of the first 9 amino acids of tgif with gfp.
the neo gene is expressed from a separate promoter, downstream of the gfp
3⬘ untranslated region. the targeting construct had a 900-bp short arm upstream
of the second coding exon and a 9-kb ecori genomic fragment as the long arm
3⬘ of the final exon. 129/sv embryonic stem cells were electroporated, and clones
were selected with  xxxg418xxx . positive clones were identified by pcr and confirmed
by southern blotting. mouse embryo fibroblasts (mefs) were isolated from
embryonic day 13.5 (e13.5) embryos and were passaged in culture three times
prior to use for chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. procedures were approved by the animal care and use committee of the university of virginia.
dna and rna analyses. dna was isolated and purified from tail biopsy or
yolk sac using the promega wizard purification kit or by hotshot (43). dna for
southern blotting was purified from an adult liver by standard proteinase k
digestion and phenol-chloroform extraction methods. rna was isolated from
e13.5 embryos using trizol reagent. northern and southern blotting were carried out by standard techniques. array analysis was carried out using ge pathway finder arrays (superarray bioscience), with 32p labeled probes, according
to the manufacturer’s instructions.
real-time pcr. total rna was extracted from testes from wild-type or mutant animals (trizol extraction followed by rneasy mini kit purification). rna
was used for cdna synthesis. the cdna was used as template in a quantitative
real-time pcr (sybr green; superarray bioscience) using a bio-rad myiq
thermocycler (annealing temperature, 56°c). all of the real-time values were
averaged and compared using the cycle threshold (ct) method, where the
amount of target rna (2⫺⫺⌬⌬ct) was normalized to the endogenous  xxxg53xxx 
(forward primer, 5⬘-cacacccgccaccagttcg-3⬘; reverse primer, 5⬘-ga
cccattcccaccatcacacc-3⬘) reference (⌬ct) and related to the amount
of targets in wild-type cells (⌬⌬ct), which was set as the calibrator at 1.0.
commercially available gene-specific primers validated for real-time pcr experiments have been used (rt2 gene expression assays; superarray bioscience).
the values represent the means ⫾ standard errors of the means of the results
from triplicate experiments.
chromatin immunoprecipitation. chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed essentially as described previously (15, 32). briefly, wild-type or mutant
mefs at passage three were treated with 9c-ra for 16 h or left untreated and
were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at 37°c. following chromatin isolation, dna was sheared by sonication to between 200 and 1,000 bp in
length. immunoprecipitations were carried out using 2 ␮l of a polyclonal tgif
antiserum (47) or of preimmune serum. the oligonucleotides used for pcr are
described in reference 32, and pcr was carried out for 31 cycles (rar␤) and 35
cycles ( xxxg861xxx ) with an annealing temperature of 62°c. for input controls,
10% of the input chromatin was purified without immunoprecipitation, and a
portion of this was subjected to pcr under the same conditions.
 xxxd3417xxx  treatment. tgif heterozygotes were intercrossed, and pregnant
females were treated by gavage at e7.5 with 7.5 mg of  xxxd3417xxx 
(sigma)/kg of body weight in 200 ␮l of corn oil, a dose known to cause hpe in
mice (42). embryos were then excised at e10.5 and genotyped by pcr from yolk
sac dna.

results
tgif represses rxr-mediated transcription. to analyze
the effect of tgif on retinoid-regulated gene expression, we
tested the effects of tgif on  xxxd3417xxx -responsive luciferase reporters in hepg2 cells. we first used a reporter containing a dr1 retinoid response element. the dr1 rxre has
five consensus rar/rxr half sites, each separated by 1 bp,
and can be bound by both rar/rxr heterodimers (which
repress this element) and rxr homodimers (which activate
it). hepg2 cells were transfected with the dr1-tata-luc
reporter and an rxr␣ expression construct, with or without a
tgif expression plasmid, and cells were either treated with
increasing amounts of 9c-ra or left untreated. the dr1
reporter was activated in the presence of transfected rxr␣
(fig. 1a). coexpression of tgif clearly repressed rxr-me-

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

interplay of genetic and environmental factors that causes
hpe.
here we test whether tgif is a general repressor of retinoic
acid-dependent transcriptional activation. we demonstrate
that tgif represses transcription from multiple different retinoid response elements by interacting specifically with the
rxr␣  xxxd3417xxx  receptor, and that it recruits the corepressor  xxxg540xxx  to rxr␣. to test whether tgif loss of function
results in increased sensitivity to  xxxd3417xxx , we created tgif
null mice. we show that tgif⫺/⫺ mice are more sensitive to
 xxxd3417xxx  signals.  xxxd3417xxx  target genes show increased
expression, and in utero exposure to exogenous  xxxd3417xxx 
caused an increased rate of developmental abnormalities in the
mutant embryos. this work clearly demonstrates for the first
time an in vivo role for tgif in control of retinoid-regulated
gene expression.

991

992

bartholin et al.

diated activation of the dr1 luciferase reporter, and this repression was partially overcome by the addition of 9c-ra. we
observed fourfold repression of the dr1 reporter by tgif in
the absence of added ligand, and this dropped to just over
twofold repression at the maximum dose of 9c-ra (fig. 1a).
next we tested the effect of expressing increasing amounts of
tgif on the activity of the dr1 reporter in the absence or
presence of two concentrations of 9c-ra. as shown in fig. 1b,
we observed a dose-dependent increase in repression of this
element by tgif in the presence of  xxxd3417xxx , whereas
even the lowest amount of tgif repressed reporter activity in
the absence of added  xxxd3417xxx .
tgif represses via a  xxxg1057xxx  rare. most known retinoidresponsive elements consist of a canonical  xxxg1057xxx  element, in
which two direct repeats of the  xxxd3417xxx  receptor binding
site are separated by 5 base pairs. since relatively few dr1
response elements have been identified, we were interested to
know whether tgif could also repress via a  xxxg1057xxx  rare.
additionally, the dr1 element has an adjacent partial match
to a tgif binding site, and it has been suggested that tgif
represses by binding directly to this dna sequence (3). however, most  xxxd3417xxx  response elements, including the  xxxg1057xxx 
reporters used here, do not have tgif binding sites. we created luciferase reporters containing either 1, 2, or 4 copies of
the rare from the rar␤ gene. when we used a reporter
with four copies of the  xxxg1057xxx  element, together with high levels
of either 9c-ra or  xxxd3417xxx , coexpression of tgif was unable
to repress activity. however, activation of the four-copy  xxxg1057xxx 
reporter by rxr␣ in the absence of added ra was repressed
fourfold by coexpression of tgif (fig. 2a). to test whether
tgif was able to better repress when fewer copies of the
rare were present, we analyzed reporters with one or two
copies of the rare. the single rare reporter was activated

by ra in the presence of rxr␣, and tgif repressed its
activity to close to the basal level (fig. 2b). similar results were
obtained with a reporter containing two copies of the rar␤
 xxxg1057xxx  element, although this reporter was much better activated by rxr␣ and 9c-ra (fig. 2b). thus, tgif is able to
inhibit activation of a  xxxg1057xxx  retinoid response element in the
presence of rxr␣ and limiting  xxxd3417xxx , but once the
level of ra is increased, this repression can be overcome.
these results suggest that tgif limits the effectiveness of
signaling by low levels of  xxxd3417xxx .
purified recombinant tgif has been shown to bind to the
crbpii rxre, which contains a close match to the tgif
consensus binding site (3). however, the  xxxg1057xxx  element does
not contain a tgif site, suggesting that binding of tgif to
dna is unlikely to account for the observed repression. to test
whether tgif binds directly to the  xxxg1057xxx  rare, we performed
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts
from transfected cos1 cells. we incubated extracts from
cos1 cells transfected with tgif with a radiolabeled probe
containing a consensus tgif binding site (ctgtcaa) (3)
and included increasing amounts of an unlabeled doublestranded oligonucleotide with either a tgif site or the  xxxg1057xxx 
element. as shown in fig. 2c, tgif bound to the probe
containing its own site, and this binding was efficiently competed by the unlabeled tgif competitor but not by the  xxxg1057xxx 
element, even with the maximum amount of competitor. together, these data demonstrate that tgif does not bind to
 xxxg1057xxx   xxxd3417xxx  response elements but is able to repress
transcription via these elements.
to test whether endogenously expressed tgif represses
retinoid signaling, we used a previously published sirna vector directed against tgif (39). as shown in fig. 2d, cotransfection of the tgif sirna vector resulted in about a twofold
increase in the activity of both the dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  luciferase
reporters, suggesting that endogenous tgif contributes to
repression of a retinoid response. in contrast, we did not observe repression of an estrogen-responsive luciferase reporter
by overexpressed tgif, nor did the tgif sirna vector increase the activity of this reporter, suggesting that tgif does
not repress all nuclear receptor-mediated transcription (fig.
2e).
tgif interacts with rxr␣. since tgif was able to repress
both the dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  elements in an rxr␣-dependent
manner but did not bind to a  xxxg1057xxx  element, we considered the
possibility that the ability of tgif to repress was due to an
interaction with rxr␣. to test whether tgif interacts with
 xxxd3417xxx  receptors, we transfected cos1 cells with expression vectors encoding t7 epitope-tagged rar␣ or rxr␣ with
and without a flag-tgif expression construct. protein complexes were collected on anti-flag agarose and analyzed by
western blotting for the presence of coprecipitating retinoic
acid receptors. as shown in fig. 3a, rxr␣ clearly coprecipitated with tgif, and this interaction was reduced by overnight
treatment of the cells with 9c-ra prior to lysis. we observed
only a weak interaction of tgif with rar␣, which was also
abolished in cells treated with 9c-ra for 16 h (fig. 3a). to
further examine the retinoid regulation of the interaction of
tgif with rxr␣, we coexpressed both proteins in cos1 cells
and either left them untreated or treated them with 9c-ra for
up to 6 h. as shown in fig. 3b, we observed little effect of

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 1. regulation of rxr-dependent transcription by tgif.
hepg2 cells were transfected with a dr1-tata-luc luciferase reporter, together with expression vectors encoding rxr␣ and tgif, as
indicated (⫺, not used). 9c-ra was added 24 h prior to analysis, as
indicated. in panel a, ⫹ indicates 10⫺7 m 9c-ra, and the titration of
increasing 9c-ra was 10⫺9 m, 10⫺8 m, and 10⫺7 m. in panel b,
increasing amounts of tgif were cotransfected as indicated (in ng per
duplicate). luciferase activity was assayed 40 h after transfection and
is presented, in arbitrary units, as the mean ⫾ standard deviation of
results from duplicate transfections.

mol. cell. biol.

vol. 26, 2006

tgif and rxr

993

9c-ra treatment at 1 or 2 h, but the interaction of tgif with
rxr␣ was clearly diminished at 4 and 6 h.
to test whether tgif and rxr␣ interact, when expressed
at endogenous levels, we immunoprecipitated rxr␣ from
cos1 cells that had been treated with 9c-ra or left untreated. when immunoprecipitates were probed with a tgifspecific antiserum, tgif was readily detectable in rxr␣ precipitates from untreated cells (fig. 3c). importantly, as with
the overexpressed proteins, tgif interaction was clearly reduced with ra treatment, suggesting that the interaction is
specific. this demonstrates a retinoid-regulated interaction of
endogenous tgif and rxr␣. taken together, these results
suggest that tgif can repress transcription from multiple  xxxd3417xxx  response elements, including the common  xxxg1057xxx  element, and that this repression is mediated by the retinoid
regulatable interaction of tgif with rxr␣.
identification of the interaction domains in tgif and
rxr␣. to identify which domains of tgif and rxr␣ medi-

ate the interaction, we first created a series of t7-tagged
rxr␣ expression constructs (fig. 4c) and tested interaction
with tgif in cos1 cells. each of the rxr␣ expression constructs was coexpressed with flag-tgif or a control vector,
and complexes were isolated on anti-flag agarose. as shown in
fig. 4a, all constructs containing the ligand binding domain
(lbd) of rxr␣ interacted with tgif, whereas deletion of
this region of the protein completely abolished interaction.
the activation function 2 core, which is encompassed by the
lbd, was also dispensable for interaction. importantly, we
detected a clear interaction with the rxr␣ lbd construct,
which lacks the dna binding domain, suggesting that the
observed interaction is independent of dna binding. we next
tested interaction of a series of flag-tagged tgif expression
constructs (fig. 4d) with rxr␣. for this analysis, we used the
rxr␣ expression construct lacking the af1 domain (⌬af1),
since this showed a clear interaction and was well separated
from the immunoglobulin heavy chain. as shown in fig. 4b,

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 2. repression of  xxxg1057xxx -mediated transcription by tgif. hepg2 cells were transfected with  xxxg1057xxx -tata-luc luciferase reporters, together
with expression vectors encoding rxr␣ and tgif, as indicated. ⫹, present; ⫺, absent. the  xxxg1057xxx  reporters contained either 1, 2, or 4 tandem
copies of the  xxxg1057xxx  element as indicated. (a)  xxxd3417xxx  or 9c-ra was added 24 h prior to analysis, as indicated, to a final concentration of 10⫺7 m.
the boxed inset in panel a shows the  xxxg1057xxx -tata-luc activity in the absence of added  xxxd3417xxx . (b) cells were transfected with a control
reporter lacking  xxxg1057xxx  elements (tata-luc) or with reporters containing 1 or 2  xxxg1057xxx  elements, together with rxr␣ and tgif expression
constructs, as indicated. 9c-ra was added as indicated 24 h prior to lysis. (c) nuclear extracts from cos1 cells transfected with a tgif or control
vector were incubated with a radiolabeled probe containing a single consensus tgif site (ctgtcaa). unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides,
either the consensus tgif site or the  xxxg1057xxx  rare, were added as indicated. triangles represent a titrations of a 5-, 20-, 80-, 320-, and 530-fold
excesses of unlabeled competitor. the tgif shifted band and free probe are indicated. (d) cells were transfected with the dr1 or  xxxg1057xxx  (two copy)
reporters together with a control vector (psuper) or one expressing a tgif-specific hairpin rna (sitgif) and treated with 9c-ra, as indicated,
24 h prior to analysis. three days after transfection, luciferase activity was assayed. (e) cells were transfected with a control vector, a tgif
expression plasmid, or a tgif sirna vector, together with a luciferase reporter in which transcription is activated by an estrogen response element
(ere). estrogen (e2) was added, as indicated, 24 h prior to analysis.

994

bartholin et al.

mol. cell. biol.

the rxr␣ ⌬af1 efficiently coprecipitated with all constructs
containing the tgif homeodomain but failed to interact with
a construct expressing amino acids 108 to 272, which lacks the
homeodomain. together, these data demonstrate that the
tgif homeodomain interacts with the lbd of rxr␣.

interaction of tgif with rxr containing heterodimers. to
further examine the specificity of the interaction of tgif with
other nuclear receptors, we generated t7-tagged versions of
rxr␤ and rxr␥, both lacking the af1 domain. cos1 cells
were transfected with ⌬af1 rxr␣, -␤, or -␥ expression vectors

fig. 4. tgif interacts with the rxr␣ ligand binding domain. (a) cos1 cells were transfected with expression constructs encoding t7
epitope-tagged rxr␣ deletion constructs, together with a flag-tagged tgif or control vector. protein complexes were isolated on anti-flag
agarose and analyzed by western blotting (wb) for the presence of coprecipitating t7-tagged rxr␣ constructs. (b) cos1 cells were transfected
with t7 epitope-tagged ⌬af1 rxr␣, together with a series of flag-tagged tgif expression constructs. protein complexes were isolated on
anti-flag agarose and analyzed by western blotting for the presence of coprecipitating rxr␣. a portion of the lysates was subjected to analysis
by direct western blotting to monitor protein expression (below). (c) the rxr␣ deletion constructs used in panel a are shown schematically,
together with the amino acids present in each construct. tgif interaction is indicated to the right (⫹, interaction; ⫺, none). af1, activation
function 1; dbd, dna binding domain; lbd, ligand binding domain; af2, activation function 2. (d) the tgif deletion constructs are shown
schematically, together with the amino acids in each and their interaction with rxr␣. the two major conserved domains of vertebrate tgifs are
indicated. hd ⫹ 20, homeodomain plus 20 amino acid extension; rd2, repression domain 2; ip, immunoprecipitation.

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 3. tgif interacts with rxr␣. (a) cos1 cells were transfected with t7 epitope-tagged rar␣ or rxr␣ expression constructs, together
with a flag-tagged tgif or control vector, and cells were treated with 9c-ra for 1 or 16 h (10⫺7 m) prior to lysis as indicated. protein complexes
were isolated on anti-flag agarose and analyzed by western blotting (wb) for the presence of coprecipitating rar␣ or rxr␣. a portion of the
lysates was subjected to analysis by direct western blotting to monitor protein expression (below). ⫹, present. (b) cells were transfected as
described for panel a, and 9c-ra was added for 1, 2, 4, or 6 h as indicated. protein complexes were analyzed as described for panel a. (c) cos1
cells either treated for 16 h with 9c-ra (⫹) or left untreated (⫺) were lysed by sonication. protein complexes were precipitated with a
rxr␣-specific monoclonal antibody and western blotted with a tgif-specific antiserum (above). the expression of tgif and rxr␣ was
monitored in the lysates by direct western blotting (below). arrowheads in panel c indicate specific bands; the bar indicates the heavy chain. the
positions of molecular mass markers (in kda) are shown to the left of each panel. ip, immunoprecipitation.

vol. 26, 2006

together with flag-tgif or a control vector, and proteins were
collected on flag-agarose. as shown in fig. 5a, all three rxr
isoforms interacted with tgif, consistent with the high degree
of homology between their ligand binding domains. next, we
further tested interaction with rar␣ and with a more distantly related rxr partner, ppar␥. cos1 cells were transfected with t7-rar␣ and flag-tgif with or without a t7rxr␣ ⌬af1 expression plasmid. as shown in fig. 5b, little
interaction of rar␣ with tgif was observed in the absence
of coexpressed rxr␣, whereas the interaction was clearly
detectable in its presence. we next performed similar experiments using t7-tagged ppar␥, although here we used a tgif
expression plasmid encoding only the amino-terminal 116
amino acids, since expression of the transfected ppar␥ was
relatively low and this tgif construct is also expressed at a
lower level. as with rar␣, only a low level of interaction of
ppar␥ with tgif was detected, but this was clearly increased
in the presence of coexpressed rxr␣ (fig. 5c). together,
these data suggest that tgif interacts preferentially with retinoid x receptors, and this can result in the incorporation of

995

tgif into heterodimeric rxr-containing nuclear receptor
complexes.
recruitment of corepressors to rxr␣. tgif interacts with
transcriptional corepressors, including  xxxg540xxx  (27). to test
whether tgif recruits  xxxg540xxx  to rxr␣, cos1 cells were transfected with expression plasmids encoding t7 tagged rxr␣
⌬af1, tgif (1 to 116), and a flag- xxxg540xxx  expression construct.
as shown in fig. 6a, rxr␣ ⌬af1 was clearly detectable in
flag immunoprecipitates when the tgif construct was also
present, whereas little or no rxr␣ ⌬af1 coprecipitated with
flag- xxxg540xxx  in its absence. we next performed luciferase assays
using the dr1 reporter together with either a control plasmid
or one expressing wild-type or mutant tgif. the mutant
tgif plasmid encodes a protein with a single serine-to-cysteine mutation (s28c) in the  xxxg540xxx  binding site, which dramatically reduces interaction of  xxxg540xxx  with tgif (27). following
transfection, cells were treated with a fixed concentration of
ra over a 24-h time course. as shown in fig. 6b, coexpression
of tgif repressed dr1 activity at all time points, whereas the
s28c mutant form of tgif was clearly compromised in its
ability to repress transcription from this reporter. the s28c
mutation in tgif did not affect interaction of tgif with
rxr␣ (fig. 6c), suggesting that the reduced repression is not
due to altered interaction with rxr␣. taken together, these
data suggest that tgif recruits  xxxg540xxx  to rxr␣ to mediate
repression of rxr-dependent transcriptional responses.
disruption of the tgif gene. mutations in human tgif are
associated with hpe (11), and in mice, prenatal exposure to
retinoids causes anterior and neural tube defects as well as
hpe (17, 42). if tgif represses  xxxd3417xxx -regulated gene
expression, its loss would be expected to mimic increased  xxxd3417xxx  signaling. it is therefore possible that tgif mutations contribute to hpe by deregulating  xxxd3417xxx -responsive gene expression. to test whether loss of tgif function
results in increased sensitivity to  xxxd3417xxx , we created a tgif
null mutation in mice. the mouse tgif gene contains three
coding exons with all but the first five codons present in the
final two exons, which are separated by an intron of less than
1 kb (fig. 7a). we therefore decided to replace most of coding
exon 2 and all of exon 3 with sequences for the green fluorescent protein (gfp) and a neomycin resistance marker (fig.
7a). gfp was fused in frame with the ninth codon of the tgif
gene, such that gfp is expressed from the native tgif promoter. targeted 129/svj embryonic stem cells were used to
create tgif mutant mice, and germ line transmission of the
targeted allele was verified by breeding to wild-type c57bl/6j
mice. all three expected genotypes were observed in the offspring obtained by intercrossing two tgif heterozygotes as revealed by pcr assay of tail biopsy dna. analysis of the
wild-type and mutant tgif loci by restriction enzyme digestion
and southern blotting demonstrated that the targeting vector
had integrated correctly, removing coding exons 2 and 3 (fig.
7a and b). to confirm that we had created a null allele, total
rna was isolated from e13.5 embryos from intercrosses of
heterozygous tgif mutants. northern analysis revealed that
tgif mrna was absent from homozygous mutants and was
present at about half the level in the heterozygotes as in the
wild types (fig. 7c). additionally, gfp was observed in a
reciprocal expression pattern. we also tested expression of the
related tgif2 and observed no significant change in expression

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 5. tgif and rxr cocomplexes. (a) cos1 cells were transfected with t7-tagged ⌬af1 rxr␣, ␤, and ␥ constructs with or without flag-tgif. complexes were isolated on flag agarose and analyzed
for coprecipitating t7-tagged rxrs. (b and c) cos1 cells were transfected with expression plasmids encoding t7-tagged rar␣ (b) or
ppar␥ (c), together with t7-rxr␣ ⌬af1 and flag-tgif, as indicated. complexes were collected on flag agarose and analyzed for the
presence of coprecipitating t7-tagged proteins. a portion of the lysates was analyzed by direct western blotting (below). ip, immunoprecipitation; wb, western blotting; ⫹, present.

tgif and rxr

996

bartholin et al.

mol. cell. biol.

level in the mutants at this stage of development. these results
demonstrate that we have created a true null allele of the
murine tgif gene.
we intercrossed heterozygous tgif mutants and analyzed the
frequencies of each genotype in the offspring from these
crosses at postnatal day 21. although there was a slight decrease in the number of heterozygous and homozygous mutants relative to the wild-type littermates, this deviation from
the expected genotype ratios was not statistically significant
(fig. 7d), and we did not observe any defects in tgif mutant
mice. both heterozygous and homozygous tgif mutants appeared normal and were fertile, suggesting that in this mixed
strain background, even homozygous loss of tgif does not
significantly affect viability.
increased expression of retinoid target genes in tgif null
mice. to test whether there was any change in gene expression
in tgif null mice compared to wild types, we first used smallscale nitrocellulose-based dna arrays, containing around 100
genes (ge arrays). since there was no apparent phenotype in
the null mice, we tested embryos as well as several different
tissues from adult mice, including the testis (where tgif expression is relatively high) and liver. of the tissues tested, we
observed the greatest changes in gene expression in the testis,
so we used this tissue for further analysis. the gene which
showed the greatest relative change, and was clearly expressed
in both the wild type and mutant, was  xxxg550xxx , which was
increased 3.1-fold in the mutant compared to the wild type.
however, the arrays used were designed to test a few genes
involved in each of several signaling pathways and did not

include well-characterized ra target genes. we therefore decided to test the expression of several known ra target genes
by real-time reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) (fig. 8a) as
well as to confirm the change in  xxxg550xxx  expression observed with the arrays. using real-time rt-pcr, we observed
about a threefold increase in  xxxg550xxx  expression in the
mutant, confirming the array data. in addition, expression of
rar␤,  xxxg1068xxx , and two stra (stimulated by ra) (38) genes
was increased in the mutant by about twofold (fig. 8a). a
third stra gene tested ( xxxg261xxx ) did not change significantly in
the mutant compared to the wild type. these data suggest that
although there is no obvious phenotype in the tgif null mice,
there is derepression of ra target genes, at least in some
tissues.
to test whether tgif is recruited to the promoter of an ra
target gene, we chose the rar␤ gene, since this has a wellcharacterized  xxxg1057xxx  element (the one used in our  xxxg1057xxx  luciferase reporters), and its expression was increased in the mutant testis. wild-type and mutant mefs were isolated from
e13.5 embryos and passaged three times in culture, and ra
was added for the final 16 h to one-half of each primary mef
culture. chromatin was cross-linked with formaldehyde and
subjected to immunoprecipitation with a tgif-specific antiserum (47) or preimmune serum. following reversal of the
cross-links, dna was analyzed by pcr with oligonucleotides
designed to detect the rar␤ promoter (spanning the  xxxg1057xxx 
rare) or a region of the  xxxg861xxx  promoter. as shown in fig.
8b, tgif was present at the rar␤ promoter in wild-type
mefs cultured without added ra, but this association was

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 6. tgif recruits  xxxg540xxx  to rxr␣. (a) cos1 cells were transfected with expression plasmids encoding t7-tagged rxr␣ ⌬af1 and tgif
(amino acids 1 to 116) and flag-tagged  xxxg540xxx , as indicated. proteins were precipitated on flag agarose and analyzed for the presence of
coprecipitating t7-rxr␣ ⌬af1. a portion of the lysates was analyzed by direct western blotting (below). (b) hepg2 cells were transfected with
a dr1-tata-luc luciferase reporter, and expression vectors encoding rxr␣ and tgif or a mutant form of tgif (s28c), as indicated. 9c-ra
was added for the indicated times prior to analysis. luciferase activity is presented, in arbitrary units, as the mean ⫾ standard deviation of the
results from duplicate transfections. (c) cos1 cells were transfected with t7-rxr␣ ⌬af1 and a control vector or one encoding flag-tgif or
the s28c mutant form of tgif. flag immunoprecipitates were analyzed for the presence of t7-rxr␣ ⌬af1, and expression of transfected
proteins in the lysates is shown below. ip, immunoprecipitation; wb, western blotting; ⫹, present.

vol. 26, 2006

tgif and rxr

997

clearly decreased by the addition of ra. importantly, no signal
was detected in tgif null mefs or in any of the precipitates
using the preimmune serum. additionally, the  xxxg861xxx  signal
was not detected to a significant level in any of the precipitates,
further confirming the specificity of the association of tgif
with the rar␤ promoter. together these data suggest that
tgif is recruited to the rar␤ promoter and that loss of
tgif results in increased expression of ra target genes, including rar␤.
increased sensitivity to  xxxd3417xxx .  xxxd3417xxx  is known
to play an important role in anterior structure patterning and
neural tube development during embryonic development, and
in utero treatment with  xxxd3417xxx  results in defects in anterior structure formation in the embryo (42). based on the
observed repression of  xxxd3417xxx -regulated reporters in cell
culture and the increased expression of ra target genes in
tissues from tgif null mice, we reasoned that the tgif mutant
embryos may be more sensitive to increased levels of retinoic
acid. to test this possibility, we intercrossed tgif heterozygous
mutants and treated the pregnant females with  xxxd3417xxx  at
7.5 days of gestation. embryos were isolated 3 days later and
analyzed for both genotype and gross morphological defects.
we observed defects which fell into three groups: failure of
neural tube closure, developmental arrest, and a reduction of
the fore- and hindbrain. examples of these defects are shown
in fig. 9a. we observed relatively few severe defects in wildtype embryos, and only 31% of all wild-type embryos had any
defect (fig. 9b). in most cases, these were a developmental
delay or brain reduction. both the tgif heterozygous and homozygous mutants exhibited increased rates of retinoid-induced teratogenesis, rising to 60% and 67% of heterozygotes
and homozygotes, respectively (fig. 9b). the rate of exen-

cephaly was greater than 36% and 56% for these genotypes,
whereas only one wild-type embryo (6%) had exencephaly
(fig. 9b and c). taken together, these data demonstrate that
the tgif null embryos are more sensitive to increased levels of
 xxxd3417xxx , suggesting that, during embryonic development,
tgif plays an important role in regulating the magnitude of
the response to  xxxd3417xxx .
discussion
we set out to determine whether tgif regulates normal
development by modulating the response to  xxxd3417xxx  signaling. we show that tgif interacts with rxr␣, recruits the
general corepressor,  xxxg540xxx , and inhibits retinoid responsive
transcription, without the need for a tgif binding site on
dna. in mice, the combination of a tgif null mutation and in
utero exposure to  xxxd3417xxx  results in an increased frequency of developmental defects, and ra target genes are
upregulated in the tgif null animal, even in the absence of
added ra.
tgif as an rxr-specific corepressor. tgif was originally
identified in a screen for proteins which could bind a specific
dr1 rxre from the rat crbpii gene (3). overexpressed
tgif was shown to reduce activation of reporter gene expression in the presence of ra and transfected rxr. the rat and
mouse crbpii rxres have a single 6/7 match to the consensus
tgif binding site, together with four retinoid receptor binding
sites. however, this tgif site is not conserved in the human
crbpii gene, and relatively few retinoid response elements
have adjacent tgif binding sites, suggesting that this is unlikely to be a general regulatory mechanism. importantly,
tgif sites are not found associated with canonical  xxxg1057xxx  reti-

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 7. a tgif null mutation in mice. (a) the targeting vector, tgif locus, and targeted allele are shown, with restriction enzyme sites and
predicted sizes of restriction fragments. coding exons are shown in black, and noncoding exons are shown in gray. the arrows indicate the positions
of pcr primers used for genotype analyses. the hatched gray bar indicates the position of the probe used for southern blotting. (b) genomic dna
from mice of the indicated genotypes was subjected to restriction enzyme digestion and southern blotting. (c) rna from mice of the indicated
genotypes was subjected to northern analysis with probes for tgif, gfp, tgif2, and  xxxg861xxx . (d) heterozygous tgif mutants were intercrossed, and
the genotypes of the offspring at 21 days after birth were determined by pcr from genomic dna. the positions of the pcr primers are indicated
by arrows in panel a. the numbers of mice of each genotype and the percentage of the total are shown, together with the number of litters and
average litter size.

998

bartholin et al.

fig. 8. analysis of endogenous gene expression in tgif null cells.
(a) rna was isolated from wild-type or mutant testes and subjected
to real time rt-pcr analysis. expression of the indicated genes was
analyzed in triplicate together with actin, and results are presented as
expression relative to actin for the wild type and mutant, with expression of each gene arbitrarily set equal to 1 for the wild-type samples.
(b) wild-type or tgif null mouse embryo fibroblasts were treated with
(⫹) or without (⫺) ra for 16 h, as indicated. chromatin was crosslinked with formaldehyde and subjected to immunoprecipitation with
a tgif-specific antiserum (␣-tgif) or the preimmune serum (preimm). precipitates were analyzed by pcr for the presence of a region
of the rar␤ promoter which spans the rare or part of the  xxxg861xxx 
promoter. in addition, the input chromatin samples were analyzed with
the same oligonucleotide pairs.

addition to the rars (16). since tgif was recruited to an
rxr␣-ppar␥ complex by coexpression of rxr␣, it is possible that tgif plays a role in regulating rxr-dependent transcriptional responses other than those activated by retinoids. it
will now be of interest to determine the extent of such regulation by tgif.
tgif and embryonic development. we created a tgif null
mouse to determine the in vivo effects of tgif loss of function.
so far, we have not observed any obvious phenotypic abnormalities, in agreement with the detailed examination of another line of tgif null mice which was recently reported (41). it
is possible that in combination with a second mutation, or
when the mutation is present on a different genetic background, a phenotype will be apparent. however, it should be
noted that a second tgif (tgif2) is present, which may
partially compensate for loss of tgif (26). here we show that,
although our tgif null mice do not have any gross abnormalities, ra target gene expression is increased relative to the wild
type, at least in some tissues. changes in gene expression
observed in whole embryos were relatively small, consistent
with the lack of a developmental phenotype, but by analyzing
several tissues from the adult mice, we were able to demon-

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

noic acid response elements. it has since been shown that
tgif is a transcriptional repressor, which can recruit multiple
general corepressors, such that its recruitment to a dna element would actively repress transcription (27, 40, 48). here we
show that tgif is unable to bind directly to the canonical  xxxg1057xxx 
 xxxd3417xxx  response element but that increased tgif expression represses transcription from both dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  elements. in addition, we show by chromatin immunoprecipitation that endogenous tgif can associate with a region of the
rar␤ promoter which contains the canonical  xxxg1057xxx  element
used in the transcriptional reporters. this suggests that tgif
is a general regulator of ra-responsive gene expression.
we show that tgif interacts with rxr␣, and with rxr␤
and ␥, suggesting that tgif is an rxr transcriptional corepressor. importantly, the interaction of tgif with rxr␣ was
readily detectable with endogenously expressed proteins. the
interaction with tgif is mediated by the rxr␣ lbd, which
in rar␣ is relatively divergent at the primary amino acid level
(rxr␣ and rar␣ share 31% identity over a 187-amino-acid
region of their lbds). we did see some interaction with transfected rar␣, but this was clearly less than that with rxr␣,
and we cannot rule out that this is bridged by endogenous
rxr␣. thus, tgif interacts at least preferentially with rxr.
in support of the idea that rxr bridges or enhances interaction of tgif with other nuclear receptors, we show that coexpression of rxr␣ increases interaction of tgif with both
rar␣ and ppar␥. thus, tgif may target multiple rxrcontaining nuclear receptor complexes via its interaction with
rxr. in our reporter assays, we see specific repression of both
dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  retinoid reporters. the dr1 reporter is more
sensitive to repression by tgif, consistent with the fact that
this is activated by rxr homodimers and not rar/rxr
heterodimers. in contrast, the  xxxg1057xxx  element, which can only be
activated by rar/rxr heterodimers, is less sensitive to repression by tgif. tgif is able to effectively repress the rxrdependent activation of dr1 and  xxxg1057xxx  elements, and it appears that this repression can be at least partially overcome by
increased  xxxd3417xxx  levels, consistent with a retinoid-induced switch from corepressor to coactivator binding.
the interaction of tgif with rxr␣ is sensitive to the
addition of  xxxd3417xxx . within 4 h of the addition of high
levels of  xxxd3417xxx , we observed a clear decrease in the
interaction, and overnight exposure reduced interaction even
more dramatically. similarly, we observed an ra-sensitive association of tgif with the rar␤ promoter in mouse embryo
fibroblasts. again, this fits with a switch in rxr from corepressor to coactivator binding in the presence of ligand. consistent with this, the interaction with rxr␣ is mediated by the
lbd, which undergoes a significant structural alteration in the
presence of ligand (7). it will be of interest to determine where
within the lbd the tgif interaction occurs and how this fits
with structural changes induced by ligand binding. taken together, our data suggest that tgif represses rxr-dependent
transcription and that this repression can be alleviated by  xxxd3417xxx , consistent with a role for tgif as a rxr-specific
corepressor. in this context, we demonstrate that tgif can
recruit  xxxg540xxx  to rxr␣ and that a single point mutation in
tgif, which abolishes interaction with  xxxg540xxx  (27), clearly decreased repression of a retinoid-responsive reporter by tgif.
rxr is a heterodimeric partner for many nuclear receptors, in

mol. cell. biol.

vol. 26, 2006

tgif and rxr

999

strate significant changes in ra target gene expression in the
testis, where tgif expression is high, suggesting that in vivo,
tgif can regulate ra-responsive gene expression. to examine the potential importance of the regulation of retinoid signaling by tgif in embryogenesis, we treated embryos with
teratogenic doses of ra. tgif null embryos are more sensitive
to treatment in utero with  xxxd3417xxx , further suggesting that,
in vivo, tgif is an important regulator of  xxxd3417xxx  signaling. a similar analysis of ra teratogenesis in tgif mutant
embryos (41) did not reveal any difference in defects between
heterozygous and homozygous tgif mutant embryos. our data
are not in significant conflict with this, as we did not observe a
dramatic difference between the rate of defects in heterozygous and homozygous mutants. however, the frequency of
defects and, particularly, of exencephaly was clearly greater in
both heterozygotes and homozygotes than in the wild-type
embryos, suggesting that loss of even one copy of tgif can
sensitize an embryo to excess ra. since in the absence of
added ra, we do not see a significant level of defects in the
tgif null mice in this strain background, we suggest that loss of
tgif results in a small but significant increase in  xxxd3417xxx 
signaling in the embryo. in the presence of a second mutation,
or environmental insult, this may result in developmental defects, either by further increasing the response to ra or by
affecting a second pathway which regulates similar developmental processes. however, since loss of tgif appears to
sensitize mice to ra signaling, it is possible that, in combination with mutations in other pathways, this could contribute to
developmental defects, including hpe.
hpe is a prevalent human disorder affecting craniofacial
development, in which the primary defect is a failure of the
ventral forebrain to divide correctly. the causes of hpe are
complex and can be both genetic and environmental (36, 45).
from the diversity of mutations associated with hpe, it ap-

pears that several developmental pathways are important for
this disease. mutations which cause hpe show incomplete
penetrance, suggesting that a single genetic lesion is not
enough to cause the disease. hpe may be caused by a combination of two or more mutations or possibly the interplay of a
predisposing mutation with environmental factors. interestingly, there is some evidence for the polygenic nature of hpe
in humans. two hpe patients with shh mutations were also
shown to have mutations of tgif. both had at least one
phenotypically normal parent who had only a shh mutation
but was wild type for tgif, suggesting that it is the combination of shh and tgif mutations that causes hpe (28). the
tgif mutants described here, or by shen and walsh (41), do not
exhibit hpe, even when the mutation is in the homozygous
state. it is noteworthy that despite the association of heterozygous shh mutations with hpe in humans, heterozygous shh
mutations do not cause hpe in mice (6). thus, for both tgif
and shh, the genetic lesion which causes the human disease
does not do so in mice. however, unlike tgif, homozygous shh
null mutations cause hpe in mice. interestingly, even the
combination of a tgif mutation and a heterozygous mutation in
shh did not appear to dramatically affect viability (41), suggesting that, at least in mice, these two mutations do not
synergize.
the best characterized role of tgif is as a transcriptional
corepressor of tgf-␤-activated, smad-dependent gene expression (47). in response to tgf-␤, an activated smad complex can interact with transcriptional corepressors, such as
tgif, c-ski or snon, which displace coactivators and limit the
extent of transcriptional activation (49). there is evidence for
a role for tgf-␤ signaling pathways in hpe. for example,
mice with heterozygous deletions of both  xxxg2169xxx  and nodal or
of  xxxg2169xxx  and  xxxg2170xxx , which result in decreased tgf-␤ responses, have craniofacial defects similar to hpe (20, 30).

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

fig. 9.  xxxd3417xxx  teratogenesis in tgif mutant embryos. pregnant females, from heterozygous intercrosses, were treated with  xxxd3417xxx 
at gestational day 7.5. embryos were examined for developmental defects at e10.5. (a) embryos representative of each defect are shown. a normal
wild type embryo and a homozygous mutant with exencephaly (severe open neural tube) are shown above. below are three heterozygous mutants,
one with a reduced fore and hind brain (left) and normal and arrested littermates (right). (b) the percentage of defective embryos (all defects)
of each tgif genotype is shown, together with the percentage with exencephaly. the total number of embryos of each genotype analyzed is shown
below. (c) the numbers of embryos with each defect and the numbers of normal embryos are shown for each tgif genotype. defects: fb ⫹ hb,
reduced fore and hind brain; arrest, severe developmental arrest or delay; exenc, exencephaly.

1000

bartholin et al.

acknowledgments
we thank j. massagué, a. e. sutherland, f. rastinejad, and l. f.
pemberton for critical reading of the manuscript. we thank r. m.
evans and a. yen for providing rar and rxr cdnas, d. mangelsdorf for the rxr␤ and ␥ cdnas, and c. rochette-egly for the
rxr␣-specific antibody. we thank m. w. mayo for advice on chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis.
this work was supported in part by research grant no. 1-fy01-243
from the march of dimes (to d.w.) and in part by a grant from the
nih, hd39926 (to d.w.).
references
1. allenby, g., r. janocha, s. kazmer, j. speck, j. f. grippo, and a. a. levin.
1994. binding of 9- xxxd2404xxx  and  xxxd3417xxx  to  xxxd3417xxx 
receptors alpha, beta, and gamma.  xxxg1933xxx  binds
 xxxd3417xxx  preferentially over 9- xxxd2404xxx . j. biol. chem.
269:16689–16695.
2. bastien, j., and c. rochette-egly. 2004. nuclear retinoid receptors and the
transcription of retinoid-target genes. gene 328:1–16.
3. bertolino, e., b. reimund, d. wildt-perinic, and r. clerc. 1995. a novel
homeobox protein which recognizes a tgt core and functionally interferes
with a retinoid-responsive motif. j. biol. chem. 270:31178–31188.
4. burglin, t. r. 1997. analysis of tale superclass homeobox genes (meis,
pbc, knox, iroquois, tgif) reveals a novel domain conserved between
plants and animals. nucleic acids res. 25:4173–4180.

5. chambon, p. 1996. a decade of molecular biology of  xxxd3417xxx  receptors.
faseb j. 10:940–954.
6. chiang, c., y. litingtung, e. lee, k. e. young, j. l. corden, h. westphal,
and p. a. beachy. 1996. cyclopia and defective axial patterning in mice
lacking  xxxg2067xxx  gene function. nature 383:407–413.
7. egea, p. f., a. mitschler, n. rochel, m. ruff, p. chambon, and d. moras.
2000. crystal structure of the human rxralpha ligand-binding domain
bound to its natural ligand: 9-cis  xxxd3417xxx . embo j. 19:2592–2601.
8. gehring, w. j., m. affolter, and t. burglin. 1994. homeodomain proteins.
annu. rev. biochem. 63:487–526.
9. glass, c. k., and m. g. rosenfeld. 2000. the coregulator exchange in
transcriptional functions of nuclear receptors. genes dev. 14:121–141.
10. golden, j. a. 1998. holoprosencephaly: a defect in brain patterning. j. neuropathol. exp.  xxxd122xxx . 57:991–999.
11. gripp, k. w., d. wotton, m. c. edwards, e. roessler, l. ades, p. meinecke,
a. richieri-costa, e. h. zackai, j. massague, m. muenke, and s. j. elledge.
2000. mutations in tgif cause holoprosencephaly and link nodal signalling to human neural axis determination. nat. genet. 25:205–208.
12. hayhurst, m., and s. k. mcconnell. 2003. mouse models of holoprosencephaly. curr. opin.  xxxd122xxx . 16:135–141.
13. heldin, c.-h., k. miyazono, and p. ten dijke. 1997. tgf-␤ signalling from
cell membrane to nucleus through smad proteins. nature 390:465–471.
14. heyman, r. a., d. j. mangelsdorf, j. a. dyck, r. b. stein, g. eichele, r. m.
evans, and c. thaller. 1992. 9-cis  xxxd3417xxx  is a high affinity ligand for the
retinoid x receptor. cell 68:397–406.
15. hoberg, j. e., f. yeung, and m. w. mayo. 2004. smrt derepression by the
 xxxg463xxx  alpha: a prerequisite to  xxxg1559xxx  transcription and survival. mol. cell 16:245–255.
16. khorasanizadeh, s., and f. rastinejad. 2001. nuclear-receptor interactions
on dna-response elements. trends biochem. sci. 26:384–390.
17. lammer, e. j., d. t. chen, r. m. hoar, n. d. agnish, p. j. benke, j. t.
braun, c. j. curry, p. m. fernhoff, a. w. grix, jr., i. t. lott, et al. 1985.
 xxxd3417xxx  embryopathy. n. engl. j. med. 313:837–841.
18. leid, m., p. kastner, r. lyons, h. nakshatri, m. saunders, t. zacharewski,
j. y. chen, a. staub, j. m. garnier, s. mader, et al. 1992. purification,
cloning, and rxr identity of the hela cell factor with which rar or tr
heterodimerizes to bind target sequences efficiently. cell 68:377–395.
19. levin, a. a., l. j. sturzenbecker, s. kazmer, t. bosakowski, c. huselton, g.
allenby, j. speck, c. kratzeisen, m. rosenberger, a. lovey, et al. 1992. 9-cis
 xxxd3417xxx  stereoisomer binds and activates the nuclear receptor rxr
alpha. nature 355:359–361.
20. liu, y., m. festing, j. c. thompson, m. hester, s. rankin, h. m. el-hodiri,
a. m. zorn, and m. weinstein. 2004.  xxxg2169xxx  and  xxxg2170xxx  coordinately regulate craniofacial and endodermal development. dev. biol. 270:411–426.
21. massagué, j. 1998. tgf␤ signal transduction. annu. rev. biochem. 67:753–
791.
22. massagué, j., a. hata, and f. liu. 1997. tgf␤ signaling through the smad
pathway. trends cell biol. 7:187–192.
23. massagué, j., and d. wotton. 2000. transcriptional control by the  xxxg2269xxx /smad signaling system. embo j. 19:1745–1754.
24. mcginnis, w., r. l. garber, j. wirz, a. kuroiwa, and w. j. gehring. 1984.
a homologous protein-coding sequence in drosophila homeotic genes and
its conservation in other metazoans. cell 37:403–408.
25. mcginnis, w., m. s. levine, e. hafen, a. kuroiwa, and w. j. gehring. 1984.
a conserved dna sequence in homoeotic genes of the drosophila antennapedia and bithorax complexes. nature 308:428–433.
26. melhuish, t. a., c. m. gallo, and d. wotton. 2001. tgif2 interacts with
 xxxg1033xxx  and represses transcription. j. biol. chem. 276:32109–
32114.
27. melhuish, t. a., and d. wotton. 2000. the interaction of c-terminal binding
protein with the smad corepressor tg-interacting factor is disrupted by a
holoprosencephaly mutation in tgif. j. biol. chem. 275:39762–39766.
28. ming, j. e., and m. muenke. 2002. multiple hits during early embryonic
development: digenic diseases and holoprosencephaly. am. j. hum. genet.
71:1017–1032.
29. muenke, m., and p. a. beachy. 2000. genetics of ventral forebrain development and holoprosencephaly. curr. opin. genet. dev. 10:262–269.
30. nomura, m., and e. li. 1998.  xxxg2169xxx  role in mesoderm formation, left-right
patterning and craniofacial development. nature 393:786–790.
31. passner, j. m., h. d. ryoo, l. shen, r. s. mann, and a. k. aggarwal. 1999.
structure of a dna-bound ultrabithorax-extradenticle homeodomain complex. nature 397:714–719.
32. pavri, r., b. lewis, t. k. kim, f. j. dilworth, h. erdjument-bromage, p.
tempst, g. de murcia, r. evans, p. chambon, and d. reinberg. 2005.
 xxxg1667xxx  determines specificity in a retinoid signaling pathway via direct
modulation of mediator. mol. cell 18:83–96.
33. pendaries, v., f. verrecchia, s. michel, and a. mauviel. 2003.  xxxd3417xxx 
receptors interfere with the tgf-beta/smad signaling pathway in a ligandspecific manner. oncogene 22:8212–8220.
34. piper, d. e., a. h. batchelor, c.-p. chang, m. l. cleary, and c. wolberger.
1999. structure of a  xxxg1068xxx -pbx1 heterodimer bound to dna: role of the

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

since tgif is a smad corepressor, any model in which loss of
tgif causes hpe by affecting tgf-␤ signaling is to some degree contradictory to the finding that mutations which decrease tgf-␤ signaling also cause hpe. our results demonstrate that tgif represses retinoid signaling in vivo and that
loss of tgif sensitizes embryos to neural tube defects. we
suggest, therefore, that human tgif mutations contribute to
hpe by altering retinoid-regulated transcription. loss of a
repressor of retinoid signaling and exposure to excess retinoic
acid would be expected to have similar outcomes. in contrast,
it is decreased activation of the tgf-␤ pathway, not increased
activation, as would be expected with loss of tgif, that contributes to hpe. an interaction of rar␥ with  xxxg2170xxx  has been
reported, and rar overexpression was shown to increase the
transcriptional activity of smad complexes, suggesting a smad
coactivator function for rars (33). since tgif plays roles in
both tgf-␤ and retinoid signaling, it is possible that its role is
to regulate cross talk between these pathways. we have, however, so far been unable to demonstrate a specific effect of
tgif on the interaction of these transcriptional regulatory
pathways. it is also possible that tgif might affect other
points of cross talk between the smad proteins and rxrcontaining nuclear receptor complexes, such as the cooperative
action of rxr-vdr heterodimers and the smads (50). however, we have been unable to demonstrate the formation of a
smad-tgif-rxr cocomplex. we therefore suggest that
tgif is a transcriptional corepressor for both tgf-␤-activated smads and rxr-containing nuclear receptor complexes
but that it plays predominantly independent roles in each of
these pathways.
in summary, we have demonstrated that a tgif mutation, in
combination with prenatal exposure to  xxxd3417xxx , causes
defects in neural tube development. our results suggest a role
for tgif as a general inhibitor of  xxxd3417xxx -regulated gene
expression during embryogenesis, and we show that tgif can
specifically repress rxr-dependent transcriptional activation
via retinoid response elements. these data suggest that mutations in tgif, which cause hpe in humans, may do so by
disrupting ra signaling.

mol. cell. biol.

vol. 26, 2006

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

43.

44.

45.
46.

47.
48.

49.
50.

51.

1001

warman. 2000. preparation of pcr-quality mouse genomic dna with hot
sodium hydroxide and tris (hotshot). biotechniques 29:52, 54.
umesono, k., k. k. murakami, c. c. thompson, and r. m. evans. 1991.
direct repeats as selective response elements for the thyroid hormone,
 xxxd3417xxx , and  xxxd1682xxx  receptors. cell 65:1255–1266.
wallis, d. e., and m. muenke. 1999. molecular mechanisms of holoprosencephaly. mol. genet. metab. 68:126–138.
wotton, d., p. s. knoepfler, c. d. laherty, r. n. eisenman, and j. massague. 2001. the smad transcriptional corepressor tgif recruits msin3.
cell growth differ. 12:457–463.
wotton, d., r. s. lo, s. lee, and j. massague. 1999. a smad transcriptional
corepressor. cell 97:29–39.
wotton, d., r. s. lo, l. a. swaby, and j. massague. 1999. multiple modes
of repression by the smad transcriptional corepressor tgif. j. biol. chem.
274:37105–37110.
wotton, d., and j. massague. 2001. smad transcriptional corepressors in
tgf beta family signaling. curr. top. microbiol. immunol. 254:145–164.
yanagisawa, j., y. yanagi, y. masuhiro, m. suzawa, m. watanabe, k.
kashiwagi, t. toriyabe, m. kawabata, k. miyazono, and s. kato. 1999.
convergence of transforming growth factor-beta and  xxxd1682xxx   xxxd2019xxx  signaling
pathways on smad transcriptional coactivators. science 283:1317–1321.
zhang, y., and r. derynck. 1999. regulation of smad signaling by protein
associations and signaling crosstalk. trends cell biol. 9:274–279.

downloaded from http://mcb.asm.org/ on april 14, 2015 by guest

42.

hexapeptide and a fourth homeodomain helix in complex formation. cell
96:587–597.
rastinejad, f. 2001. retinoid x receptor and its partners in the nuclear
receptor family. curr. opin. struct. biol. 11:33–38.
roessler, e., and m. muenke. 1998. holoprosencephaly: a paradigm for the
complex genetics of brain development. j. inherit. metab. dis. 21:481–497.
rubenstein, j. l., and p. a. beachy. 1998. patterning of the embryonic
forebrain. curr. opin. neurobiol. 8:18–26.
sapin, v., p. bouillet, m. oulad-abdelghani, b. dastugue, p. chambon, and
p. dolle. 2000. differential expression of  xxxd3417xxx -inducible (stra) genes
during mouse placentation. mech. dev. 92:295–299.
seo, s. r., f. lallemand, n. ferrand, m. pessah, s. l’hoste, j. camonis, and
a. atfi. 2004. the novel e3 ubiquitin ligase tiul1 associates with tgif to
target  xxxg2169xxx  for degradation. embo j. 23:3780–3792.
sharma, m., and z. sun. 2001. 5⬘tg3⬘ interacting factor interacts with
sin3a and represses ar-mediated transcription. mol. endocrinol. 15:1918–
1928.
shen, j., and c. a. walsh. 2005. targeted disruption of tgif, the mouse
ortholog of a human holoprosencephaly gene, does not result in holoprosencephaly in mice. mol. cell. biol. 25:3639–3647.
sulik, k. k., d. b. dehart, j. m. rogers, and n. chernoff. 1995. teratogenicity of low doses of all- xxxd3417xxx  in presomite mouse embryos.
teratology 51:398–403.
truett, g. e., p. heeger, r. l. mynatt, a. a. truett, j. a. walker, and m. l.

tgif and rxr

