 2006 by the société internationale de chirurgie
published online: 7 february 2006

world j surg (2006) 30: 909–916
doi: 10.1007/s00268-005-0347-8

bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopic cushing’s
syndrome—discussions on technique and
indication
per hellman, md, phd,1 fredrik linder, md,1 joakim hennings, md,1
ola hessman, md, phd,1 barbro eriksson, md, phd,2 håkan örlefors, md, phd,2
göran åkerström, md,  xxxg684xxx 
1
2

department of surgery, university hospital, se-751 85 uppsala, sweden
department of oncologic endocrinology, university hospital, se-751 85 uppsala, sweden

abstract
background: tumors producing  xxxg1801xxx  (acth) or corticotropin releasing
hormone (crh) often remain undiagnosed until severe cushing’s syndrome appears, and it may
be difficult to distinguish from cushing’s syndrome due to pituitary tumors. many patients suffer
from disease spread, with metastases in the liver or other locations, and the main symptoms may
be mineral disturbances, diabetes mellitus, or psychological symptoms from the severe hypercortisolism. bilateral adrenalectomy may alleviate this situation, but is sometimes a troublesome
procedure in these severely ill patients.
methods: we have retrospectively investigated 8 patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome who
have undergone bilateral adrenalectomy at the university hospital in uppsala. in addition, another
5 patients who underwent bilateral adrenalectomy for other reasons (recurrent pituitary mb
cushing or bilateral hyperplasia) were scrutinized for technical considerations. indications, timing
of surgery, and operative procedures were studied to identify signs that may support our approach
to management in the future.
results: curative surgery was not possible in any of the cases with ectopic cushing’s syndrome. of
the 13 operated patients, handport-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy was successfully performed bilaterally in 5 patients and unilaterally in combination with contralateral open surgery in 1
patient; conventional open surgery was performed on 7 patients, 3 of which were conversions from
intitial handport-assisted procedures. non-fatal complications occurred in 4 out of 10 patients.
conclusions: we conclude that bilateral handport-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy is safe,
and that all surgical techniques in these severely ill patients may be troublesome and technically
demanding. early surgical intervention may reduce the technical disadvantages. moreover,
bilateral adrenalectomy can substantially reduce the symptoms of cushing’s syndrome, although
effects on mortality are not obvious.

e

xcess cortisol production is usually associated with
 xxxg1801xxx  (acth)-producing

correspondence to: per hellman, md, phd, department of surgery,
university hospital, se-751 85 uppsala, sweden, e-mail: per.hellman@
surgsci.uu.se

pituitary tumors or hyperplasia, adenomas, or carcinomas
in the adrenal glands. in the 1960s it was discovered that
extrapituitary tumors could produce acth and also
cause hypercortisolism.1 this derangement was named
ectopic cushing’s syndrome, and it constitutes about

910

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

10% of all cases with hypercortisolism due to tumor production. several different types of extrapituitary tumors
have been found to cause an ectopic cushing’s syndrome, by production of acth, or corticotropin releasing
hormone (crh). the most common origin is small cell
lung cancer (sclc);2 other causes have been endocrine
pancreatic tumors, bronchial or thymic carcinoids, gastrointestinal carcinoids or medullary thyroid cancer.
rarely, the syndrome has been caused by pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma, renal carcinoma, or colorectal
cancer.3
to establish a diagnosis of ectopic cushing’s syndrome, four criteria are needed: clinical signs of cushing’s syndrome, high levels of cortisol in serum and urine,
increased levels of acth in plasma, and the exclusion
that symptoms and signs are due to a pituitary lesion.4 a
sinus petrosus venous sampling may be required to
completely exclude pituitary disease. in addition, other
signs that have been proposed for a definite diagnosis
are (1) clinical improvement after surgical resection of the
tumor, (2) arteriovenous gradient across the tumor, and
(3) immunohistochemical or mrna evidence of acth
secretion from tumor cells.4
in most cases the acth- or crh-producing tumor can
be found, but may only rarely be resected to reach cure and
normocortisolism. cases where the primary tumor cannot
be detected also exist, and such circumstances may be
denoted occult ectopic cushing’s syndrome. ectopic
cushing’s syndrome is often associated with spread and
incurable tumor disease, with a characteristically high
proliferation rate and low differentiation features. if curative
surgery is not possible, palliation by reducing the cortisol
levels is important, and this can be achieved either by
medical or surgical treatment. medical treatment involves
drugs with adrenolytic effects or chemotherapy to reduce
growth and induce apoptosis. surgical treatment will generally have to focus on removal of the target organs by
bilateral adrenalectomy. because of the severity and rarity
of the disease, there are few reported series documenting
treatment outcomes,4–6 and there have been no randomized trials. moreover, the technique for adrenalectomy has
developed over the last decade, and laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the gold standard for unilateral
adrenalectomy, at least for tumors measuring less than 6
cm.7–9 laparoscopy is also increasingly proposed for removal of bilateral adrenal tumors.
in the present study we have reviewed those patients
subjected to bilateral adrenalectomy for hypercortisolism
and have studied indications for surgery as well as
different surgical techniques and technical problems
associated with this metabolic abnormality.

methods
patients
eight patients were identified with obvious ectopic
cushing’s syndrome and another 5 with classical pituitary cushing and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia associated with hypercortisolism. all have undergone bilateral
adrenalectomy. the mean age of this group was 55 – 6
years.
the patients with ectopic cushing had immunohistochemically and radiologically proven sclc (n = 3),
endocrine pancreatic tumors (n = 4), and thymic carcinoid (n = 1). one patient initially underwent a pancreatic
resection, which demonstrated a low differentiated and
highly proliferative (ki-67 index 15%–20%) endocrine
pancreatic tumor; another patient underwent a simultaneous pancreatic resection demonstrating a 3-cm endocrine tumor in the pancreatic tail with a ki-67 index of
10%–12%. the patients with sclc all demonstrated a
high ki-67 proliferation index (20%–50%) after biopsy of
the lung tumor. the patient with thymic carcinoid had
undergone operation for resection of the primary tumor 4
years previously, but disease recurrence was marked by
ovarian, breast, and pulmonary metastases. biopsies
demonstrated histopathology similar to the thymic tumor,
but with higher ki-67 index (10%–15%). chemotherapy
was initiated with  xxxd437xxx  and  xxxd2068xxx , but there was a
negative response, and a progressive hypercortisolism
followed.
all patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome had high
serum acth levels 3–30 times above the upper reference limit, severe hypokalemia (1.9–3.5 mmol/l), and
metabolic alkalosis. serum cortisol levels were 10–20
times higher than the upper reference limit in all patients
without diurnal variation. preoperative 24-hour urinary
cortisol (du-cortisol) ranged from 1200 to 32,545 nmol/h
(normal range 3–15 nmol/h). moreover, they all had disease spread with multiple liver metastases and in most
cases also other metastases as well. one patient indicating a pituitary tumor had a suspicious acth-gradient
on sinus petrosus sampling, and also underwent
hypophysectomy. at operation, however, there were no
signs of an acth-producing tumor or of alleviation of
hypercortisolism. biopsies of known primary tumor or
metastases demonstrated no immunhistochemical evidence of acth staining in any of the patients. one
patient was immunohistochemically positive for crh, but
revealed only minute levels of crh in serum, in conjunction with high acth levels. no patient had radiological signs of a sellar tumor.

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

911

surgery

figure 1. computed tomography demonstrating a left hyperplastic adrenal gland (arrow at ‘‘a’’) as well as a distal endocrine
pancreatic tumor (arrow at ‘‘p’’) producing adrenocorticotropic
hormone (acth).

all patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome were
initially medically treated with the aim of blocking cortisol production to achieve a stable metabolic situation
that would allow chemotherapy. thus, adrenolytic drugs
(ketoconazole,  xxxd2656xxx ,  xxxd147xxx ,  xxxd2633xxx , or somatostatin analog) were given. three of the
8 patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome reached a
metabolic situation allowing chemotherapy (cisplatin,
 xxxd437xxx ,  xxxd2068xxx ), including normalization of serum
cortisol and potassium, whereas the other 5 had to
undergo bilateral adrenalectomy before we could consider chemotherapy. in the 8 patients with ectopic
cushing’s syndrome, adrenalectomy was performed to
offer palliation with the effort to prolong survival despite
the critical situation. preoperative imaging included a
ct scan for visualization of the adrenal glands (fig. 1).
the 5 additional patients who underwent bilateral
adrenalectomy for hypercortisolism either had primary
bilateral adrenal nodular hyperplasia (n = 3) or pituitary
cushing’s disease. in the two patients with pituitary
cushing’s disease, treatment with hypophysectomy and
postoperative radiation had failed (n = 2). the hypercortisolism in these 5 patients was less severe (serum cortisol raised 5–10 times above upper reference limit), and
treatment with cortisol production blocking agents was
more successful. however, the medical therapy also
gave rise to unwanted side effects, which supported the
choice of surgery as definitive therapy.

bilateral adrenalectomy was performed with both the
open access, laparoscopic transabdominal technique and
the handport-assisted transabdominal laparoscopic
technique. although medical treatment failed to normalize
cortisol levels in 5 patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome, it was maintained for preoperative optimization of
the patient’s fluid and electrolyte balance, nutrition, and
coagulation status.
experiences from open adrenal surgery has been used
to improve the technique of handport-assisted laparoscopic surgery in which the patient was placed in a supine
position, slightly hyperextended with supporting pillows
under the left flank, which is generally chosen as the site
of initial exploration. the patient was leaned at 30 degrees towards the surgeon, positioned on the contra-lateral side. together with the supporting cushion, this
position allows good access to the upper left abdominal
area. the handport incision was placed transversely to
the right of the midline, above the umbilicus (fig. 2).
previous attempts at handport-assisted unilateral adrenalectomy on the left or right sides have demonstrated
that proper placement of this port was crucial for surgery
mainly on the right side, whereas many different positions
are possible for the left-sided handport-assisted surgery.
thus, it is important to allow lateral traction of the right
adrenal gland by the introduced hand, allowing safe dissection between the medial adrenal border and the inferior caval vein. the length of the incision for the handport
should equal the width of the surgeon’s wrist. after
insertion of the left hand, a troacar is placed below the left
costal margin with internal tactile control, and pneumoperitoneum is applied (fig. 3).
left-sided adrenalectomy with handport assistance
may be performed via two different accesses: either the
left colonic flexure is detached and mobilized medially, or
the lesser sac is entered. the first approach is similar to
the one regularly performed in transabdominal laparoscopy with the patient in a lateral position, by lowering the
left colon flexure and detaching the lateral attachments
between the spleen and the abdominal wall to allow the
spleen to fall to the right. the tail of the pancreas is also
mobilized by this maneuver. the left adrenal is found in
the area cranial to the renal vein, lateral to the mobilized
pancreas and spleen, and on the medial-upper corner of
the left kidney.
in the second approach, the lesser sac is reached by
opening the greater omentum with ultrasonic shears
allowing fast and secure division of small vessels. the
introduced left hand may also lift the greater omentum,

912

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

figure 2. planned incisions for bilateral handport-assisted
laparsocopic adrenalectomy. 1: incision for handport (60–85
mm); 2: troacar for liver retractor (10–12 mm); 3: troacar
for camera (10 mm); 4: troacars for laparoscopic instruments
(10–12 mm).

allowing access into the lesser sac through the avascular
plane underneath the omentum. the inferior border of the
pancreas is visualized and the peritoneum around it was
opened. thereafter blunt dissection makes it easy to lift
the tail of the pancreas to reach the adrenal gland, which
in this setting is done with the left hand.
handport-assisted right-sided laparoscopic adrenalectomy is performed in much the same way as a transabdominal laparoscopic procedure with the patient in a
lateral position, but with the patient angled at about 45
degrees. this is achieved by tilting the table approximately 30 degrees and placing a cushion under the patient’s right flank. mobilization of the liver is the initial
maneuver and is performed by removing the lateral
attachments between the right liver lobe and the diaphragm, and continuing below the liver, between the
inferior liver border and the dorsal peritoneal sheet. the
right adrenal is usually found underneath this plane.
identification of the inferior caval vein and the duodenum
is crucial to finding the area within which to dissect.
during this dissection the right hand may be introduced
via the handport, to grasp the adrenal gland and lift it
upward and medially to allow dissection on the lateral

figure 3. handport (ethicon) allowing application of pneumoperitoneum.

border, and upward and laterally to allow dissection along
the caval vein. placement of the handport in the midline
will, in our experience, make the right-sided exploration
difficult, and we have adjusted the incision to be higher
and more to the right of the abdomen. with this adjustment the hand approaches the right adrenal slightly more
from above, making especially the lateral traction for the
caval dissection easier. in addition, the hand can be kept
in place in case of accidental injury to the caval vein,
allowing easy compression and time for planning the
most efficient repair. an additional troacar to be used as a
liver retractor may be introduced in the upper midline.

results
eight patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome were
operated on. in all cases surgery was indicated because
of difficulties in managing the severe metabolic condition.
the patients had continuous hypokalemia, alkalosis,
hypertension, progressive hyperglycemia, bleeding ulcer,
hypoalbuminemia, massive edema, and, frequently,
confusion. after adrenalectomy, four of the eight patients
had obvious improvement, with metabolic stabilization
allowing initiation (or continuation) of chemotherapy.

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

adrenal surgery
the eight patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome
were operated by different methods. one operation began with transabdominal laparoscopy but was converted
to open surgery because of massive enlargement of a
metastatic liver and marked inflammation of the periadrenal fat on both sides, which bled easily. in addition to
the problem of a large, tense, and heavy liver, the organ
was also stuck to the surrounding tissue by tight adherences. this patient was preoperatively in very bad condition and never improved postoperatively and died 1
week later in general organ failure. two patients underwent operation with handport-assisted laparoscopic surgery. the pre- and postoperative course was uneventful,
and the cortisol levels normalized in both cases. one of
these patients died 3 months postoperatively due to
progression of metastases from the acth-producing
small cell lung cancer, but with low cortisol levels. the
other patient had an endocrine pancreatic tumor that had
spread to the liver. the liver metastases are being treated
with repeated percutaneous ultrasound-guided radiofrequency (rf) ablation, and the patient has a controlled
disease with cortisol substitution therapy 5 years after
adrenalectomy.
one patient underwent handport-assisted laparoscopic
adrenalectomy on the left side, but the procedure was
converted to open technique on the right side because
severe adherences, an enlarged liver containing numerous metastases, and thickened perinephric fat. the
postoperative course included aspiration pneumonia,
sepsis, intestinal perforation treated with reoperation, and
sigmoideostomy and another reoperation due to bleeding. the serum cortisol was normalized 2 weeks postoperatively.
another operation began with the handport-assisted
technique but was converted to complete open bilateral
adrenalectomy because tense fat surrounded the kidneys, exhibiting fragile vessels causing numerous small
areas of bleeding, as well as difficult dissection through
the tense and heavy tissues. in addition, the liver contained high levels of fat and was massively enlarged,
covering the area of the right adrenal; it was extremely
difficult to lift anteriorly with laparoscopic instruments or
with the introduced hand, making it difficult to gain better
access to the area.
three patients underwent operation with a planned
open technique. in two of them, the per- and postoperative course was uneventful, and serum cortisol levels
were normalized. one of these two patients simultaneously underwent a left-sided pancreatic resection for a

913

pancreatic tumor. the third patient had an uneventful
peroperative course, but a troublesome postoperative
period, with continuing electrolyte abnormalitites including hypokalemia, even though complete bilateral adrenalectomy was performed. this patient died 1 month later
from progressive disease.
the five patients with classical pituitary cushing or
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia underwent operation with
the handport-assisted laparoscopic technique (n = 3),
initial handport-assisted technique but conversion to open
surgery (n = 1), and only open surgery (n = 1). in every
case the cortisol level was normalized and the patients
are free of symptoms at follow-up (1–5 years).
thus, altogether five patients were successfully treated
with handport-assisted bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy, three with intended open surgery, and the
remaining four patients were converted to open operations from either pure or handport-assisted laparoscopic
surgery.
histopathological examination of the adrenal glands
demonstrated hyperplastic cortical tissue, and in one
case several adrenal metastases of this patient’s lung
carcinoma were identified (fig. 4).

discussion
our results highlight some management problems in
patients with severe cushing and bilateral adrenal disease. patients with cushing’s syndrome will be subjected
to careful investigations to exclude the presence of a
pituitary tumor and to reveal histopathology and location
of the tumor disease causing the syndrome. the diagnosis of the acth-producing tumor may be difficult, and
biochemical and immunohistochemical measurements
can be difficult to interpret. thus, in our material none of
the patients had signs of tumoral acth expression at
immunostaining, possibly due to rapid synthesis and
secretion mechanisms, as seen in other endocrine tumors. although the serum acth was high in our patients,
other peptides may also cause hypercortisolism, such as
acth-like peptides or secreted acth precursors.10,11
after diagnosis, the initial aims are generally to alleviate
the metabolic abnormalities of hypokalemia, alkalosis,
catabolism, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperglycemia that
follow on the increased cortisol levels. resection of the
tumor disease is considered for differentiated lesions.
the current patients with ectopic cushing’s syndrome all
had severe disease with markedly deranged metabolic
parameters, which were difficult to manage medically,
and adrenalectomy was therefore more or less urgently

914

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

figure 4. (a)hematoxylin-eosin staining of hyperplastic
adrenal gland including metastatic nodule of pulmonary
carcinoma (arrow) producing acth. (b)hematoxylineosin staining of hyperplastic adrenal gland.

required. during our survey we noted that not all patients
with ectopic cushing have undergone adrenalectomy, (1)
because limited disease made it possible to remove the
primary tumor so that adrenal surgery was unnecessary
(2) because the disease progression was so rapid that
operation was not feasible, or (3) because it was possible
with medical treatment to achieve metabolic control and
prerequisites for chemotherapy which also led to tumor
regression. therefore, the present case material is severely selected toward the most diseased patients, where
curative surgery is impossible.
although several causes for ectopic cushing’s syndrome exist, sclc is the most common, and it is also one
of the most aggressive variants; sclc in combination
with cushing’s syndrome has an especially poor prognosis.1,12 bronchial carcinoids seem to have a somewhat

better prognosis compared to other tumors.4,5 in our
series, patients underwent bilateral adrenalectomy if
adrenolytic treatment failed to achieve a metabolically
stable situation. on the other hand, the trauma caused by
surgery often delays initiation of chemotherapy. the
present series also underscore the high complication rate
within this group of patients. thus, indications for and
timing of surgery are difficult to establish, and surgical
intervention is ideally considered when cortisol secretion
blockage is successful and metabolic derangements adjusted. it has to be kept in mind that the medical treatment
regimes are hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic, and a controlled situation may become worse if treatment with
adrenolytic drugs is continued. the patients in the present study were severely ill with deranged electrolyte and
glucose levels, and they may have had marginal liver and

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

renal function difficult to manage in terms of anesthesia,
pain control, and postoperative treatment. the substitution therapy needed after bilateral adrenalectomy may be
more troublesome in these patients because of the extremely high preoperative cortisol levels. other studies,
demonstrating stable conditions and long survival after
adrenalectomy, may have treated groups of patients different from ours.4–6
the worst situation with progressive disease and bad
response to medical therapy is difficult to manage. in one
of our cases with unfavorable outcome adrenalectomy
was probably applied too late; therefore our current policy
is to liberally propose this procedure if the condition is not
easily controlled medically.
the indications for surgery in the five patients not suffering from ectopic cushing’s syndrome were more or
less similar, although these patients had a much more
benign course of their disease. bilateral adrenalectomy
was recommended because they did not have malignant
disease, and had good survival prospects; furthermore,
none of them wanted to continue on adrenolytic drugs,
which caused unwanted side effects.
laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice
for all benign adrenal lesions with a size of less than 6 cm,
and it is also considered for most bilateral lesions. the
currently described handport-assisted procedure may
offer avoidance of some technical difficulties encountered
in the classical laparoscopic operation. the technique
has rarely been reported in the literature, although it is
used at several centers in the treatment of large adrenal
tumors.13–15
surgeons who have used the hand-assisted technique
agree on its simplicity, and rather short learning curve,
possibly because it brings together the best tools from
two different techniques: manual handling allows the
digital sensation of the open technique and is combined
with the magnification of the videocameras. the handport
facilitates traction of organs and dissection. healing after
handport-assisted surgery is similar to conventional laparoscopic surgery and is superior to that of open surgery.
a troublesome factor encountered in the present series
was the great increase and inflammation of periadrenal
fat, which may be unusually tense and fragile, leading to
numerous small areas of bleeding, even when the fat is
gently manipulated. another negative factor was the
sometimes marked difficulty in identifying the adrenal.
this was part of the reason for conversion in some of our
patients. if problems are encountered with laparoscopy,
bilateral operation via a subcostal incision may be the
safest procedure. the dissection may often be especially
troublesome on the right side where a fatty, enlarged and

915

tense liver with several liver metastases may be
encountered.
the handport-assisted technique for adrenalectomy
also offers possibilities for large adrenal glands to be
extirpated securely. recently, there have been some reports of incomplete laparoscopic adrenalectomies which
have come to light years later.16–18 for the kinds of disease described here, anything other than a complete and
total adrenalectomy should be avoided. the handport
technique reduces this risk dramatically, because the
tactile sensation of the adrenal glands should assure total
bilateral adrenalectomy.
in conclusion, in patients with the ectopic cushing’s
syndrome complete bilateral adrenalectomy is crucial but
is often technically demanding. early surgical intervention
and a technique of handport-assisted laparoscopy may
reduce the technical difficulties.

references
1. becker m, aron d. ectopic acth syndrome and crhmediated cushing’s syndrome. endocrinol metab clin north
am 1994;23:585–590.
2. odell w. ectopic acth secretion: a misnomer. endocrinol
metab clin north am 1991;20:371–373.
3. berenyi m, singh g, gloster e, et al. acth-producing
pheochromocytoma. arch pathol lab med 1977;101:31–35.
4. aniszewski j, young w, thompson g, et al. cushing syndrome due to ectopic  xxxg1801xxx  secretion. world j surg 2001;25:934–940.
5. doppman j, nieman l, miller d, et al. ectopic  xxxg1801xxx  syndrome: localization studies of 30
cases. cancer 1989;172:115–119.
6. wajchenberg b, mendonca b, liberman b, et al. ectopic
acth syndrome. j steroid biochem mol biol 1995;53:139–
145.
7. brunt lm, doherty gm, norton ja, et al. laparoscopic
adrenalectomy compared to open adrenalectomy for benign
adrenal neoplasms. j am coll surg 1996;183:1–10.
8. dudley n, harrison b. comparison of open posterior versus
transperitoneal laparoscopic adrenalectomy. br j surg
1999;86:656–660.
9. duncan jl 3rd, fuhrman gm, bolton js, et al. laparoscopic adrenalectomy is superior to an open approach to
treat primary hyperaldosteronism. am surg 2000;66:932–
935;discussion 935–936.
10. schteingart d. ectopic secretion of peptides of the  xxxg1801xxx  family. endocrinol metab clin north am
1991;20:453–456.
11. oliver rl, davis jr, white a. characterisation of acth
related peptides in ectopic cushing’s syndrome. pituitary
2003;6:119–126.

916

hellman et al.: bilateral adrenalectomy for ectopis cushing’s syndrome

12. delisle l, boyer m, warr d, et al. ectopic corticotropin
syndrome and small-cell carcinoma of the lung: clinical
features, outcome, and complications. arch intern med
1993;153:746–752.
13. bennett i, ray m. hand-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy: an alternative minimal invasive surgical technique for
the adrenal gland. aust n z j surg 2002;72:801–805.
14. kitaoka f, yanaga k, okudaira s, et al. successful left
adrenalectomy for metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma
using hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery: report of a case.
surg today 2005;35:172–174.
15. perrotti m, ankem m, peterson s, et al. laparoscopic
bilateral adrenalectomy with the use of a single midline

hand-assist port. j soc laparoendoc surg 2003;7:273–
275.
16. foxius a, ramboux a, lefebvre y, et al. hazards of laparoscopic adrenalectomy for conn’s adenoma: when enthusiasm turns to tragedy. surg endosc 1999;13:715–717.
17. iacconi p, bendinelli c, miccoli p, et al. a case of cushing’s
syndrome due to adrenocortical carcinoma with recurrence
19 months after laparsocopic adrenalectomy. j urol
1999;161:1580–1584.
18. vshiyama t, suzuki k, kageyama s, et al. a case of
cushing’s syndrome due to adrenocortical carcinoma with
recurrence 19 months after laparoscopic adrenalectomy. j
urol 1997;157:2239–2240.

