amino acids (2006) 30: 1–15
doi 10.1007/s00726-005-0243-4

cysteine s-conjugate b-lyases
review article
a. j. l. cooper1;2;3 and j. t. pinto3
1

department of biochemistry, weill medical college, cornell university, new york, new york, u.s.a.
department of neurology and neuroscience, weill medical college, cornell university, new york, new york, u.s.a.
3
burke medical research institute, white plains, new york, u.s.a.
2

received july 29, 2005; accepted july 31, 2005; published online february 6, 2006
# springer-verlag 2006

summary. cysteine s-conjugate -lyases are pyridoxal 50 -phosphatecontaining enzymes that catalyze -elimination reactions with cysteine
s-conjugates that possess an electron-withdrawing group attached at the
sulfur. the end products of the -lyase reaction are pyruvate, ammonium and a sulfur-containing fragment. if the sulfur-containing fragment is reactive, the parent cysteine s-conjugate may be toxic, particularly to kidney mitochondria. halogenated alkenes are examples of
electrophiles that are bioactivated (toxified) by conversion to cysteine
s-conjugates. these conjugates are converted by cysteine s-conjugate
-lyases to thioacylating fragments. several cysteine s-conjugates
found in allium foods (garlic and onion) are -lyase substrates. this
finding may account in part for the chemopreventive activity of allium
products. this review (1) identifies enzymes that catalyze cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase reactions, (2) suggests that toxicant channeling
may contribute to halogenated cysteine s-conjugate-induced toxicity
to mitochondria, and (3) proposes mechanisms that may contribute to
the antiproliferative effects of sulfur-containing fragments eliminated
from allium-derived cysteine s-conjugates.
keywords: cysteine s-conjugates – cysteine s-conjugate -lyases – s(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine –  xxxg1294xxx  – mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase – s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-l-cysteine –
allium-derived compounds
abbreviations used: alaat,  xxxg941xxx ; agat ii,
 xxxg102xxx  isoenzyme ii;  xxxg246xxx , cytosolic
branched-chain aminotransferase;  xxxg247xxx , mitochondrial branchedchain aminotransferase; bcdhc, branched-chain -keto acid dehydrogenase complex; btc, s-(2-benzothiazolyl)-l-cysteine; cytaspat,
cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase; dcvc, s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-lcysteine; gst,  xxxg1073xxx ; gtk,  xxxg1294xxx ; kat i, kynurenine aminotransferase isoenzyme i; kgdhc, ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex; mitaspat, mitochondrial
aspartate aminotransferase; pdhc, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex;
plp, pyridoxal 50 -phosphate; pmp, pyridoxamine 50 -phosphate; sac,
s-allyl-l-cysteine; samc, s-allylmercapto-l-cysteine; tca cycle,
tricarboxylic acid cycle; tfec, s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-l-cysteine

introduction
many reactive endogenous and exogenous electrophiles
are detoxified in mammalian tissues by the mercapturate
pathway (fig. 1), the outline of which was discovered
over 120 years ago (e.g. baumann, 1883). (for reviews
of the mercapturate pathway, see, for example, stevens
et al. [1989], cooper and tate [1997].) the first step in
the mercapturate pathway (formation of the corresponding
glutathione s-conjugate by attack of glutathione thiolate
[gs ] on the electrophile) is catalyzed by a multigene
superfamily of glutathione s-transferases ( xxxg1073xxx ), many
of which have overlapping specificities.  xxxg1073xxx  are classified on the basis of their isoelectric point, substrate and
inhibitor properties, antibody recognition, and n-terminal
amino acid sequences. the main classes of  xxxg1073xxx  are , ,
 and . these enzymes may also be broadly classified
into groups on the basis of their cellular location, namely,
microsomal, mitochondrial and cytosolic (hayes et al.,
2005).
the glutathione s-conjugate (-glu-cys(x)-gly)
is converted sequentially to the l-cysteinylglycine sconjugate (x-cys-gly), the l-cysteine s-conjugate
(x-cys) and finally to the n-acetyl-l-cysteinyl s-conjugate
(n-acetyl-cys-x: mercapturate) by -glutamyltransferase,  xxxg163xxx =cysteinylglycinase and an
n-acetyltransferase, respectively (fig. 1). generally, the
mercapturate is more polar and water-soluble than is the
original electrophile, and is readily excreted in the urine

2

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

are detoxified, the pathway can occasionally lead to bioactivation (toxification). bioactivation occurs when (a) the
cysteine s-conjugate is irreversibly diverted away from
the mercapturate end product by the action of cysteine
s-conjugate -lyases, and (b) the sulfur-containing fragment eliminated by the cysteine s-conjugate -lyase reaction is chemically reactive. halogenated cysteine s-conjugates formed from trichloroethylene=dichloroacetylene
and from tetrafluoroethylene (s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine [dcvc] and s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-l-cysteine
[tfec], respectively) are examples of cysteine s-conjugates that are toxic as a result of cysteine s-conjugate
-lyase activity. these cysteine s-conjugates and their
elimination products are discussed below.
discovery of cysteine s-conjugate b-lyases

fig. 1. mercapturate pathway for the detoxification of electrophiles. the
electrophile, denoted here by x, may be produced endogenously or
ingested. note that -glutamyltransferase,  xxxg163xxx  and cysteinylglycinase are ectoenzymes (occur on the cell surface), whereas glutathione s-transferases and n-acetyltransferases are intracellular. the
acceptor substrate for the -glutamyltransferase-catalyzed reaction is
shown as water, but can also be various amino acids, dipeptides or
glutathione itself. modified from silbernagl and heuner (1993)

and bile.  xxxg1073xxx  catalyze three types of reaction. for example, haloalkenes and dichloroacetylene undergo gstcatalyzed vinylic substitution (snv) reactions, which may
be either an addition reaction (e.g. with tetrafluoroethylene [eq. (1)], dichloroacetylene [eq. (2)]) or an addition
elimination reaction (e.g. with trichloroethylene [eq. (3)]).
 xxxg1073xxx  also catalyze reactions with epoxide moieties (e.g.
in the conversion of leukotriene a4 to leukotriene c4)
(reviewed by cooper et al., 2002a). glutathione s-conjugate formation with haloalkenes and dichloroacetylene is
catalyzed by microsomal and cytosolic  xxxg1073xxx  (wolf et al.,
1984; dekant et al., 1988a, b; mclellan et al., 1989;
wallin et al., 1988; cummings et al., 2000; jolivette and
anders, 2002).


þ

f2 c¼cf2 þ gs þ h ! f2 cðhþcf2 sg

ð1þ

clcccl þ gs þ hþ ! clcðhþ¼cðclþsg

ð2þ

clðhþc¼ccl2 þ gs ! clcðhþ¼cðclþsg þ cl

ð3þ

although the mercapturate pathway generally represents
a mechanism by which potentially dangerous electrophiles

in 1965, colucci and buyske identified a thiol metabolite
of benzothiazolyl 2-sulfonamide in rabbits, rats, and dogs.
this was probably the first example reported in the literature of a c-s lyase involved in the metabolism of a xenobiotic in mammals. shortly thereafter, bhattacharya and
schultze (1967) showed that dcvc is enzymatically
cleaved by a c-s lyase. a sulfur-containing moiety was
shown to attach covalently to macromolecules, but the
nature of the reaction was not fully elucidated.
tateishi et al. (1978) were the first authors to use the
term ‘‘cysteine conjugate -lyase’’. these authors noted
that rat liver possesses an activity capable of cleaving the
thioether linkage in cysteine s-conjugates of aromatic compounds such as 2,4-dinitrobenzene and p-bromobenzene.
equal quantities of pyruvate, ammonium and a sulfurcontaining fragment (xsh) were generated via a elimination reaction (eq. (4)). (actually, the initial product of a -elimination reaction with an -amino acid is
aminoacrylate ½ch2 ¼cðnh3 þ þco2  , which undergoes
non-enzymatic rearrangement to the -imino acid
½ch3 cð¼nh2 þ þco2   and subsequent hydrolysis to pyruvate and ammonium [miles, 1986].) the -lyase activity
was purified about 500-fold, but the identity of the enzyme
responsible was not determined (tateishi et al., 1973).
xsch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ xsh

ð4þ

identities and general properties of mammalian
cysteine s-conjugate b-lyases
stevens (1985) identified a cysteine s-conjugate -lyase
of rat liver cytosol as  xxxg1296xxx . shortly thereafter

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases

stevens and colleagues (1986) identified a cysteine s-conjugate -lyase (dcvc as substrate) of rat kidney cytosol
as  xxxg1294xxx  (gtk). gtk is a freely
reversible glutamine (methionine) aromatic amino acid
aminotransferase (cooper and meister, 1974, 1981). this
enzyme is most likely involved in closure of the methionine salvage pathway, salvage of some -keto acids and in
the production of unusual sulfur-containing cyclic ketimines. gtk is identical to kynurenine aminotransferase
isoenzyme i (kat i) (reviewed by cooper, 2004).
mammalian tissues are now known to contain at least
eleven enzymes capable of catalyzing cysteine s-conjugate -lyase reactions in vitro (table 1), and no doubt the
list will continue to grow. the list of plp-containing

3

enzymes that can catalyze cysteine s-conjugate -lyase
reactions (table 1) currently includes the cytosolic enzymes  xxxg1296xxx , gtk, cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase (cytaspat),  xxxg941xxx  (alaat),
and cytosolic branched-chain aminotransferase ( xxxg246xxx )
and the mitochondrial enzymes mitochondrial aspartate
aminotransferase (mitaspat), mitochondrial branchedchain aminotransferase ( xxxg247xxx ),  xxxg102xxx  isozyme ii (agat ii), and  xxxg8xxx . in addition, a high-mr -lyase occurs in both
cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions. this high-mr enzyme is discussed in more detail below.
all the cysteine s-conjugate -lyases contain pyridoxal
50 -phosphate (plp) as a coenzyme and, under normal

table 1. mammalian plp-dependent enzymes with l-cysteine s-conjugate -lyase activitya,b
enzymec

-lyase substrates

syncatalytic
inactivation

competing
transamination

approximate
specific activity
(u=mg)d

selected
reference(s)

stevens (1985)
stevens et al. (1986),
yamauchi et al. (1993)
gaskin et al. (1995),
adcock et al. (1996),
teesdale-spittle et al. (1996),
kato et al. (1998),
buckberry et al. (1998)
gaskin et al. (1995),
adcock et al. (1996),
kato et al. (1998)
cooper et al. (2003a)
pinto et al. (2005)

dcvc

tfec

btc

cytosolic enzyme
 xxxg1296xxx  (r)
gtk=kat i (r)f

þ
þ

nde
þ

þ


þ


nd
þ

0.25
0.6–6.4

cytaspat (r)

þ

þ



þ



0.04–0.16

alaat (p)

þ

þ

þ

þ



0.004–0.06

 xxxg246xxx  (h)
-cystathionase (r)

þ


þ
þ

þ


þ





0.3–0.5
0.05–0.1

mitochondrial enzyme
mitaspat (r)
 xxxg247xxx  (h)
agat ii (r)
 xxxg8xxx  (p)g
high-mr -lyase (r)h

þ
þ
þ
nd
þ

þ
þ
þ
þ
þ

þ

þ
nd
þ

þ
þ
þ
nd


þ

þ
nd
þ

0.8–2.3
0.2–0.5
0.2
0.016
1.0–1.2

a

cooper et al. (2002b)
cooper et al. (2003a)
cooper et al. (2003b)
present work
abraham and cooper (1991),
abraham et al. (1995),
cooper et al. (2001)

this table is an update of that published in cooper et al. (2002a). a unit of enzyme activity is defined as the amount of enzyme that catalyzes the
formation of 1 mol of pyruvate per min (usually at 37 c, but temperature was not specified in all the references cited)
b
agat ii and -cystathionase are homotetramers with mr values of 210,000 and 176,00, respectively. the high-mr -lyase of rat kidney and liver
homogenates has a mr > 200,000. all other enzymes listed are homodimers with mr values for the intact holoenzymes of 90,000–110,000
c
species abbreviations: r, rat; p, pig; h, human
d
activity with dcvc and=or tfec
e
nd, not determined
f
human liver contains a kat with strong cysteine s-conjugate -lyase activity (buckberry et al., 1992). a cysteine s-conjugate -lyase has been highly
purified from human kidney (lash, 1990a). the lyase activity co-purifies with gtk. the human gtk, unlike the rat enzyme, has activity with btc
(lash et al., 1990a). in the rat, some gtk is also present in mitochondria (see the text)
g
the assay mixture (0.02 ml) contained 20 mm tfec, 50 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 8.0) and 14.4 g  xxxg8xxx  (17 u=mg). after
incubation at 37 c for 30 min the amount of pyruvate formed was determined as the 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone according to the method of cooper et al.
(2002b)
h
also present in the cytosolic fraction of rat liver and kidneys (abraham et al., 1995). the high-mr -lyase was shown to co-purify with hsp70 and
protein disulfide isomerase (cooper et al., 2001). the catalytic portion has been shown to be due, at least in part, to mitaspat

4

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

conditions, are involved in amino acid metabolism. most
of the cysteine s-conjugate -lyases discovered thus far
are aminotransferases (table 1), and an aminotransferase
reaction may therefore compete with the -elimination
reaction. a half-transamination reaction will convert the
plp coenzyme to its pyridoxamine 50 -phosphate (pmp)
form, which cannot catalyze a -lyase reaction. when
transamination of the cysteine s-conjugate competes with
the -lyase reaction, maximal -lyase activity requires the
presence of an -keto acid substrate in the reaction mixture. the -keto acid substrate forms a schiff’s base with
pmp that is then converted to the corresponding amino
acid and plp. the plp form of the enzyme can then
support another round of -lyase catalysis (stevens et al.,
1986; cooper, 1998).
the cysteine s-conjugate -lyases exhibit some degree
of substrate specificity with the most commonly used
substrates (dcvc, tfec and s-(2-benzothiazolyl)-lcysteine [btc]). for example, dcvc and tfec are
-lyase substrates of gtk, whereas btc is not. on the
other hand, all three are substrates of mitaspat. tfec is
a -lyase substrate of -cystathionase but dcvc is not
(see table 1).
syncatalytic inactivation of cysteine s-conjugate lyases by end-product(s) may occur (table 1). as noted
above, one of the products eliminated from the -lyase
active site is aminoacrylate, which subsequently undergoes rearrangement and hydrolysis to pyruvate and
ammonium. aminoacrylate is known to inactivate pig
heart cytaspat by reacting with the plp coenzyme to
generate a plp-pyruvate aldol condensation product
(ueno et al., 1982). moreover, the sulfur-containing fragment released from the halogenated cysteine s-conjugate
may react with a lysine residue leading to self-inactivation
(see below). -lyase reactions with dcvc and tfec
catalyzed by gtk apparently do not lead to self-inactivation. however, mitaspat-catalyzed -elimination with
tfec leads to inactivation on average after several thousand turnover events (cooper et al., 2002b). inactivation
of the cysteine s-conjugate -lyase enzymes,  xxxg247xxx  and
 xxxg246xxx , in the presence of tfec occurs on average after
about 200 and 45 turnover events, respectively (cooper
et al., 2003a). thus, factors such as the presence or
absence of ‘‘natural’’ -keto acid substrate, length of
incubation time, nature of cysteine s-conjugate used
as substrate, and organ distribution of a given plpdependent enzyme, together with variable km values
and ph optima will affect the apparent level of cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase activity measured in crude tissue
homogenates.

b-lyase activity toward analogues of cysteine
s-conjugates containing a higher chalcogenide
s-methyl-, s-ethyl-, s-allyl- and various s-aryl-l-cysteine
s-conjugates are not measurable or are very limited
-lyase substrates of purified rat kidney gtk, but
are moderately good aminotransferase substrates
(commandeur et al., 2000; see also cooper and pinto,
2005). by contrast, the selenocysteine se-conjugates are
5- to 10-fold better aminotransferase substrates of gtk
than their sulfur-containing counterparts. the selenocysteine se-conjugates are also good -lyase substrates
of rat kidney gtk (eq. (5)) (commandeur et al., 2000).
the greater reactivity of the selenocysteine se-conjugates may be due to the weaker c–se bond compared
to the c–s bond and=or to the more facile abstraction of
the  proton (commandeur et al., 2002). selenocysteine
se-conjugate -lyase activity is present in human kidney cytosol, and it has been suggested that selenocysteine se-conjugates may be useful as prodrugs to target
pharmacologically active selenol compounds (xseh;
eq. (5)) to the kidney (rooseboom et al., 2000).
se-benzyl- xxxd3186xxx  and  xxxd315xxx  are
oxidized to the corresponding sulfoxides by a flavincontaining monooxygenase in rat liver microsomes.
se-benzyl- xxxd3186xxx  selenoxide, but not  xxxd315xxx  sulfoxide, readily undergoes a non-enzymatic syn -elimination reaction to yield aminoacrylate
(and eventually pyruvate) and rseoh (rooseboom
et al., 2001a). selenocysteine se-conjugates (but not
cysteine s-conjugates) also undergo an l-amino acid
oxidase-catalyzed -elimination reaction (rooseboom
et al., 2001b).
rooseboom et al. (2002) have shown that te-phenyl-l-tellurocysteine is a good -lyase substrate of
purified rat kidney gtk (eq. (6)). the authors suggested that tellurocysteine te-conjugates may be an
interesting novel class of prodrugs for the formation
of biologically active tellurols. the lower pka and
the much greater nucleophilicity of xseh and xteh
compared to xsh should render the elimination fragments containing the higher chalcogenides catalytically much more reactive than the xsh elimination
fragment.
xsech2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ xseh
phetech2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ pheteh

ð5þ

ð6þ

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases

toxicity of haloalkenes and their corresponding
cysteine s-conjugates
haloalkenes enter the environment anthropogenically as
degreasing solvents, organic solvents, organic reagents
and inhalational anesthetic agents. the first evidence that
haloalkenes are toxic was published early in the last century. stockman (1916) reported that cattle fed soybean
meal improperly treated with trichloroethylene developed
aplastic anemia. subsequently, compelling evidence was
presented that a toxic factor derived from trichloroethylene is the corresponding cysteine s-conjugate, namely,
dcvc (mckinney et al., 1959). among the different
species tested, cattle exclusively develop dcvc-induced
aplastic anemia (lock et al., 1996). however, dcvc
is nephrotoxic=nephrocarcinogenic and hepatotoxic=
hepatocarcinogenic in experimental animals (dekant et al.,
1990), and may also be neurotoxic under certain circumstances (reviewed in cooper et al., 2002a; anders, 2005).
the glutathione-, cysteinylglycine-, cysteine- and nacetylcysteine s-conjugates (mercapturates) of a number
of haloalkenes, such as trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, tetrafluoroethylene and hexachlorobutadiene, are all
nephrotoxic=hepatotoxic, and in many cases nephrocarcinogenic=hepatocarcinogenic in experimental animals (e.g.
koob and dekant, 1991; dekant et al., 1990; anders,
2004). toxicity is due mostly to the action of cysteine
s-conjugate -lyases that irreversibly divert the cysteine
s-conjugate away from mercapturate formation and simultaneously generate a reactive sulfur-containing fragment
(see below). the mercapturates derived from the halogenated alkenes are toxic because they can be hydrolyzed
back to the corresponding cysteine s-conjugate by aminoacylases (e.g. uttamsingh et al., 2000; pushkin et al., 2004).
thus, as noted above, the mercapturate pathway enzymes
together with cysteine s-conjugate -lyases can on occasion contribute to toxification (bioactivation) rather than to
detoxification. (for reviews, see, for example, cooper,
1994, 1998; anders, 2004; dekant et al., 1994.) the reactive sulfur-containing fragment generated from halogenated
cysteine s-conjugates by the action of cysteine s-conjugate
-lyases are especially cytotoxic in experimental animals
to the proximal renal tubules, in particular to the s3 regions
and, to a lesser extent, the s2 regions (e.g. nash et al.,
1984; jones et al., 1988). toxicity of dcvc is associated
in part with covalent modification of macromolecules,
depletion of non-protein thiols (e.g. glutathione), and initiation of lipid peroxidation (chen et al., 1990).
in rodents, major metabolites of trichloroethylene are
 xxxd1870xxx  and trichloroacetate, which may contrib-

5

ute in part to the toxicity of this haloalkene (bull et al.,
2002). only a small portion of trichloroethylene is metabolized through the  xxxg1073xxx  pathway
(probably <1%) in the rat (koob and dekant, 1991).
nevertheless, there is compelling evidence that a major
route for bioactivation of trichloroethylene involves the
mercapturate pathway and cysteine s-conjugate formation
(anders, 2004). for other haloalkenes, the mercapturate
pathway=cysteine s-conjugate formation is the major
route for metabolism and consequently for bioactivation
(e.g. odum and green, 1982; lock and ishmael, 1988;
jaffe et al., 1983; dekant et al., 1988). dcvc induces
expression of the proto-oncogenes c-fos and c-myc in
llc- xxxg1757xxx  cells (a pig kidney cell line) (vamvakas and
k€oster, 1993; vamvakas et al., 1993).
halogenated alkenes (trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, hexachlorobutadiene) are among the several
hundred potentially dangerous toxicants listed as present
in superfund sites in the us (http:==www.atsdr.cdc.gov=
cxcx3.html). some segments of the us population are
exposed to haloalkenes from such sites and in the workplace (wu and schaum, 2000), and possibly through
‘‘recreational’’ abuse (marjot and mcleod, 1989). recent
evidence suggests that heavy exposure to trichloroethylene
is associated with an increased risk of kidney cancer in
humans as a result of mutations in the von hippel-lindau
(vhl) tumor suppressor gene (brauch et al., 2004).
another interesting example whereby cysteine s-conjugate -lyases may contribute adversely to human health
relates to exposure to breakdown products of inhalational
anesthetic agents. administration of various anesthetics
can sometimes lead to damage to kidneys, liver and occasionally neural tissue (reviewed by anders, 2005). when
an anesthetic gas is used in association with a desiccated
carbon dioxide absorbant, severe heat buildup in the anesthetic circuit, particularly in the co2 absorber canister,
can lead to the conversion of trichloroethylene to dichloroacetylene, halothane to 2-bromo-2-chloro-1,1-difluoroethylene,  xxxd3197xxx  to 2-(fluoromethoxy)-1,1,3,3,3pentafluoro-1-propylene (compound a), and  xxxd1844xxx ,
isoflurane, and  xxxd1993xxx  to co. dichloroacetylene, 2bromo-2-chloro-1,1-difluoroethylene, and compound a
form glutathione s-conjugates that undergo hydrolysis to
cysteine s-conjugates, and subsequent bioactivation to
toxic sulfur-containing fragments by cysteine s-conjugate
-lyases (anders, 2005). the cysteine s-conjugate
derived from dichloroacetylene is dcvc. glutathione
s-conjugate formation with dichloroacetylene (eq. (2)) is
much more rapid than is glutathione s-conjugate formation
from trichloroethylene (eq. (3)). thus, toxic dcvc forms

6

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

more readily from dichloroacetylene than from trichloroethylene (kanhai et al., 1991). the above-mentioned findings have spurred the development of newer anesthetic gas
ventilators that minimize the risk of conversion of anesthetics to toxic breakdown products (anders, 2005).
toxic fragments generated from halogenated
cysteine s-conjugates by the action of cysteine
s-conjugate b-lyases
when the sulfur-containing fragment (xsh; eq. (4))
eliminated in a cysteine s-conjugate -lyase reaction is
not reactive, the parent electrophile=cysteine s-conjugate
is not particularly toxic. an example of a cysteine sconjugate -lyase substrate that is not toxic is btc.
the eliminated fragment (2-mercaptobenzothiazol) is
s-glucuronidated by udp-glucuronosyltransferase and excreted (elfarra and hwang, 1990). conversely, toxicity
may ensue when the eliminated sulfur-containing fragment is reactive. the toxicity of most halogenated cysteine s-conjugates is associated with the formation of a
reactive thioacylating agents. for example, 1,2-dichloroethenethiol ½clcðhþ¼cðclþsh formed from dcvc
by the cysteine s-conjugate -lyase reaction is highly
reactive, most likely generating a thioketene (eq. (7)),
which thioacylates macromolecules, particularly at the
"-amino groups of lysyl residues in proteins (eq. (8))
(hayden et al., 1990; dekant et al., 1994; v€olkel and
dekant, 1998). the reactive metabolite eliminated from
the toxic cysteine s-conjugate tfec (eq. (8)) yields
difluorothionoacetyl fluoride (eq. (9)) (dekant et al.,
1994), which also thioacylates lysyl moieties (eq. (10))
(oldum and green, 1982; lock and ishmael, 1998).
½clcðhþ¼cðclþsh ! clcðhþ¼c¼s þ hcl

ð7þ

clcðhþ¼c¼s þ h2 nr ! clch2 cð¼sþnhr

ð8þ

f2 cðhþcf2 sh ! f2 cðhþcð¼sþf þ hf

ð9þ

f2 cðhþcð¼sþf þ h2 nr ! f2 cðhþcð¼sþnhr þ hf
ð10þ
cysteine s-conjugates derived from bromine-containing fluoroalkenes are more mutagenic than those lacking
bromine. the mutagenicity of these cysteine s-conjugates
may be associated with the formation of a reactive 2,2difluoro-3-halothiirane

following a -lyase

reaction (finkelstein et al., 1996; shim et al., 1997).

targeting of mitochondria by toxic cysteine
s-conjugates
much evidence suggests that mitochondria are the principle
targets of toxic, halogenated cysteine s-conjugates. sulfoxidation (see lash et al., 1994) may play a role in the mitochondrial toxicity of these compounds by a mechanism that
is independent of a -lyase reaction (lash et al., 2003).
however, there is compelling evidence that -lyase reactions contribute importantly to the mitochondrial toxicity
elicited by halogenated cysteine s-conjugates (see cooper
et al. [2002a] for a detailed discussion). important findings
are those of bruschi et al. (1993), who showed that six
mitochondrial proteins in kidney are thioacylated after rats
were exposed to tfec. no thioacylation of cytosolic proteins was detected. the six proteins have been identified as
hsp60, mitochondrial hsp70, mitaspat, the e2k subunit
of the -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (kgdhc),
the e3 subunit of kgdhc (and of the branched-chain keto
acid dehydrogenase complex; bcdhc), and aconitase
(bruschi et al., 1993, 1994, 1998; james et al., 2002).
gtk rapidly catalyzes a -lyase reaction with dcvc
as substrate under optimal conditions in vitro (stevens
et al., 1986; yamauchi et al., 1993). thus, it seemed at
first that gtk might be the major enzyme responsible for
the -lyase activity with halogenated cysteine s-conjugates in vivo. indeed, gtk is often referred to as cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase, with the tacit assumption that it is
the enzyme responsible for damage to the renal proximal
tubules induced by dcvc and other halogenated cysteine
s-conjugates. certainly, gtk is well represented in the
proximal tubules of the rat kidney (jones et al., 1988;
macfarlane et al., 1989), but available data suggest that
the contribution of this enzyme to halogenated cysteine sconjugate-induced toxicity to the mitochondria in the
proximal tubules may be less than originally proposed.
gtk exists in cytosolic and mitochondrial forms due to
the presence of two mrnas derived from the same gene
encoding proteins, respectively, with and without mitochondria-targeting leader sequences (malherbe et al.,
1995; mosca et al., 2003). however, only about 10% of
the total gtk activity in rat kidney fractions is due to the
mitochondrial form (cooper, 1988), and most of the cysteine s-conjugate -lyase activity in rat kidney mitochondria cannot be assigned to gtk (abraham et al.,
1995a). a large fraction of the cysteine s-conjugate lyase activity in cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions obtained from rat kidney and liver is due to a high-mr enzyme
complex (abraham et al., 1995b). partial sequencing of
proteins in the isolated rat kidney high-mr complex

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases

revealed the presence of hsp70 and protein disulfide isomerase (cooper et al., 2001). this finding offers an explanation for the thioacylation of mitochondrial hsp70 in
kidney mitochondria after rats were treated with tfec.
at first, the catalytic component of the high mr-lyase
was not recognized. however, recent work from our
laboratory has shown that mitaspat is present in the
complex (a. c. l. cooper, unpubl.). other work from
our laboratory has also shown that three aminotransferases present in kidney mitochondria (namely, mitaspat,
 xxxg247xxx , agat ii) possess cysteine s-conjugate -lyase
activity with tfec as substrate (cooper et al., 2002b,
2003a,b). it was estimated that 15–20% of the -lyase
activity toward tfec in rat kidney mitochondria is due
to mitaspat (cooper et al., 2002b). this finding is consistent with that of bruschi et al. (1993). those authors
showed that mitaspat is thioacylated in kidneys of rats
treated with tfec. evidently the reactive sulfur-containing fragment released from tfec at the active site of
mitaspat can cause auto-thioacylation.
bruschi and colleagues have used a murine cell line
(tamh) to model tfec-induced cell necrosis (ho et al.,
2005a, b). the tfec-induced necrotic cell death in these
cells is mediated by bax and antagonized by the bcl-2
family member  xxxg251xxx  (ho et al., 2005a). the tfecinduced cytotoxicity in the tamh cells was also shown to
involve nrf2 activation by an oxidative-stress-independent
pathway (ho et al., 2005b). activation of nrf2 involves
redox mechanisms that mediate its release from  xxxg1275xxx , a
cytosolic protein that sequesters and tethers the transcription factor in the cytoplasm. a widely accepted model for
nrf2 nuclear accumulation involves modification of
 xxxg1275xxx  cysteine moieties by electrophilic compounds that
lead directly to dissociation of the  xxxg1275xxx -nrf2 complex
and subsequent translocation of nrf2 into the nucleus to
drive gene transcription (e.g. nguyen et al., 2005).
toxicant channeling involving mitochondrial
cysteine s-conjugate b-lyases
although the e2k and e3 subunits of kgdhc are thioacylated in kidney mitochondria of rats administered
tfec, the e2p and e3 subunits of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (pdhc) are not (bruschi et al., 1998;
james et al., 2002). kgdhc activity, but not pdhc activity, is also diminished in the tfec-treated rats. we have
found that kgdhc, but not pdhc, is directly inhibited in
pc12 cells exposed to 1 mm tfec (park et al., 1999).
these findings are remarkable because e3 is a common
component of kgdhc, pdhc and bcdhc (and the

7

glycine cleavage system). pdhc is more resistant to
in vitro inactivation than is kgdhc in the presence of
tfec and purified gtk (a source of thioacylating moieties) (park et al., 1999), and there is some evidence that
e3 subunits are packed differently in pdhc than in
kgdhc (mccartney et al., 1998). thus, part of the resistance of pdhc to thioacylation=inactivation in kidney
mitochondria of tfec-treated rats may be due to steric
considerations. however, pdhc is not known to be
associated with any aminotransferases=-lyases in the
mitochondria, whereas kgdhc is thought to be closely
associated with mitaspat (see below). thus, the susceptibility of kgdhc to thioacylation may be due to close
juxtapositioning of this enzyme complex to mitaspat
(james et al., 2002) and to the ready accessibility of the
subunits to the thioacylating agent (park et al., 1999).
some evidence suggests that enzymes of the tca cycle
and ancillary enzymes are arranged in supramolecular
complexes (metabolons) that facilitate substrate channeling. for example, mitaspat is thought to be part of a
metabolon that also contains kgdhc (cooper et al.,
2002a and references cited therein). on the basis of the
findings from our laboratory and those of bruschi and
colleagues, we have proposed that it is not only possible
for metabolites to be channeled through supramolecular

fig. 2. model for toxicant channeling in mitochondria in vivo. the protoxicant tfec (r) is transported into the mitochondrion, where it is
converted by cysteine s-conjugate -lyases to a toxicant (rþ , a thioacylating agent). the three -keto acid dehydrogenase complexes –
branched-chain -keto acid dehydrogenase complex (bcdhc), -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (kgdhc) and pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (pdhc) – are represented as multimeric units labeled 2, 4
and 7, respectively. the mitochondrial cysteine s-conjugate -lyases
include the homodimeric  xxxg247xxx  (1) and the homodimeric mitaspat
(3). the close juxtapositioning of  xxxg247xxx  and mitaspat to enzymes of
energy metabolism results in channeling of the toxicant to bcdhc (2)
and kgdhc (4)=aconitase (5), respectively, resulting in their inactivation. on the other hand, pdhc (7) is not known to be associated with any
aminotransferase=cysteine s-conjugate -lyase (6) and is not inactivated
by direct thioacylation. the curved arrows represent ‘‘self-thioacylation’’
of  xxxg247xxx  and mitaspat, respectively. im, inner membrane; om, outer
mitochondrial membrane. modified from cooper et al. (2002a)

8

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

complexes in the tca cycle, but also for toxicants to be
channeled through this complex (cooper et al., 2002a)
(fig. 2). this concept may explain not only the susceptibility of kgdhc to tfec-induced inactivation in rat
kidney=cells in culture but also the susceptibility of aconitase and bcdhc to thioacylation=inactivation. aconitase is thought to be part of the metabolon that includes
kgdhc and mitaspat (ovadi and srere, 2000), whereas
bcdhc is thought to form a metabolon with  xxxg247xxx 
(fig. 2) (van horn et al., 2004).
prodrug==drug metabolism involving cysteine
s-conjugate b-lyases
elfarra and colleagues have synthesized prodrugs of the
anti-cancer agent 6- xxxd2573xxx  that were designed to
release the active agent in the kidneys by the action of
cysteine s-conjugate -lyases (hwang and elfarra, 1991;
elfarra and hwang, 1993; elfarra et al., 1995; lash et al.,
1997). for example, it was shown that 30 min after administration of the prodrug s-(6-purinyl)-l-cysteine to rats the
concentration of 6- xxxd2573xxx  was nearly 2.4 times
higher in the kidneys than in liver and 90 times higher than
in plasma (hwang and elfarra, 1991). other analogues,
such as the mercapturate, glutathione s-conjugate and
homocysteine s-conjugate also generated relatively high
levels of 6- xxxd2573xxx  in the kidney (elfarra and
hwang, 1995). evidently, the mercapturate and glutathione
s-conjugates can be readily converted to the corresponding cysteine s-conjugate in the kidney. the cysteine
s-conjugate, either taken up directly or formed from the
mercapturate=glutathione s-conjugate, is a substrate of cysteine s-conjugate -lyases thereby generating the active
drug 6- xxxd2573xxx  within the kidneys. interestingly,
s-(6-purinyl)-l-cysteine can undergo a novel rearrangement at neutral ph to yield the positional isomer n-(6purinyl)-l-cysteine (hwang and elfarra, 1996). rearrangement was much less favored with the homocysteine s-conjugate, and rearrangement was blocked in the mercapturate
and glutathione s-conjugate (hwang and elfarra, 1996).
in fact, s-(6-purinyl)glutathione may be an even better
delivery agent for 6- xxxd2573xxx  to the kidney than
is s-(6-purinyl)-l-cysteine for treating renal tumors or for
suppressing renal transplant rejection (lash et al., 1997).
elfarra et al. (1995) also showed that s-(6-guaninyl)-lcysteine is an effective prodrug of the anticancer agent
 xxxd3352xxx  and is bioactivated by cysteine s-conjugate
-lyase(s) in the kidney. interestingly, the maximal specific activity of the -lyase with s-(6-guaninyl)-l-cysteine
as substrate was 45 times higher in a rat kidney mitochon-

drial fraction than in the cytosolic fraction. this finding
shows that gtk cannot have been responsible for most of
the -lyase activity with s-(6-guaninyl)-l-cysteine. the
possibility that mitaspat may be the cysteine s-conjugate -lyase responsible for the mitochondrial activity
should be investigated. these studies with the various
s-conjugate anti-cancer prodrugs have apparently not been
followed up with clinical trials, but suggest that the strategy may generally be useful for targeting some drugs to
cysteine s-conjugate -lyases within human kidneys.
the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor  xxxd2592xxx , which
can cause ocular toxicity, is metabolized to glutathione
s-conjugates and cysteine s-conjugates (kishida et al.,
1990). it was later shown that the cysteine s-conjugate
is a substrate of -lyases in bovine kidney and liver homogenates (kishida et al., 2001). the eliminated sh-containing fragment was identified by elemental analysis, nmr
and mass spectrometry to be n-(3-methyl)-5-mercapto4-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl) xxxd63xxx . this finding may account for the binding of a metabolite to macromolecules
(kishida et al., 2001).
cisplatin has been used successfully to treat germ cell
tumors, head and neck tumors and cervical cancer even
when the cancer has metastasized. however, its effectiveness against other cancers is limited by its toxicity to renal
proximal tubules. studies from many laboratories have
implicated dna damage as the primary mechanism by
which cisplatin kills tumor and other rapidly dividing cells.
however, the renal proximal tubule cells are well-differentiated, non-dividing cells that are not killed by other dnadamaging agents. early work suggested that a metabolite
of cisplatin is responsible for the nephrotoxicity and that
mitochondria are the targets. (for original references, see
townsend et al. [2003] and zhang and hanigan [2003].)
in part on the basis of the results of experiments with
kidney tissue=cells and inhibitors of -glutamyltransferase
and plp-dependent enzymes, hanigan and colleagues have
concluded that damage to kidney cells is due to a bioactivation mechanism involving the cysteine s-conjugate
(townsend et al., 2003; zhang and hanigan, 2003).
cisplatin is converted to its glutathione s-conjugate and
eventually to its cysteine s-conjugate. the cysteine
s-conjugate is then acted upon by cysteine s-conjugate
-lyase(s) to generate a fragment containing a pt-sh moiety (eq. (11)). this pt-sh fragment was proposed to react
with macromolecules at thiophilic centers.
ðh2 nþ2 ptðclþsch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ ðnh2 þ2 ptðclþsh
ð11þ

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases

9

if enzymes capable of catalyzing cysteine
s-conjugate b-lyase reactions are widely distributed
in mammalian tissues why are the kidney proximal
tubules especially susceptible to halogenated
cysteine s-conjugate-induced damage?

bruising or crushing of the bulb, alliin is converted to
a number of odorous sulfur-containing compounds, which
begins with the action of alliinase (a -lyase) (eq. (12)).
the eliminated sulfur-containing compound (allylsulfenic
acid) is converted non-enzymatically to allicin (eq. (13)).

many of the cysteine s-conjugate -lyases are widespread
in mammalian tissues. for example, in the rat, gtk is
most active in kidney followed by the liver. however, this
enzyme is present in almost every rat tissue analyzed
(cooper, 1988; cooper and meister, 1981). similarly,
mitaspat is present in high concentrations in almost every
tissue. evidently, the tissue distribution of the cysteine
s-conjugate -lyases cannot explain the sensitivity of the
kidney proximal tubules to the toxic, halogenated cysteine
s-conjugates. many factors are presumably involved, including relative distribution of n-acetyltransferase, acylases, cellular and mitochondrial uptake mechanisms, and
concentrations of competing natural amino acid=-keto
acid substrates. however, a major contributing factor is
likely to be the very large surface area of the renal proximal
tubules coupled to the extraordinary high renal vascular
perfusion. in humans, kidney receives 20% of the cardiac
output; yet comprises <1% of the body weight (pfaller and
gstraunthaler, 1998). the widespread distribution of cysteine s-conjugate -lyases suggests that bioactivation
may occur in many tissues, albeit at a lower level than in
the kidneys. indeed, as noted above, halogenated cysteine sconjugates are toxic to liver and, on occasion, nervous tissue.

ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o

cysteine s-conjugates in garlic extracts
and their ability to undergo enzyme-catalyzed
b-lyase reactions
garlic and other members of the allium family contain
alliin – a cysteine s-conjugate sulfoxide (eq. (12)). on

alliin
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþh
allylsulfenic acid
ð12þ
2ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþh
! ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþsch2 ch¼ch2 þ h2 o
allicin

through a series of disulfide=sulfide interchange
reactions of allicin with cysteine, a number of cysteine
s-conjugates are formed in fresh and aged garlic extracts
including s-allyl-l-cysteine (sac), s-allylmercapto-lcysteine (samc), s-methylmercapto-l-cysteine, s-propylmercapto-l-cysteine, s-penta-1,3-dienylmercapto-lcysteine, and l-ajocysteine (cooper and pinto, 2005).
each of these garlic-derived cysteine s-conjugates (except
l-ajocysteine, which was not tested) was found to be an
excellent to moderately good substrate of purified rat kidney gtk and snake venom l-amino acid oxidase (cooper
and pinto, 2005). in addition, an activity in rat liver cytosol was able to catalyze a -elimination reaction with
sac, samc, s-propylmercapto-l-cysteine and s-penta1,3-dienylmercapto-l-cysteine (but not with s-methylmercapto-l-cysteine) (table 2) (cooper and pinto, 2005).
tomisawa et al. (1988) previously showed that s-propyll-cysteine or cysteine s-conjugates containing larger
alkyl groups, but not s-methyl- or s-ethyl-l-cysteine are

table 2. cysteine s-conjugates derived from l-alliin ½ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþch2 chðnh3 þ þco2   in fresh and aged garlic extracts shown to
be -lyase substrates of -cystathionase, and predicted sulfur-containing -elimination fragmenta
structure

name

predicted -elimination fragment

ch2 ¼chch2 ssch2 chðnh3 þ þco2 
ch2 ¼chch2 sch2 chðnh3 þ þco2 
ch3 ch2 ch2 ssch2 chðnh3 þ þco2 
ch3 ch¼chch¼chssch2 chðnh3 þ þco2 

s-allylmercapto-l-cysteine (samc)
s-allyl-l-cysteine (sac)
s-propylmercapto-l-cysteine
s-penta-1,3-dienylmercapto-l-cysteine

ch2 ¼chch2 ssh
ch2 ¼chch2 sh
ch3ch2ch2ssh
ch3 ch¼chch¼chssh

a

ð13þ

for the mechanism of formation of these cysteine s-conjugates from l-alliin, see cooper and pinto (2005). each of the cysteine
s-conjugates listed was shown to be converted to pyruvate by an enzyme present in rat liver homogenates (cooper and pinto, 2005), now
identified as -cystathionase (pinto et al., 2005). the structure of the sulfur-containing elimination fragment was not elucidated, so only the
predicted structure is shown. with the notable exception of sac, the predicted sulfur-containing elimination fragment is a persulfide
(rssh). l-ajocysteine ½ch2 ¼chch2 sðoþch2 ch¼chssch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  , a cysteine s-conjugate that also occurs in garlic
extracts, was not tested as a -lyase substrate of -cystathionase but is expected to undergo a -elimination reaction

10

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

-lyase substrates of -cystathionase. on the basis of this
finding and that from our laboratory of strong inhibition by
propargylglycine, we suggested that the -lyase activity
in rat liver extracts toward the various garlic-derived
cysteine s-conjugates is due to -cystathionase (cooper
and pinto, 2005). this was subsequently confirmed when
we showed that -lyase activity toward samc copurified with -cystathionase in rat liver preparations
(pinto et al., 2005). a mitochondrial enzyme may also be
able to catalyze a -elimination reaction with s-penta-1,3dienylmercapto-l-cysteine but not with other garlicderived cysteine s-conjugates tested (cooper and pinto,
2005). however, the identity of this enzyme is not known.
-cystathionase can catalyze a -elimination reaction
with l-cystine (which may be regarded as a special case
of a cysteine s-conjugate) generating pyruvate, ammonium and l-thiocysteine (l-cysteine persulfide) (eq. (14)).
interaction of l-thiocysteine with unreacted l-cystine can
generate l-cysteine and l-thiocystine (cystine persulfide)
(eq. (15)). at neutral ph, l-thiocystine slowly breaks
down to l-cystine and elemental sulfur (s0) (eq. (16)).
l-thiocystine is a substrate of rhodanese, which can
transfer s0 (sulfane sulfur) to a suitable co-substrate such
as cyanide, which generates the less toxic thiocyanate
(eq. (17)). (see cooper and pinto [2005] for original
references.) generally, interactions involving gsh
and cysteine are slow at acid or neutral ph values.
therefore, it is probable that mercapto-l-cysteine sconjugates can enter the bloodstream intact after ingestion. as discussed below, this raises some intriguing
biochemical possibilities.
h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 ssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ þ h2 o
! ch3 cðoþco2  þ nh4 þ þ hssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
ð14þ
h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 ssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ

biological implications of cysteine s-conjugate
b-lyase catalyzed-elimination reactions
with allium-derived cysteine s-conjugates
-lyase reactions involving the allium-derived mercaptol-cysteine s-conjugates should theoretically generate reactive persulfide (hydrodisulfide) species (rssh), in a fashion similar to the generation of persulfide from cystine
(table 2). the present finding that samc, s-propyl-lcysteine and s-penta-1,3-dienylmercapto-l-cysteine are
-lyase substrates of -cystathionase in rat liver homogenates suggests that the eliminated persulfide fragment may
be a source of s0 through interactions with l-cystine or
 xxxd2811xxx . this sulfane sulfur could exert biological effects
through addition to cysteine domains on redox-sensitive
proteins and through detoxification reactions involving rhodanese (cooper and pinto, 2005). possible mechanisms
whereby the eliminated sulfur-containing fragments interact with protein sulfhydryls are summarized in fig. 3.
meta-analysis of the literature revealed a diminished
risk of stomach and colorectal cancer with increased garlic intake (fleischauer et al., 2000). additionally, numerous studies have shown that several garlic-derived cysteinyl s-conjugates have anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
effects against a number of hormone-sensitive- and refractory human tumor cell lines, and inhibit growth of transplantable tumors in experimental animals. as reviewed by
toohey (1989, 2001) and by iciek and wlodek (2001),
these effects may be mediated by sulfane sulfur-containing
compounds or sulfane progenitors. toohey (1989, 2001)
suggested that proliferation of malignant cells may be
related to a paucity of sulfane sulfur in these cells and
to uncontrolled activity of proliferative enzymes and=or
signal factors normally inactivated by sulfane sulfur. if
this hypothesis is correct, the anti-cancer effects of the
allium-derived cysteine s-conjugates may be due at least
in part to their ability to act as progenitors of sulfane
sulfur via interactions involving -cystathionase.

þ hssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
! h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 sssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
þ hsch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
ð15þ
h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 sssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
! h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 ssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ þ s0
ð16þ
h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 sssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ þ cn
! h3 þ nð o2 cþchch2 ssch2 chðco2  þnh3 þ
þ scn
ð17þ

fig. 3. possible mechanisms whereby proteins are modified via products
generated from the -cystathionase-catalyzed -elimination reaction
with various allium-derived cysteine s-conjugates. p and p0 represent
protein backbones and r represents s-alkane and s-alkene moieties.
from cooper and pinto, 2005

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases

flow cytometric analyses of dna indicate that garlicderived l-cysteine s-conjugates can prevent a variety of
tumor cell lines from progressing through g1=s phase
while others are blocked in g2=m. studies on cell cycle
progression suggest that allylsulfide derivatives can modify redox-sensitive signal transduction pathways that lead
to expression of nuclear transcription factors. for example, a water-soluble allylsulfide derivative blocks activation of nuclear factor kappa b (nfkb) in jurkat
t cells, while one lipid-soluble allylpolysulfide compound
induces apoptosis in human promyeloleukemic cells
(reviewed by pinto et al., 2001). because of the interaction of garlic-derived cysteine s-conjugates with cystathionase (and in one case a mitochondrial cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase) to produce reactive sulfhydryl
and=or potential sulfane sulfur progenitors, the chemopreventive activity of these dietary factors may be due in
part to their ability to modify intracellular redox potentials, to generate sulfane sulfur and=or to interact with
thiols associated with cysteine moieties in regulatory or
catalytic signal proteins.
c-elimination from homocysteine s-conjugates
work from our laboratory using l-amino acid oxidase has
shown that oxidation of the -amino group to an -imino
group in amino acids containing a leaving group (denoted
as r in eq. (18)) in the -position leads to a nonenzymatic -elimination reaction with subsequent formation of ammonium and vinylglyoxylate (2-oxo-3-butenoic
acid; ch2 ¼chcðoþco2  þ (eqs. (18–20)). this is due to
the strong activation of the  c–h bond in the -imino
acid relative to that in the -amino acid. examples of
amino acids that undergo this type of reaction with lamino acid oxidase include  xxxd2595xxx -s,r-sulfoximine (cooper et al., 1976), l- xxxd416xxx  (hollander
et al., 1989), and s-methyl- xxxd2595xxx  (rhodes et al.,
1997), where the eliminated groups are methane sulfinamide, n-hydroxyguanine, and dimethylsulfide, respectively. -elimination reactions also occur with -keto
acids generated from these amino acids via transamination reactions (eqs. (21), (22)), although the reaction is
less facile than that with -imino acids. an interesting
transamination=-elimination reaction occurs with sadenosyl- xxxd2595xxx , which is the amino donor in the
transamination of 7-oxo-8-aminopelargonic acid, an intermediate in the biotin biosynthetic pathway, to 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid in escherichia coli. the -keto
acid analogue of s-adenosyl- xxxd2595xxx  was shown to
undergo a -elimination reaction in which 50 -methylthio-

11

adenosine is the leaving group (stoner and eisenberg,
1975).
rch2 ch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! rch2 ch2 cð¼nh2 þ þco2  þ h2 o2

ð18þ

rch2 ch2 cð¼nh2 þ þco2 
! rh þ ch2 ¼chcð¼nh2 þ þco2 

ð19þ

ch2 ¼chcð¼nh2 þ þco2  þ h2 o
! ch2 ¼chcðoþco2  þ nh4 þ

ð20þ

rch2 ch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ r0 cðoþco2 
! rch2 chcðoþco2  þ r0 chðnh3 þ þco2  ð21þ
rch2 chcðoþco2  ! rh þ ch2 ¼chcðoþco2 
ð22þ
the homocysteine s-conjugates s-(1,2,-dichlorovinyl)l-homocysteine and s-(benzothiazolyl)-l-homocysteine)
were observed to undergo an oxidation=-elimination
reaction when incubated with l-amino acid oxidase (lash
et al., 1990b). s-(1,2,-dichlorovinyl)-l-homocysteine is
much more nephrotoxic than is dcvc. by contrast, the
-methyl homocysteine analogue, which cannot undergo
a transamination reaction, is not toxic (elfarra et al.,
1986). s-(1,2,-dichlorovinyl)-l-homocysteine is more
toxic to isolated rat kidney cells and to mitochondria than
is dcvc. s-(benzothiazolyl)-l-homocysteine is toxic,
whereas btc is not. these data suggest that s-(1,2,dichlorovinyl)-l-homocysteine and s-(benzothiazolyl)l-homocysteine undergo a transamination reaction followed by a non-enzymatic -elimination reaction (shown
in eqs. (23), (24) for s-(1,2,-dichlorovinyl)-l-homocysteine) (lash et al., 1990b). the increased toxicity of s(1,2,-dichlorovinyl)-l-homocysteine and s-(benzothiazolyl)-l-homocysteine compared to the corresponding cysteine s-conjugates may be due to the formation of the
toxic fragment, 2-oxo-3-butenoic acid, which is expected
to readily participate in a michael addition reaction
(elfarra et al., 1986; lash et al., 1990b) forming a conjugate with a carbanion nucleophile, or possibly in a
robinson annulation reaction that leads to formation of
a cyclic ,-unsaturated ketone.
clðhþc¼cðclþsch2 ch2 chðnh3 þ þco2  þ r0 cðoþco2 
! clðhþc¼cðclþsch2 chcðoþco2 
þ r0 chðnh3 þ þco2 
clðhþc¼cðclþsch2 chcðoþco2 
! clðhþc¼cðclþsh þ ch2 ¼chcðoþco2 

ð23þ

ð24þ

12

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

as noted above, the homocysteine s-conjugate of 6mercaptopurine acts as a prodrug directed toward the kidney. presumably, the release of 6- xxxd2573xxx  results
from an enzymatic transamination followed by a nonenzymatic -elimination reaction (elfarra and hwang,
1995).
conclusions
at least eleven plp-dependent enzymes catalyze cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase side reactions. these reactions can
have both negative and positive physiological consequences. adverse effects may occur as a result of cysteine
s-conjugate -lyases catalyzing reactions that generate
toxic sulfur-containing fragments. the toxicity of a number of halogenated cysteine s-conjugates may be attributable to at least two mechanisms (cooper et al., 2002a).
syncatalytic inactivation may lead to inactivation of crucial plp-dependent enzyme activity. for example, incubation of pc12 cells with 1 mm tfec leads to a timedependent loss of mitaspat activity (park et al., 1999).
similar results were obtained with rat astrocytes in culture
(a. j. l. cooper, unpubl. data). inactivation of mitaspat
could lead to disruption of the malate:aspartate shuttle and
thus to compromised energy metabolism. the sensitivity
of both bcat isozymes to syncatalytic inactivation in the
presence of tfec suggests that toxic halogenated
cysteine s-conjugates may disrupt branched-chain amino
acid metabolism. the brain is almost unique in its possession of both bcat isozymes (sweatt et al., 2004). this
arrangement may allow crucial nitrogen cycling between
astrocytes and neurons. inhibition of the bcat isozymes
could lead to brain dysfunction and=or developmental
alterations (sweatt et al., 2004). secondly, energy metabolism may be compromised by the selective loss of tca
cycle enzyme activities such as kgdhc and aconitase, in
part resulting from close juxtapositioning to mitaspat.
because cysteine s-conjugate -lyase activity is widespread, the potential may exist for cysteine s-conjugateinduced toxicity in many tissues. mitochondrial dysfunction and compromised energy metabolism occur in aging
and in many neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. beal, 2000).
the possibility should be considered that exposure of
mitochondria over many years to low levels of potentially
toxic cysteine s-conjugates derived from endogenous and
exogenous sources may contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction of aging and disease.
possible beneficial or useful consequences of cysteine
s-conjugate -lyase activity include targeting of prodrugs.
although presently limited in scope, available studies

show the potential for cysteine s-conjugate -lyases to
unmask suitably designed prodrugs in target tumors=
tissues. other favorable -lyase reactions are associated
with activation of s-cysteine conjugates derived from
allium foods into reactive persulfide or sulfane sulfur progenitors. a large number of studies provides compelling
evidence that allium-derived s-allylcysteinyl constituents
are effective inhibitors of the cancer process. these
studies reveal that the antiproliferative effects of cysteine
s-conjugates reside in inhibited growth, cell cycle arrest
in g2=m, and induction of apoptotic signaling in several
types of human cancers. for example, in colon cancer
cells, immunofluorescence microscopy analyses reveal
that treatment with samc causes rapid microtubule depolymerization, microtubule cytoskeleton disruption, centrosome fragmentation and golgi dispersion in interphase
cells, presumably manifested through direct interaction of
eliminated sulfur-containing fragments from -lyase reactions on sulfhydryl moieties in tubulin and other redoxsensitive signal proteins (xiao et al., 2003). thus, the
eliminated products of garlic constituents by cysteine
s-conjugate -lyases may have anti-cancer properties.
we conclude that the allium-derived compounds, such
as samc, exert antiproliferative effects through a metabolite binding of sulfur-containing metabolites directly to
redox-sensitive or thiophilic sites on signal proteins or
transcription factor (ganther, 1999), thus arresting cells
in mitosis and triggering activation of other pro-apoptotic
signaling pathways. thus, the study of the biochemistry of
allium-derived cysteine s-conjugates may lead to new
avenues for cancer treatment.

acknowledgements
part of the work cited from the authors’ laboratory was supported by nih
grant ro1 es8421. we thank dr. caroline peneff (division of structural
biology, biozentrum, university of basel, switzerland) for the generous
gift of highly purified  xxxg8xxx  (see table 1).

references
abraham dg, thomas rj, cooper ajl (1995a) glutamine transaminase
k is not a major cysteine s-conjugate -lyase of rat kidney mitochondria: evidence that a high-molecular-weight enzyme fulfills this role.
mol pharmacol 48: 855–860
abraham dg, patel p, cooper ajl (1995b) isolation from rat kidney of a
high molecular weight cysteine s-conjugate -lyase with activity
toward leukotriene e4. j biol chem 270: 180–188
adcock hj, gaskin pj, shaw pn, teesdale-spittle ph, buckberry ld
(1996) novel sources of mammalian c-s lyase activity. j pharm
pharmacol 48: 150–153
anders mw (2004) glutathione-dependent bioactivation of haloalkanes
and haloalkenes. drug metab rev 36: 583–594

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases
anders mw (2005) formation and toxicity of anesthetic degradation
products. annu rev pharmacol toxicol 45: 147–176
€ ber die bildung der mercapturs€auren in organismus
baumann e (1883) u
und ihre erkennung im harn. hoppe-seylers physiol chem 84: 190–197
beal mf (2000) energetics in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative
diseases. trends neurosci 23: 298–304
bhattacharya rk, schultze mo (1967) enzymes from bovine and turkey
kidneys which cleave s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine. comp biochem physiol 22: 723–735
brauch h, weirich g, klein b, rabstein s, bolt hm, bruning t (2004)
vhl mutations in renal cell cancer: does occupational exposure to
trichloroethylene make a difference? toxicol lett 151: 301–310
bruschi sa, west ka, crabb jw, gupta rs, stevens jl (1993) mitochondrial hsp60 (p1 protein) and hsp70-like protein ( xxxg1103xxx ) are
major targets for modification during s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-lcysteine-induced toxicity. j biol chem 268: 23157–23161
bruschi sa, crabb jw, stevens jl (1994) the e3 subunit of 2-oxoglutarate, branched-chain -keto acid, and  xxxg1739xxx  are
adducted during nephrotoxic cysteine-conjugate injury. toxicologist
14: 428 (abstract)
bruschi sa, lindsay jg, crabb jw (1998) mitochondrial stress protein
recognition of inactivated dehydrogenases during mammalian cell
death. proc natl acad sci usa 95: 13413–13418
buckberry ld, blagbrough is, bycroft bw, shaw pn (1992) kynurenine
aminotransferase activity in human liver. identity with hepatic c-s
lyase activity and a physiological role for this enzyme. toxicol lett 60:
241–246
buckberry ld, patel r, hollingworth l, teesdale-spittle ph (1998)
cysteine conjugate -lyase activity of amino acid decarboxylases.
biochem soc trans 26: 269s
bull rj, orner ga, cheng rs, stillwell l, stauber aj, sasser lb,
lingohr mk, thrall bd (2002) contribution of  xxxd1870xxx  and
trichloroacetate to liver tumor induction in mice by trichloroethylene.
toxicol appl pharmacol 182: 55–65
chen q, jones tw, brown pc, stevens jl (1990) the mechanism of
cysteine conjugate cytotoxicity in renal epithelial cells. covalent
binding leads to thiol depletion and lipid peroxidation. j biol chem
1265: 21603–21611
colucci df, buyske da (1965) the biotransformation of a sulfonamide to
a mercaptan and to  xxxd68xxx  and glucuronide conjugates.
biochem pharmacol 14: 457–466
commandeur jnm, andreadou i, rooseboom m, out m, de leur lj,
groot e, vermeulen npe (2000) bioactivation of selenocysteine
se-conjugates by a highly purified rat renal cysteine conjugate
-lyase= xxxg1294xxx . j pharmacol exp ther 294: 753–761
cooper ajl (1988) glutamine aminotransferases and !-amidases. in:
kvamme e (ed) glutamine and glutamate in mammals, vol 1. crc
press, boca raton, florida, pp 33–52
cooper ajl (1994) enzymology of cysteine s-conjugate -lyases. adv
pharmacol 27: 71–113
cooper ajl (1998) mechanisms of cysteine s-conjugate -lyases. adv
enzymol 72: 199–238
cooper ajl (2004) the role of  xxxg1294xxx  (gtk) in sulfur
and -keto acid metabolism in the brain, and the possible bioactivation
of neurotoxicants. neurochem int 44: 1–21
cooper ajl, meister a (1974) isolation and properties of a new glutamine
transaminase from rat kidney. j biol chem 249: 2554–2561
cooper ajl, meister a (1981) comparative studies of glutamine transaminases from rat tissues. comp biochem physiol 69b: 137–145
cooper ajl, pinto jt (2005) aminotransferase, l-amino acid oxidase
and -lyase reactions involving cysteine s-conjugates found in allium
extracts. relevance to biological activity? biochem pharmacol 69:
209–220
cooper ajl, tate ss (1997) enzymes involved in processing of
glutathione conjugates. in: sipes ig, mcqueen ca, gandolfi aj

13

(series eds), guengerich fp (volume ed) comprehensive toxicology:
volume 3, biotransformations. elsevier, oxford, pp 329–363
cooper ajl, stephani ra, meister a (1976) enzymatic reactions of
methionine sulfoximine. conversion to the corresponding -imino and
-keto acids, and to -ketobutyrate and methane sulfinamide. j biol
chem 251: 6674–6682
cooper ajl, wang j, gartner ca, bruschi sa (2001) co-purification of
mitochondrial hsp70 and mature protein disulfide isomerase with a
functional rat kidney high-mr cysteine s-conjugate -lyase. biochem
pharmacol 62: 1345–1353
cooper ajl, bruschi sa, anders mw (2002a) toxic, halogenated
cysteine s-conjugates and targeting of mitochondrial enzymes of
energy metabolism. biochem pharmacol 64: 553–564
cooper ajl, bruschi sa, iriarte a, martinez-carrion m (2002b) mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase catalyses cysteine s-conjugate
-lyase reactions. biochem j 368: 253–261
cooper ajl, bruschi sa, conway m, hutson sm (2003a) human
mitochondrial and cytosolic branched-chain aminotransferases are
cysteine s-conjugate -lyases, but turnover leads to inactivation. biochem pharmacol 65: 181–192
cooper ajl, krasnikov b, okuno e, jeitner tm (2003b) l-alanineglyoxylate aminotransferase ii of rat kidney and liver mitochondria
possesses cysteine s-conjugate -lyase activity. a contributing factor to
the nephrotoxicity=hepatotoxicity of halogenated alkenes? biochem j
376: 169–178
cummings bs, parker jc, lash ll (2000) role of cytochrome p450 and
 xxxg1073xxx   in the metabolism and cytotoxicity of
trichloroethylene in the rat. biochem pharmacol 59: 531–543
dekant w, schrenk d, vamvakas s, henschler d (1988a) metabolism of
hexachloro-1,3-butadiene in mice: in vivo and in vitro evidence for
activation by glutathione conjugation. xenobiotica 18: 803–806
dekant w, vamvakas s, henschler d, anders mw (1988b) enzymatic
conjugation of hexachloro-1,3-butadiene with glutathione. formation
of 1-( xxxd2213xxx -s-yl)-1,2,3,4,4-pentachlorobuta-1,3-diene and 1,4bis( xxxd2213xxx -s-yl)-1,2,3,4-tetrachlorobuta-1,3-diene. drug metab
dispos 16: 701–706
dekant w, vamvakas s, koob m, kochling a, kanhai w, muller d,
henschler d (1990) a mechanism of haloalkene-induced renal carcinogenesis. environ health perspect 88: 107–110
dekant w, vamvakas s, anders mw (1994) formation and fate of
nephrotoxic and cytotoxic glutathione s-conjugates: cysteine conjugate -lyase pathway. adv pharmacol 27: 114–162
elfarra aa, hwang iy (1990) in vivo metabolites of s-(2-benzothiazolyl)l-cysteine as markers of in vivo cysteine conjugate -lyase and thiol
glucuronosyl transferase activities. drug metab dispos 18: 917–922
elfarra aa, hwang iy (1991) targeting of 6- xxxd2573xxx  to the
kidneys. metabolism and kidney-selectivity of s-(6-purinyl)-l-cysteine
analogs in rats. drug metab dsipos 21: 841–845
elfarra aa, hwang (1996) effects of ph, temperature, and chemical
structure on the stability of s-(purin-6-yl)-l-cysteine: evidence for a
novel molecular rearrangement mechanism to yield n-(purin-6-yl)-lcysteine. chem res toxicol 9: 654–658
elfarra aa, lash lh, anders mw (1986) metabolic activation and
detoxification of nephrotoxic cysteine and homocysteine s-conjugates.
proc natl acad sci usa 83: 2667–2671
elfarra aa, duescher rj, hwang iy, sicuri ar, nelson ja (1995)
targeting  xxxd3352xxx  to the kidney with s-( xxxd2245xxx -6-yl)-l-cysteine.
j pharmacol exp ther 274: 1298–1304
finkelstein mb, dekant w, anders mw (1996) cysteine conjugate lyase-catalyzed bioactivation of bromine-containing cysteine s-conjugates: stoichiometry and formation of 2,2-difluoro-3-halothiiranes.
chem res toxicol 9: 227–231
fleischauer at, poole ca, arab l (2000) garlic consumption and cancer
prevention: meta-analyses of colorectal and stomach cancers. am j
clin nutr 72: 1047–1052

14

a. j. l. cooper and j. t. pinto

ganther he (1999) selenium metabolism, selenoproteins and mechanisms of cancer prevention: complexities with  xxxg1826xxx .
carcinogenesis 20: 1657–1666
gaskin pj, adcock hj, buckberry ld, teesdale-spittle ph, shaw pn
(1995) the c-s-lysis of l-cysteine conjugates by aspartate and alanine
aminotransferase enzymes. hum exp toxicol 14: 422–427
hargus sj, fitzsimmons me, aniya y, anders mw (1991) stereochemistry of the microsomal  xxxg1073xxx  catalyzed
addition of glutathione to chlorotrifluoroethene. biochemistry 30:
717–721
hayden pj, stevens jl (1990) cysteine conjugate toxicity, metabolism
and binding to macromolecules in isolated rat kidney mitochondria.
mol pharmacol 37: 468–476
hayes jd, flanagan ju, jowsey ir (2005) glutathione transferases. annu
rev pharmacol toxicol 45: 51–88
ho hk, hu zh, tzung sp, hockenbery dm, fausto n, nelson sd,
bruschi sa (2005a)  xxxg251xxx  overexpression effectively protects
against tetrafluoroethylcysteine-induced intramitochondrial damage
and death. biochem pharmacol 69: 147–157
ho hk, white cc, fernandez c, fausto n, kavanagh tj, nelson sd,
bruschi sa (2005b) nrf2 activation involves an oxidative stress
independent pathway in tetrafluoroethylcysteine-induced cytotoxicity.
toxicol sci 86: 354–364
hollander mm, reiter aj, horner wh, cooper ajl (1989) conversion of
 xxxd416xxx  to -keto--guanidinooxybutyrate and to vinylglyoxylate
and 2-hydroxyguanidine. arch biochem biophys 270: 698–713
hwang iy, elfarra aa (1991) kidney-selective prodrugs of 6-mecaptopurine: biochemical basis of the kidney selectivity of s-(6-purinyl)-lcysteine and metabolism of new analogs in rats. j pharmacol exp ther
258: 171–177
iciek i, wlodek l (2001) biosynthesis and biological properties of
compounds containing highly reactive, reduced sulfane sulfur. polish
j pharmacol 53: 215–225
jaffe dr, hassall cd, brendel k, gandolfi aj (1983) in vivo and in vitro
nephrotoxicity of the cysteine conjugate of hexachlorobutadiene.
toxicol environ health 11: 857–856
james ea, gygi sp, adams ml, pierce rh, fausto n, aebersold rh,
nelson sd, bruschi sa (2002)  xxxg41xxx  modification,
functional inhibition, and evidence for a supramolecular complex of
the tca cycle by the renal toxicant s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-lcysteine. biochemistry 28: 6789–6797
jolivette lj, anders mw (2002) structure-activity relationship for biotransformations of haloalkenes by rat liver microsomal glutathione
transferase 1. chem res toxicol 15: 1036–1041
jones tw, qin c, schaeffer vh, stevens jl (1988) immunohistochemical
localization of  xxxg1294xxx , a rat kidney cysteine conjugate -lyase, and the relationship to the segment specificity of
cysteine conjugate nephrotoxicity. mol pharmacol 34: 621–627
kanhai w, koob m, dekant w, henschler d (1991) metabolism of 14cdichloroacetylene in rats. xenobiotica 21: 905–910
kato y, asano y, cooper ajl (1996) inactivation of brain and kidney
aspartate aminotransferases by s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine and
s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-l-cysteine. dev neurosci 18: 505–514
koob m, dekant w (1991) bioactivation of xenobiotics by formation of
toxic glutathione conjugates. chem biol interact 77: 107–136
lash lh, nelson rm, van dyke r, anders mw (1990a) purification and
characterization of human kidney cytosolic conjugate -lyase activity.
drug metab dispos 18: 50–54
lash lh, elfarra aa, rakiewicz-nemeth d, anders mw (1990b)
bioactivation of cytotoxic homocysteine s-conjugates. arch biochem
biophys 276: 322–330
lash lh, sausen pj, duescher rj, cooley aj, elfarra aa (1994) roles of
cysteine conjugate -lyase and s-oxidase in nephrotoxicity: studies
with s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine and s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-lcysteine sulfoxide. j pharmacol exp ther 269: 374–383

lash lh, xu y, elfarra aa, duescher rj, parker jc (1995) glutathionedependent metabolism of trichloroethylene in isolated liver and kidney
cells of rats and its role in mitochondrial and cellular toxicity. drug
metab dispos 23: 846–853
lash lh, shivnani a, mai j, chinnaiyan p, krause rj, elfarra aa (1997)
renal cellular transport, metabolism, and cytotoxicity of s-(6-purinyl)glutathione, a prodrug of 6- xxxd2573xxx , and analogues. biochem
pharmacol 54: 1341–1349
lash lh, putt da, hueni se, krause rj, elfarra aa (2003) roles of
necrosis, apoptosis, and mitochondrial dysfunction in s-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine sulfoxide-induced cytotoxicity in primary cultures
of human renal proximal tubular cells. j pharmacol exp ther 305:
1163–1172
lock ea, ishmael j (1998) the nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity of
1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-l-cysteine in the rat. arch toxicol 72: 347–354
lock ea, sani y, moore rb, finkelstein mb, anders mw, seawright aa
(1996) bone marrow and renal injury associated with haloalkene
cysteine conjugates in calves. arch toxicol 70: 607–619
macfarlane m, foster jr, gibson gg, king lj, lock ea (1989) cysteine
conjugate -lyase of rat kidney cytosol: characterization, immunocytochemical localization, and correlation with hexachlorobutadiene
nephrotoxicity. toxicol appl pharmacol 98: 185–197
malherbe p, alberati-giani d, k€ohler c, cesura am (1995) identification
of a mitochondrial form of kynurenine aminotransferase=glutamine
transaminase k from rat brain. febs lett 367: 141–144
marjot r, mcleod aa (1989) chronic non-neurological toxicity from
volatile substance abuse. hum toxicol 8: 301–306
mckinney ll, picken jc jr, weakley f, eldridge ac, campbell re,
cowan jc, biester he (1959) possible toxic factor of trichloroethylene-extracted  xxxd3230xxx  meal. j am chem soc 1959: 909–915
mccartney rg, rice je, sanderson sj, bunik v, lindsay h, lindsay jg
(1998) subunit interactions in the mammalian -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase components. j biol chem 237: 24159–24164
mclellan li, wolf cr, hayes jd (1989) human microsomal glutathione
s-transferase. its involvement in the conjugation of hexachloro-1,3butadiene with glutathione. biochem j 258: 87–93
miles ew (1986)  xxxd3047xxx  enzymes catalyzing -elimination
and -replacement reactions. in: dolphin d, poulson r, avramovic o
(eds)  xxxd3049xxx   xxxd3047xxx . wiley, new york, pp 253–310
mosca m, croci c, mostardini m, breton j, malyszko j, avanzi n, toma
s, benatti l, gatti s (2003) tissue expression and translational control
of rat kynurenine aminotransferase= xxxg1294xxx  mrnas.
biochim biophys acta 1628: 1–10
nash ja, king lj, lock ea, green t (1984) the metabolism and
disposition of hexachloro-1:3-butadiene in the rat and its relevance
to nephrotoxicity. toxicol appl pharmacol 73: 124–137
nguyen t, sherratt pj, nioi p, yang cs, pickett cb (2005) nrf2 controls
constitutive and inducible expression of are-driven genes through a
dynamic pathway involving nucleocytoplasmic shuttling by keap 1.
j biol chem 280: 32485–32492
odum j, green t (1982) the metabolism and toxicity of tetrafluoroethylene in the rat. toxicol appl pharmacol 76: 306–318
park lch, gibson ge, bunik v, cooper ajl (1999) inhibition of select
mitochondrial enzymes in pc12 cells exposed to s-(1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl)-l-cysteine. biochem pharmacol 58: 1557–1565
pfaller w, gstraunthaler g (1998) nephrotoxicity testing in vitro – what
we know and what we need to know. environ health perspect 106
[suppl 2]: 559–569
pinto jt, lapsia s, shah a, santiago h, kim g (2001) antiproliferative
effects of garlic-derived and other allium related compounds. in: go
vlw (ed) nutrition and cancer prevention: new insights into the role of
phytochemicals. kluwer academic, new york, pp 83–106 (advances
in experimental medicine and biology, vol 492)
pinto jt, krasnikov bf, cooper ajl (2005) antiproliferative effects of
garlic and its potential chemopreventive activity. j nutr (in press)

cysteine s-conjugate -lyases
pushkin a, carpenito g, abuladze n, newman d, tsuprun v, ryazantsev
s, motemoturu s, sassani p, solovieva n, dukkipati r, kurtz i (2004)
structural characterization, tissue distribution, and functional expression of murine aminoacylase iii. am j physiol cell physiol 286:
c848–c856
ovadi j, srere pa (2000) macromolecular compartmentation and channeling. int rev cytol 192: 255–280
rhodes d, gage da, cooper ajl, hanson ad (1997) s-methylmethionine conversion to dimethylsulfoniopropionate: evidence for an unusual transamination reaction. plant physiol 115: 1541–1548
rooseboom m, vermeulen npe, andreadou i, commandeur jnm (2000)
evaluation of the kinetics of -elimination reactions of selenocysteine
se-conjugates in human renal cytosol: possible implications for the use
as kidney selective prodrugs. j pharmacol exp ther 294: 762–769
rooseboom m, commandeur jnm, floor gc, rettie ae, vermeulen npe
(2001a) selenoxidation by flavin-containing monooxygenases as a
novel pathway for -elimination of selenocysteine se-conjugates.
chem res toxicol 14: 127–134
rooseboom m, vermeulen npe, van hemert n, commandeur jnm
(2001b) bioactivation of chemopreventive selenocysteine se-conjugates
and related amino acids by amino acid oxidases – novel route of
metabolism of selenoamino acids. chem res toxicol 14: 996–1005
rooseboom m, vermeulen npe, durgut f, commandeur jnm (2002)
comparative study on the bioactivation mechanisms and toxicity of
te-phenyl-l-tellurocysteine, se-phenyl- xxxd3186xxx , and s-phenyll-cysteine. chem res toxicol 15: 1610–1618
shim j-y, richard am (1997) theoretical evaluation of two plausible
routes for bioactivation of s-(1,1-difluoro-2,2-dihaloethyl)-l-cysteine
conjugates. chem res toxicol 10: 103–110
silbernagl s, heuner a (1993) renal transport and metabolism of
mercapturic acids and their precursors, the s-conjugates of glutathione
and cysteine. in: anders mw, dekant w, henschler d, oberleithner,
silbernagl s (eds) renal disposition and nephrotoxicity of xenobiotics.
academic press, san diego, pp 135–154
stevens jl (1985) isolation and characterization of a rat liver enzyme with
both cysteine conjugate  lyase and  xxxg1296xxx  activity. j biol chem
260: 7945–7950
stevens jl, jones dp (1989) the  xxxd68xxx  pathway: biosynthesis,
intermediary metabolism, and physiological disposition. in: dolphin d,
poulson r, avramovic o (eds) glutathione: chemical, biochemical and
medical aspects, part b. new york, wiley, pp 45–84
stevens jl, robbins jd, byrd ra (1986) a purified cysteine conjugate
-lyase from rat kidney cytosol. requirement for an -keto acid or an
amino acid oxidase for activity and identity with soluble glutamine
transaminase k. j biol chem 261: 15529–15537
stockman s (1916) cases of poisoning in cattle by feeding on soy bean
after extraction of the oil. j comp pathol 29: 95–107
stoner gl, episenberg ma (1975) purification and properties of 7,8diaminoperlargonic acid aminotransferase, an enzyme in the biotin
biosynthetic pathway. j biol chem 250: 4029–4036
sweatt aj, garcia-espinosa ma, wallin r, hutson sm (2004) branchedchain amino acids and neurotransmitter metabolism: expression of
cytosolic branched-chain aminotransferase ( xxxg246xxx ) in the cerebellum
and hippocampus. j comp  xxxd122xxx  477: 360–370
tateishi m, suzuki s, shimizu h (1978) cysteine conjugate -lyase in rat
liver. a novel enzyme catalyzing formation of thiol-containing metabolites of drugs. j biol chem 253: 8854–8859
teesdale-spittle ph, adcock hj, patterson lh, buckberry ld (1996)
rationalisation of the c-s lyase activity of aspartate aminotransferase.
biochem soc trans 24: 141s

15

tomisawa h, ichimoto n, ichihara s, fukazawa h, tateishi m
(1988) involvement of cystathionase in the formation of alkanethiols from corresponding cysteine conjugates. xenobiotica 18:
1029–1037
toohey ji (1989) sulphane sulfur in biological systems: a possible
regulatory role. biochem j 264: 625–632 (erratum in: biochem j
267: 843, 1990)
toohey ji (2001) possible involvement of sulfane sulfur in homocysteineinduced atherosclerosis. med hypotheses 56: 259–261
townsend dm, deng m, zhang l, lapus mg, hanigan mh (2003)
metabolism of cisplatin to a nephrotoxin in proximal tubule cells.
j am soc nephrol 14: 1–10
ueno h, likos jj, metzler de (1982) chemistry of inactivation of
cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase by serine o-sulfate. biochemistry
21: 4387–4393
uttamsingh v, baggs rb, krenitsky dm, anders mw (2000) immunohistochemical localization of the acylases that catalyze deacylation of
n- xxxd68xxx  and haloalkene-derived mercapturates. drug
metab dispos 28: 625–632
vamvakas s, k€oster u (1993) the nephrotoxin dichlorovinylcysteine
induces expression of the protooncogenes c-fos and c-myc in llc- xxxg1757xxx 
cells – a comparative investigation with growth factors and 12
o-tetradecanoylphorbolacetate. cell biol toxicol 9: 1–13
vamvakas s, bittner d, k€oster u (1993) enhanced expression of the
protooncogenes c-myc and c-fos in normal and malignant growth.
toxicol lett 67: 161–172
van horn cg, wallin r, fujii h, hutson sm (2004) evidence for a direct
protein–protein interaction between the leucine catabolic enzymes.
faseb j 18, a848 (abstract)
v€olkel w, dekant w (1998) chlorothioketene, the ultimate reactive
intermediate formed by cysteine conjugate -lyase-mediated cleavage
of the trichloroethene metabolite s-(1,2,-dichlorvinyl)-l-cysteine,
forms cytosine adducts in organic solvents, but not in aqueous solution.
chem res toxicol 11: 1082–1088
wallin a, gerdes rg, morgenstern r, jones tw, ormstad k (1988)
features of microsomal and cytosolic glutathione conjugation of
hexachlorobutadiene in rat liver. chem biol interact 68: 1–11
wolf cr, berry pn, nash ja, lock ea (1984) role of microsomal and
cytosolic glutathione s-transferases in the conjugation of hexachloro1:3-butadiene and its possible relevance to toxicity. j pharmacol exp
ther 228: 202–208
wu c, schaum j (2000) exposure assessment of trichloroethylene.
environ health perspect 108 [suppl 2]: 359–363
xiao d, pinto jt, soh j-w, deguchi a, gundersen gg, palazzo af, yoon
j-t, shirin h, weinstein ib (2003) induction of apoptosis by the garlicderived  xxxd3553xxx -allylmercaptocysteine (samc) is associated with
microtubule depolymerization and c-jun nh2 terminal kinase 1 activation. cancer res 63: 6825–7837
yamauchi a, stijntjes gj, commandeur jnm, vermeulen npe (1993)
purification of  xxxg1294xxx =cysteine conjugate -lyase
from rat renal cytosol based on hydrophobic interaction hplc and gel
permeation fplc. protein expr purif 4: 552–562
zhang l, hanigan mh (2003) role of cysteine s-conjugate -lyase in the
metabolism of cisplatin. j pharmacol exp ther 306: 988–994

authors’ address: arthur j. l. cooper, ph.d., d.sc., professor of biochemistry, burke medical research institute, 785 mamaroneck avenue,
white plains, ny 10605, usa.
e-mail: acooper@burke.org

