acta obstetricia et gynecologica. 2006; 85: 207 /211

original article

intrauterine pressure, ischemia markers, and experienced pain
during administration of a vasopressin  xxxg229xxx  antagonist in
spontaneous and vasopressin-induced dysmenorrhea

ragner liedman1, lee grant2, sarah igidbashian3, ian james2,
alison mcleod2, laurence skillern2 & mats åkerlund1
1

department of obstetrics and gynecology, university hospital of lund, sweden, 3verona, italy, and 2pfizer global
research, clinical research and development, sandwich, uk

abstract
background. a model to study the effect of vasopressin v1a antagonist in dysmenorrhea. methods. a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial was performed. eight patients with primary dysmenorrhea and eight tuballigated, healthy subjects participated on days 1 /2 of two consecutive menstruations. at each menstruation a bolus injection
of 10 pmol/kg of vasopressin was administered before and during infusion of either 300 mg/min of atosiban or placebo.
intrauterine pressure was measured as area under the curve throughout the experiments. ischemia markers in plasma and
pain recorded by a visual analog scale were measured before and after each  xxxd3495xxx  as well as before and after
the start of either atosiban or placebo infusion. results. vasopressin injections elevated area under the curve in both healthy
volunteers and dysmenorrhea subjects. the vasopressin-induced rise in area under the curve was lower during atosiban
administration than during infusion of placebo in both groups. none of the ischemia markers differed between or within
groups at vasopressin injections or atosiban/placebo infusions. in subjects with dysmenorrhea the increase in pain following
the administration of vasopressin was significantly lower during atosiban than during placebo infusion. healthy volunteers
experienced only slight discomfort after the vasopressin injections. conclusions . atosiban reduces vasopressin-induced
intrauterine pressure in both healthy volunteers and dysmenorrheics, and reported pain in subjects with dysmenorrhea. the
ischemia markers are not a useful biomarker index in women with dysmenorrhea. the dysmenorrhea pain evoked by
vasopressin correlated poorly with area under the curve, which may suggest that the effect is mediated by more than one
v1a-like receptor. we conclude that this model with recordings in healthy women is useful in the evaluation of drug
candidates for primary dysmenorrhea.

key words: primary dysmenorrhea, intrauterine pressure, uterine ischemia markers, vasopressin v1a antagonist, atosiban

women with primary dysmenorrhea have increased
myometrial activity and reduced uterine blood
flow (1), which may derive from an increased
secretion of  xxxd3495xxx  (2 /5). vasopressin acts on the uterus at vasopressin v1a and, to
some extent, oxytocin receptors (6 /8). the etiological importance of vasopressin in dysmenorrhea
was confirmed by the therapeutic effect of
a peptide analog 1-deamino-2-d-tyr(oet)-4-thr8-orn-oxytocin (atosiban), which competitively
blocks vasopressin v1a and oxytocin receptors
(9). an orally active vasopressin v1a and oxytocin

receptor antagonist, sr 49059, was also shown to
relieve dysmenorrhea when given prophylactically
before onset of symptoms (10). however, the
influence of vasopressin antagonists on dysmenorrheic pain recorded in parallel to myometrial activity
and uterine blood flow has not been studied
previously.
the method of recording intrauterine pressure as
an index of myometrial activity is well established
(1/5,7,8). regarding blood flow, measurement of
ischemia markers in plasma could possibly be a
useful alternative to more complex methods such as

correspondence: professor mats åkerlund, department of obstetrics and gynaecology, university hospital, se-221 85 lund, sweden. e-mail:
mats.akerlund@med.lu.se

(received 12 october 2005; accepted 19 november 2005)
issn 0001-6349 print/issn 1600-0412 online # 2006 taylor & francis
doi: 10.1080/00016340500495082

208

r. liedman et al.

thermodilution or doppler ultrasound (11/13).
furthermore, in recordings of intrauterine pressure
and pain in drug studies, healthy, sterilized women
may be preferable to young women with primary
dysmenorrhea due to a more consistent uterine
activity in the former and easier insertion of a
pressure catheter (11). in drug studies toxicological
requirements would also be reduced in such women
as they cannot become pregnant. however, the
validity of the new model in testing vasopressin v1a
receptor antagonists was not studied (11).
in the present study we recorded pain and
intrauterine pressure, and obtained blood samples
for measurement of ischemia markers in patients
with dysmenorrhea and in healthy, sterilized women.
the effect of the antagonist atosiban versus placebo
on spontaneous and vasopressin-induced dysmenorrhea was also studied. we hypothesized that healthy
women have a similar change in intrauterine pressure
following administration of a v1a antagonist compared to women with primary dysmenorrhea.

material and methods
subjects
sixteen women participated in the study. all women
had regular menstrual cycles and had a body mass
index b/27. eight of them suffered from moderate to
severe dysmenorrhea, defined as a history of at least
6 months of painful menstruation necessitating drug
therapy. the age in this group ranged from 20 to
30 years (mean 23 years). all were nulliparous and
used contraceptives, but not an intrauterine device
or hormonal contraception within three months
prior to the start of the study. another eight healthy,
nonpregnant women aged 36/45 years (mean
40 years) formed a ‘‘control’’ group. all were parous
and had undergone sterilization by tubal division at
laparoscopy, at which they had been found to be
gynecologically normal. six of these women were
participants in a previous study (11). all women
gave their written consent to participation in the
study, which was conducted according to ich
guidelines and was approved by the local ethics
committee.

the start of either atosiban or placebo infusion.
women were randomized to either placebo or
atosiban using a computer-generated code.

experimental procedure
at a screening visit all participating women underwent a general physical and gynecological examination, a pelvic ultrasound, routine blood and urine
safety tests, hiv and hepatitis a/b serology, chlamydia testing, and a 12-lead electrocardiogram.
urine pregnancy tests were performed in the dysmenorrhea group at the screening and follow-up
visits as well as prior to all invasive procedures on
study days.
the recording procedure is summarized in figure
1. within the first 48 h after onset of menstruation,
the subjects attended a first recording session
measuring uterine contractility and pain as previously described (11). a second recording was
performed during the next menstruation. at each
recording all subjects were given two intravenous
bolus injections over one minute of 10 pmol/kg
vasopressin in 0.9 ml of 5% glucose 40 and
120 min after the start of recording. administration
of atosiban (tractocile† , ferring pharmaceuticals,
copenhagen, denmark) or placebo was started after
80 min. initially, a bolus intravenous dose of atosiban of 0.9 ml of a solution of 7.5 mg/ml was given
followed by infusion at a rate of 300 mg/min or
placebo (5% glucose) was administered in the same
manner and in randomized order. the infusion
continued for the rest of the recording.
the uterine contractility was measured as area
under the curve (auc) of intrauterine pressure,
which was recorded by a microtransducer catheter
(millar instruments inc., houston, texas, usa).
the pressure signals were stored in a computer
(software from synectics ab, stockholm, sweden)
connected to an a/d signal converter (polygraaf 12
bit, synectics ab, stockholm, sweden). the auc

study design
a prospective, randomized, double-blind, two-period, cross-over study was performed. the study
included three phases, a screening phase, a study
period phase including two visits, and a follow-up
phase. at each study period one intravenous bolus
injection of vasopressin was given before and after

figure 1. diagram illustrating procedures and time periods
including the analyses of the study.

vasopressin  xxxg229xxx  antagonist in dysmenorrhea
was derived over 10-min intervals throughout the
study periods.
blood samples were taken for analyses of vasopressin and ischemia markers (c reactive protein,
ckmb isoenzyme and isoforms, ck, troponin-t
and hypoxanthine) 10 min before and 10 min after
each injection as well as before and after start of
atosiban and placebo infusions. the women had an
indwelling venous catheter placed in each arm. one
of these catheters was used for administration of the
study drugs, the other for blood sampling.
during the recording sessions women were asked
to indicate their pain experience at 2-min intervals
for 10 min before and 10 min after each vasopressin
injection and start of infusion. a visual analog scale
(vas, innovaderm dvas10) was used for measuring the pain where the endpoints were scores that
ranged between 00.0 (no pain) and 99.9 (worst
menstrual pain the patient had ever experienced).
the vas scores were visually assessed.
a follow-up visit was performed within 14 days
after the study period. at this visit, physical and
gynecological examinations including pelvic ultrasound and electrocardiogram were performed, and
blood and urine samples taken for laboratory safety
tests.

statistical methods
a log transformation of auc was used. the endpoints were analyzed by a residual maximum likelihood (reml) analysis with random effect
(subject) and fixed effects (visit and treatment)
with baseline as a covariate. individual time profiles
were plotted for auc over 10-min intervals. the
following analyses were performed:

209

the sample size was determined on the basis of
previous experience gained from exploratory studies
with uterine measurements conducted previously by
the center, rather than formal power calculations.
results
all women had normal physical examinations and
laboratory tests both at screening and at the followup visit. all subjects completed the study successfully except one in the healthy volunteer group who
missed the second recording.
a representative recording of auc of intrauterine
pressure over time in a woman with dysmenorrhea is
shown in figure 2. the recording procedures were
technically successful in all cases and well tolerated.
the results of the auc analyses (10-min periods
prior to and following intervention) are summarized
in table i. a comparison of the baselines taken prior
to each of the vasopressin doses showed no statistically significant difference between the recordings
with placebo and those with atosiban in either
patients or healthy volunteers (figure 1 a versus
e). there were no significant differences between
the aucs before and after the start of atosiban or
placebo infusion (figure 1 c versus d). the mean
rise in auc after  xxxd3495xxx  compared to
before was significantly greater during placebo infusion than with atosiban both in patients with
dysmenorrhea and healthy volunteers (figure 1 b
versus f).
regarding ischemia markers, no significant differences were found between all within groups before or
after vasopressin and atosiban/placebo administration (not shown).
a summary of vas scores in patients with
dysmenorrhea at baseline, before and after start
of atosiban or placebo infusion, and induced by

1. confirmatory comparison of baselines pre
vasopressin (figure 1: a versus e).
2. change observed between pre (baseline) and
post start of atosiban/placebo infusion (c
versus d).
3. change observed as a result of vasopressininduced contraction (after either atosiban or
placebo) from the baseline of vasopressininduced contraction (b versus f).
since the healthy volunteers only experienced discomfort and not pain as the vasopressin was
administered, it was decided to disregard the healthy
volunteer vas data. the auc was plotted against
the corresponding vas score over 10-min periods
before and after each injection as well as before and
after start of infusions.

figure 2. representative recording of log auc before and after
atosiban treatment or placebo in a subject with primary dysmenorrhea.

210

r. liedman et al.

table i. summary of uterine pressure analyses (log auc) in dysmenorrhea patients and healthy volunteers (hv) receiving bolus injections
of vasopressin and infusion of atosiban and placebo

baseline comparison (figure 1: a versus e)
pre & post atosiban/placebo (c versus d)
vasopressin induced (b versus f)

patients
hv
patients
hv
patients
hv

atosiban

placebo

/0.02
/0.12
/0.01
/0.11
/0.54
/0.67

0.13
0.11
/0.06
/0.11
/0.10
0.00

vasopressin during atosiban or placebo infusion is
shown in table ii. no difference at baseline during
the two treatments was observed. regarding differences in vas before and after start of infusion of
atosiban or placebo, there was a trend of an effect of
atosiban on pain with a p- value of 0.2. the pain
summarized as vas 10 min after  xxxd3495xxx  was significantly reduced when the subjects
were given atosiban in comparison to placebo.
mean vas recordings 10 min before and after
each injection and start of infusions in individual
subjects with dysmenorrhea are shown in figure 3.
the increase in experienced pain observed at  xxxd3495xxx  in all patients at baseline was
markedly reduced or completely abolished when
atosiban was infused, but not during placebo administration. the maximum change in vas
occurred before maximum auc in 68% of the
subjects. no significant correlation between the
intrauterine pressure and pain could be established.
discussion
recording of intrauterine pressure together with
repeated blood sampling and pain monitoring in
the present model was easy to perform and the
procedure was well tolerated by both patients with
dysmenorrhea and healthy volunteers. during
atosiban infusion the increase in auc evoked
by vasopressin was significantly diminished in comparison to placebo infusion in both groups. this
finding is in agreement with previous results of
studies with v1a antagonists (10,12). in patients
with dysmenorrhea,  xxxd3495xxx  induced
further pain, which was also significantly reduced by

mean difference
/0.15
/0.22
0.05
0.00
/0.44
/0.67

95% ci
(/0.57,
(/0.80,
(/0.13,
(/0.14,
(/0.82,
(/1.10,

0.27)
0.35)
0.23)
0.14)
/0.07)
/0.24)

p value
0.4166
0.4181
0.5413
0.9843
0.0251
0.0084

atosiban infusion in comparison to placebo. thus,
the present model of recording vasopressin-induced
pain seems to be valid. no significant effect of
atosiban infusion on spontaneous uterine pressure
in either group was observed. however, regarding
dysmenorrheic pain a trend of an effect of atosiban
was seen. in the design of further studies to explore
the therapeutic effects of vasopressin antagonists in
dysmenorrhea, the number of patients should therefore be substantially bigger than that of the present
investigation. then, this methodology of recording
intrauterine pressure and pain with repeated vasopressin injections could be useful in the development
and evaluation of newly developed vasopressin v1a
antagonists.
local ischemia caused by increased uterine
contractility and/or vasoconstriction in uterine
vessels is probably an important cause of the pain
in dysmenorrhea (1). there are no established
markers in plasma for uterine ischemia. therefore,
we studied the existing ischemia markers for the
heart in this study (13). we also studied levels of
c-reactive proteins (crp), as a relation to impaired
oxygenation has been shown in patients with acute
aortic dissection (14). in an earlier investigation we
found a significant difference for creatine kinase
isoenzyme mb (ckmb) and crp between patients
with dysmenorrhea and healthy volunteers, although
no significant difference was observed between
concentrations before and after vasopressin injections. the results of the present study did not
confirm these differences. we therefore conclude
that
these
ischemia
markers
do
not
discriminate between primary dysmenorrhea and

table ii. summary of visual analog score analyses in the dysmenorrhea group
atosiban
baseline comparison (figure 1: a versus e)
pre & post atosiban/placebo (c versus d)
vasopressin induced (b versus f)

/9.4
/8.7
/20

placebo
0.5
/2.6
6

mean difference

95% ci

p value

/10.0
/6.1
/26

(/31, 11)
(/16, 4)
(/47, /5)

0.318
0.2033
0.0202

211

vasopressin  xxxg229xxx  antagonist in dysmenorrhea
vas 70

mean vas-scores before and after vasopressin injections

2. .åkerlund m, strömberg p, forsling ml. primary dysmenorrhoea and vasopressin. br j obstet gynaecol. 1979;86:484 /7.
3. strömberg p, .åkerlund m, forsling ml, granström e,
kindahl h. vasopressin and prostaglandin in premenstrual
pain and primary dysmenorrhoea. acta obstet gynecol
scand. 1984;63:533 /8.
4. ekström p, laudanski t, mrugacz g, forsling m, kindahl h,
.åkerlund m. stimulation of vasopressin release in women
with primary dysmenorrhoea and after oral contraceptive
treatment / effect on uterine contractility. br j obstet
gynaecol. 1992;99:680 /4.
5. ekström p, forsling m, kindahl h, åkerlund m. perception
of pain in primary dysmenorrhoea in relation to uterine
activity and plasma concentrations of vasopressin and a pg
f2a metabolite. j neuroendocrinol, 4th international conference on the neurohypophysis 1990; p. 168 /71.
6. .åkerlund m, brouard r, bossmar t, kostrzewska a,
laudanski t, lemancewicz a, et al. receptor binding of
oxytocin and vasopressin antagonists and the inhibitory effects
on isolated myometrium from preterm and term pregnant
women. br j obstet gynaecol. 1999;106:1047 /53.
7. bossmar t, .åkerlund m, fantoni g, maggi m, szamatowics
j, laudanski t. receptor-mediated uterine effects of oxytocin
and vasopressin in non-pregnant women. br j obstet gynaecol. 1995;102:907 /12.
8. bossmar t, brouard r, döberl a, .åkerlund m. effects of sr
49059, an orally active vasopressin  xxxg229xxx  antagonist on
vasopressin-induced uterine contractions in women. br j
obstet gynecol. 1997;104:471 /7.
9. .åkerlund m. can primary dysmenorrhoea be alleviated by a
vasopressin antagonist? acta obstet gynecol scand. 1987;66:
459 /61.
10. brouard r, bossmar t, fournié-lloret d, chassard d,
.åkerlund m. effect of sr 49059, an orally active vasopressin
 xxxg229xxx  antagonist, in the treatment of dysmenorrhoea.
br j obstet gynaecol. 2000;107:614 /9.
11. liedman r, skillern l, james i, mclead a, grant l, åkerlund
m. validation of a test model of induced dysmenorrhoea.
acta obstet gynecol scand. in press.
12. hauksson a, .åkerlund m, melin p. uterine blood flow and
myometrial activity at menstruation, and the action of
vasopressin and a synthetic antagonist. br j obstet gynaecol.
1988;95:898 /904.
13. amsterdam ea, deedwania p. bedside evaluation of cardiac
markers. point-of-care testing can differentiate acute coronary
syndromes. postgraduate medicine online. 2005;118(3).
14. komukai k, shibata t, mochizuki s.  xxxg520xxx  is
related to impaired oxygenation in patients with acute aortic
dissection. int heart j. 2005;46:795 /9.
15. chan wy, levi r, wo nc, koyama m, stoev s, cheng ll,
et al. novel selective hypotensive vasopressin peptides:
cardiovascular and structure-activity-relationship studies.
eur j pharmacol. 2001;4:65 /72.
16. widholm o, kantero rl. menstrual patterns of adolescent
girls according to the chronological and gynaecological ages.
acta obstet gynecol scand. 1971;50(suppl 14):19 /29.
17. thorbert g, alm p, björklund ab, owman c, sjöberg no.
adrenergic innervation of the human uterus. disappearance
of the transmitter and transmitter-forming enzymes during
pregnancy. am j obstet gynecol. 1979;135:223 /6.
18. lundström v, gréen k, wiqvist n. prostaglandins, indomethacin and dysmenorrhoea. prostaglandins. 1976;11:893 /
904.
19. bitner m, kattenhorn j, hatfield c, gao j, kellstein d.
efficacy and tolerability of  xxxd2517xxx  in the treatment of
primary dysmenorrhoea. int j clin pract. 2004;58:340 /5.
/

60
50
40
30

/

20
10
0
a

b

e

f

a

b

placebo

e

f

atosiban

/

/

figure 3. mean (9/se) 10-min vas scores before and after each
 xxxd3495xxx  in subjects with dysmenorrhea. a, before
first  xxxd3495xxx ; b, after first  xxxd3495xxx ; e,
before second  xxxd3495xxx ; f, after second vasopressin
injection.

normal condition, nor are there any age- or
parity-related differences, which are consistent.
the correlation between increases in auc and
vasopressin-induced pain was poor. a recent publication (15) has suggested that myometrial and
vascular smooth muscle v1a receptors are different.
it is possible that this is the explanation for the
difference observed between auc and pain in
dysmenorrheic patients.
up to 50% of young, nulliparous women suffer
from primary dysmenorrhea (16). the pain often
disappears after the first pregnancy, which has been
attributed to partial denervation (17). the common
treatment for this condition is analgetics, in particular nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, but
sufficient pain relief with this treatment is only
achieved in about 70% of patients (18). with
cox-2 selective inhibitors the efficacy is about the
same (19). an orally active compound, which
specifically blocks the effect of vasopressin on the
uterus, may be an interesting alternative treatment
for primary dysmenorrhea.
acknowledgements
the authors acknowledge david sudworth and
jeanette fall for their skilful monitoring of this study
and also biochemical analysts louise lindau and
bodil nilsson for their excellent assistance. this
study was sponsored by pfizer limited, sandwich,
uk. mrs alison mcleod and drs james, skillern and
grant are employees of pfizer limited. the other
authors are supported by grants from the company.

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

references

/

/

/

1. .åkerlund m, andersson k-e, ingemarsson i. effects of
terbutaline on myometrial activity, endometrial blood flow
and lower abdominal pain in women with primary dysmenorrhoea. br j obstet gynaecol. 1976;83:673 /8.
/

/

/

/

/

/

