1364

proarrhythmic response to
sodium channel blockade
theoretical model and numerical experiments
c. frank starmer, phd; anselmo a. lastra, phd;
vladislav v. nesterenko, phd; and augustus 0. grant, md, phd

background. the use of  xxxd2113xxx  and  xxxd1991xxx  was terminated in the cardiac arrhythmia
suppression trial because of an excess of sudden cardiac deaths in the active treatment group.
such events might arise from reentrant rhythms initiated by premature stimulation in the
presence of anisotropic sodium channel availability. drugs that bind to sodium channels
increase the functional dispersion of refractoriness by slowing (a result of the drug-unbinding
process) the transition from an inexcitable state to an excitable state. it is interesting that
 xxxd1991xxx  and  xxxd2113xxx  unbind slowly (15-20 seconds), whereas lidocaine and  xxxd2669xxx 
unbind rapidly (0.2-1.3 seconds).
methods and results. with a computer representation of a cable with beeler-reuter membrane
properties, we found a small (6 msec) vulnerable window that occurred 338 msec after the last
drive stimulus. premature stimuli falling within the vulnerable window resulted in unidirectional block and reentrant activation. in the presence of a slowly unbinding drug, the window
was delayed an additional 341 msec, and its duration was extended to 38 msec. the delay
(antiarrhythmic effect) before the onset of the vulnerable window and its duration (proarrhythmic effect) were both dependent on the sodium channel availability and the recovery process.
both effects were also prolonged when sodium channel availability was reduced by membrane
depolarization. defining the proarrhythmic potential as the duration of the vulnerable window,
we found that hypothetical use-dependent class i drugs have a greater proarrhythmic potential
than non-use-dependent drugs.
conclusions. the antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic properties of pure sodium channel
antagonists are both dependent on sodium channel availability. consequently, the price for
increased antiarrhythmic efficacy (suppressed premature ventricular contractions) is an
increased proarrhythmic vulnerability to unsuppressed premature ventricular contractions.
(circulation 1991;84:1364-1377)

r ecently, the use of  xxxd2113xxx  and  xxxd1991xxx 
was discontinued in the cardiac arrhythmia suppression trial (cast),1 but the use

of  xxxd2669xxx  was continued. among the causes of
sudden death, this study suggests that certain antiarrhythmic agents can significantly amplify the likelihood of life-threatening arrhythmic events. there
are many possible mechanisms for drug-associated
arrhythmogenesis, including modification of passive
properties2 and slowed conduction as a result of
from the departments of medicine and computer science

(c.f.s., a.a.l., a.o.g.), duke university medical center,
durham, n.c.; and the laboratory of heart electrophysiology
(v.v.n.), institute of experimental cardiology, academy of medical science, moscow, ussr.
supported in part by grants hl-32994, hl-32708, and hl11307 from the national heart, lung, and blood institute, national institutes of health (nih), and by the joint us-ussr
scientific exchange in problem area 5, sudden death. computer

modified sodium channel conductance.3 all of these
drugs interact with the cardiac sodium channel and
modify the time course of availability of sodium
channels for recruitment in the excitatory process.4
reentrant rhythms occur in a variety of settings,
and it has been proposed that unidirectional block,
perhaps resulting from a dispersion of the refractory
states of individual cells, is a requirement for initiation.5 investigators have discussed dispersion of refractoriness as a reflection of cellular variations of
time was provided by grants from the pittsburgh supercomputer
center through grant rr-04154 from the division of research
resources, nih; the north carolina supercomputer center; the
advanced computing research facility, mathematics and computer science division, argonne national laboratories; and cray
research inc.
address for correspondence: c. frank starmer, phd, box 3181,
duke university medical center, durham, nc 27710.
received november 27, 1990; revision accepted may 14, 1991.

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential

the repolarization process derived from structural
differences between cells. less obvious is the possibility of achieving functional dispersion of refractoriness in an array of identical excitable cells.6 this
dispersion is the result of identical repolarization
processes coupled with a finite conduction velocity.
with activation, cells make a transition between an
excitable state and an inexcitable state. after an
interval of time associated with the plateau region of
the cardiac action potential, cells return to the excitable state. because activation and recovery wave
fronts propagate at a finite velocity, cells in different
spatial regions of the heart will exhibit different
states of recovery or excitability, depending on their
location relative to the activation or recovery wave
front.
from a theoretical perspective, however, the distribution of refractory states relative to the stimulation site is also critical for initiating reentrant processes. if refractoriness is dispersed but isotropic
(varies in a similar manner in all directions relative to
a stimulation site), then premature stimulation will
result in only bidirectional block or bidirectional
conduction. on the other hand, if refractoriness is
anisotropic in the region of the stimulation site, then
unidirectional block is possible. spach and colleagues7 elegantly demonstrated microreentry resulting from premature stimulation in the presence of
structural anisotropy as determined by directional
differences in cell properties. functional anisotropy
in an array of identical cells can be generated for a
short period of time by selecting a premature stimulation site remote from a drive site. thus, when the
wave front derived from drive site stimulation passes
over the premature stimulation site, refractoriness
will transiently be greater in the antegrade direction
than in the retrograde direction-a result of functional anisotropy. as with structural anisotropy, a
critically timed stimulus at a site of functional anisotropic excitability will also lead to unidirectional
block.
the critical time when refractoriness is anisotropic
occurs when cells experience a transition from an
inexcitable state to an excitable state such that sodium channel availability is different in different
directions. (the same applies to nodal tissue where
calcium channel availability is the primary determinant of excitability.) the duration of the transition
time between inexcitable and excitable states is a
complex function of repolarizing currents, membrane
potential, and the degree of sodium channel availability, whereas spatial dispersion of channel availability is a function of the direction and velocity of
the propagated wave front.
lidocaine,  xxxd2669xxx ,  xxxd2113xxx , and  xxxd1991xxx 
block sodium channels in a use-dependent manner4 8-11 and slow the recovery of channel availability.
use-dependent antagonism, where the formation of
drug-complexed channels is dependent on the stimulation frequency, will result when blockade is sensitive to membrane potential and/or channel protein

1365

conformation. thus, under certain conditions, increasing the frequency of cellular stimulation will
result in increasing the fraction of blocked channels.
increasing the degree of blockade with increasing
frequency of stimulation is the cumulative effect of
incomplete unblocking during the interstimulus interval, which in turn is dependent on the time course
of uncoupling of the drug-complexed channel.
these drugs exhibit unbinding time constants ranging from 200 msec for lidocaine4 to 20 seconds for
 xxxd1991xxx ,11 which can significantly affect sodium
channel availability at rapid heart rates. because
lidocaine has few reported proarrhythmic properties
relative to those reported for  xxxd2113xxx , we hypothesized that one dimension of the proarrhythmic
potential of an antiarrhythmic agent might be associated with the "apparent" dispersion of refractoriness (functional anisotropy) as determined by sodium
channel availability. based on this hypothesis, we
anticipated that lidocaine would be the least proarrhythmic (a result of rapid recovery of channel
availability), whereas slower unbinding drugs would
be progressively more proarrhythmic.
to test this hypothesis, we simulated the electrical
responses to premature stimulation in both a 4-cm
cable with membrane properties identical to those of
the beeler-reuter ventricular cell12 and an 8-cm ring
of cells. because demonstration of reentry is dependent on path length, we chose to focus these investigations on exploring the factors controlling unidirectional block in the cable and used the simulations of
reentry in a ring to demonstrate that reentry did
follow from unidirectional block, given a sufficiently
long path.
our primary goal was to explore functional anisotropy by using different sites of drive and premature
stimulation to identify the vulnerable window (vw)
during which premature stimulation produced unidirectional conduction block and to observe the effects
of sodium channel availability and the rate of unblocking on the duration of vw. these computational experiments were followed by in vitro experiments13 in which the protocol for searching for the
vulnerable region was patterned after the results of
the computational experiments.
model
the numerical experiments used a one-dimensional cable model of beeler-reuter membrane.12
the unmodified beeler-reuter model was selected
for several reasons. it has been used in many simulation studies (e.g., references 14 and 15), and the
model of the depolarization process has been
matched to the model of the repolarization process.
this is particularly important because our model of
drug-channel interaction is based on binding to inactivated channels, and the lifetime of an inactivated
channel is determined by the time course of repolarization. the equations were discretized and solved
numerically.1617 the values of the model parameters
are illustrated in table 1.

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

1366

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991

table 1. parameter values of numerical experiments

a x=0.033 cm

c= 1 /lf/cm'

a t=0.01 msec

ri=250 qcm

gna=4.0 ms/cm2
gnac=0.003 ms/cm2
gk=0.35 ms/cm2
g,l=0.8 ms/cm2

length=4.2 or 8.0 cm
radius=0.0007 cm
mesh ratio=0.0126

gca=0.09 ms/m2
vna=50 mv

there are several models of ion channel blockade.18-20 we chose the guarded receptor model,21 a
generalization of armstrong's model,18 to represent
the interaction between the cardiac sodium channel
and an antiarrhythmic drug. the guarded receptor
model involves fewer rate constants than the modulated receptor model19 and does not assume modification of the channel inactivation process in drugcomplexed channels. furthermore, experimentally
derived rate constants for lidocaine based on the
guarded receptor model are readily available.22,23 for
purposes of the numerical experiments, we used
lidocaine as a model drug with blockade occurring
predominantly to channels in an inactivated conformation according to the following:
kd
r =c i b
a

-

where r is the rest state, i is the inactivated state, b
is the blocked state, and ,b are channel transition
rates, and kd and are rates of binding and unbinding. if h is the fraction of available channels [h=r/
(r+i)] in the absence of drug, then the time course
of blockade is described by the solution of the
following:
a

db
=

kd(1-h)(1 -b)-- b

where b is the fraction of blocked channels.22 the
beeler-reuter sodium current as modified by channel blockade is described by the following:

ina=gna m3h j(1 b)(v vna)
recent studies in our laboratory22'23 provided data
regarding lidocaine rates of binding and unbinding
and their voltage dependence. because our emphasis
in these studies was on the effect of the time course
of the unblocking process and both inactivated and
open channel antagonists exhibit exponential recovery,8,24 the nature of the blocking process was considered a secondary effect and was not investigated.
we selected a range of rates for hypothetical drugs
that illustrated an effect on the delay to and duration
of the window. thus, the focus of these studies was to
demonstrate and explore the existence of the vw
while the relation to "real" drugs was left for the in
vitro studies.

to study the effect of the rate of unbinding, we
fixed the forward rate at 4 events/sec (similar to that
observed for 80 ,um lidocaine) and varied the reverse
or unbinding rate. to study the effect of drug concentration, we fixed the unbinding rate at 1.5 events/
sec (similar to that of  xxxd2635xxx ) and varied the
binding rate (or drug concentration).
computations were performed on a cray y-mp
computer at the north carolina supercomputer center and the pittsburgh supercomputer center. programs were written in c and vectorized where possible. computations for the drive train were performed
once, and the state of the cable just before premature
stimulation was saved. for each probe of the diastolic
interval, the drive train results were used as an initial
condition, and computations were continued for the
duration of the response to premature stimulation.
refractory and window times were measured relative
to either the time of the last drive pulse or the time
when repolarization passed through -60 mv. the
results of premature stimulation were saved and used
later for graphic display and detailed analysis using a
sun sparc workstation.
instrumentation. we monitored the membrane potential at 0.5-cm intervals along the length of the
cable. a stimulating electrode (s5) was placed at one
end of the cable and used to excite the preparation at
selected drive rates. a second stimulating electrode
(s2) was placed at the midpoint of the cable for
premature stimulation.
stimulation protocols. the diastolic threshold for
stimulation at a 1-hz drive rate was determined by
progressively reducing the stimulus amplitude until
no response was achieved. for normal stimulation,
an amplitude of twice diastolic threshold and a
duration of 1 msec were used for both the drive
electrode and the premature electrode. the vw was
located by using a binary search algorithm to scan the
postrepolarization interval. after a 10- or 20-pulse
train was applied to the drive (sl) electrode, a single
premature stimulus was applied to the midpoint
electrode (s2). if bidirectional conduction was observed in response to the premature excitation, then
the more premature interval of time was bisected.
premature stimulation was applied at a time equal to
the midpoint of the left interval. if bidirectional block
was observed, then the less premature interval was
bisected and the right subinterval was tested. this
process was continued until the boundaries of the
vw were determined to within a specified interval.
to investigate reentry, we connected one end of
the cable to the other end. loops of 4 and 8 cm were
used to investigate reentry. as with the cable experiments, data were usually monitored at 0.5 -cm intervals. the premature stimulation electrode was located one fourth of the circumference distant from
the drive electrode.
results
the primary goal of this investigation was to test
the hypothesis that prolongating the recovery of

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential
premature stimulus

a

time

337

b

mmmc

premature stimulus tnm

338 m

4.0

x

:

c

x

--

0.0

x

500

400

300

,~o

premature stinldus
x

x

-

tme m

343 msec

4.0

0.0

300

400

time (ma)

400

.;,500

figure 1. traces showing spatial and temporal responses in retrograde and antegrade
directions to premature stimulation. each
panel contains nine traces representing membrane potentials observed at 0.5-cm intervals
along length of cable. drive stimuli are applied at x=0 (bottom trace), and premature
stimuli are applied at x=2 cm (middle
trace). horizontal axis indicates time relative
to last stimulus in drive train. panel a:
response 1 msec before most premature
boundary of vulnerable window. note that
there

time (me)

c

,

300

500

300

1367

is

no

response

in

either

antegrade

or

retrograde direction. panel b: response when
timing of premature stimulus corresponds to
most premature boundary of vulnerable window. here, response to stimulation is propagated in retrograde direction, but conduction
is blocked in antegrade direction. panel c:
~-~----~--~=-response when timing of premature stimulus
corresponds to least premature boundary of
vulnerable window. again, premature response is propagated in retrograde direction
and blocked in antegrade direction. panel d:
response when timing of premature stimulus
is delayed 1 msec beyond least premature
boundary. response is seen to propagate in
_both antegrade and retrograde directions. du..-.r.....-...j ration of vulnerable window under control
1 --500 conditions was 6 msec.
4.0
time (me)

sodium channel availability influences the delay to
and duration of the vw, during which premature
stimulation can elicit transient unidirectional block.
to explore this hypothesis, we first computed the
responses to premature stimulation under drug-free
conditions where sodium channel availability was
modulated by either changing the maximum sodium
conductance or increasing the fraction of inactivated
channels by reducing the resting membrane potential. we then explored the effects of dynamic changes
in sodium channel availability in response to usedependent sodium channel blockade.
figure 1 illustrates computed responses to premature stimulation at the most premature boundary
(mpb) and the least premature boundary (lpb) of
the vw under control conditions. these results,
derived from a continuous cable, are qualitatively
similar to those derived from a one-dimensional
array of coupled cells studied by quan and rudy.25
under control conditions, we found the duration of
the vw to be 6 msec (from 338 msec through 343
msec after the last drive, sl stimulus) when a 4-ma/
cm2, 1-msec stimulus pulse was used. the results
appear insensitive to the detailed kinetics of the
sodium channel since quan and rudy'1 replaced the
beeler-reuter sodium channel model with the ebi-

hara-johnson sodium channel model.26 the conduction velocity, as estimated from the time required for
the peak of an action potential to travel the length of
the cable, was 50 cm/sec.
reducing the maximal sodium channel conductance increased the window duration and delayed the
appearance of the window. under control conditions,
sodium conductance ( na) was 4.0 ms/cm2, the window duration was 6 msec, and the window was
located 338 msec after the last drive stimulus. as can
be seen in table 2, increasing the conductance above
table 2. window parameters as a function of maximum
sodium conductance
window
width
conduction
gna
location (msec)*
velocity (m/sec)
(msec)
(ms/cm 2)
2.0
no conduction
...
...
13
0.37
2.5
359
8
0.43
349
3.0
7
342
0.47
3.5
337
6
0.50
4.0
4
0.61
326
6.0
4
0.68
320
8.0
*window location is measured relative to time of last drive pulse.

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991

1368

the control value reduces the delay to the start of the
vw (refractory period) and its duration, whereas
reducing the conductance below the control value
delays the vw and prolongs its duration.
we sought to approximate the effects of ischemia
by reducing the resting membrane potential (by
reducing the potassium equilibrium potential); we
then explored the effects of membrane potential on
window location and width. as seen in table 3,
progressive depolarization of the resting membrane
potential results in monotonic increases in the refractory period (window location) and in the duration of
the vw.
in the presence of a fast recovery drug (kd, 4
second-1; e, 4 second-1), we found that the window
width increased from 6 to 9 msec. decreasing the
unbinding rate from 4 to 0.8 event/sec while maintaining the binding rate resulted in an increase to 38
msec of the duration of the vw. thus, use-dependent agents appear able to prolong the duration of
the window beyond that associated with a simple
reduction of the maximal sodium conductance.
shown in figure 2 are responses at the mpb and
lpb of the vw when the unbinding rate was 0.8
second`. the retrograde conduction velocity under
these conditions was 42 cm/sec. further reductions in
a

pmatue stimuhis tim
x

.

-

426 mc

b

premature stimulus tim

table 3. window parameters as a function of resting potential
window location (msec)*
width
337
6
361
7
-75
395
10
-73
417
14
-70
no conduction
*window location is measured relative to last drive pulse.

vm (mv)
-85
-80

the unbinding rate resulted in progressive increases
in the duration of the vw and reductions in conduction velocity.
in exploring the effect of stimulus energy, we
systematically increased the amplitude and duration
of the premature pulse. using a 1-msec stimulus
duration and varying the amplitude, we found that
the lpb was insensitive to the stimulus amplitude,
whereas the delay to the mpb increased as the
amplitude was decreased (figure 3a). similarly, using an amplitude of 4 ma/cm2 and varying the
duration, we found that the lpb was insensitive to
stimulus duration, whereas the delay to the mpb
decreased as the stimulus duration was increased
(figure 3b). the overall result was that increasing
-

427 msc

0
4_0

i

i,
20
x -

0.0

400

500

600

time (m)

c

premature stimulus tine

500

400

600

time (ms)

-

449 misc

d

premature stimulus time * 450 msec

x - 4.0
.

c
ii
c

x-

2.0

x -

0.0

400

500
time

(me)

600

400

500

time

figure 2. traces showing temporal and
spatial responses to premature stimulation
in presence of use-dependent sodium channel blockade (kd, 4 second-'; f, 1.5 second-'). horizontal axis indicates time relative to last stimulus in drive train. note that
responses occur considerably later than under control conditions, indicating a prolonged refractory interval. panels a-d:
these panels correspond to panels a-d in
figure 1. duration of vulnerable window is
23 msec for this drug. note that in addition
to a prolongation of vulnerable window,
conduction is slowed as indicated by increased delay of action potential peaks between two monitoring points.

600

(ma)

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential
a

1369

effect of stimulus amplitude on window location

ee
u

,

*-" urn........ u

730

e
a

720

a ~~~~~~~mpb

a

710

<

a

a

700

a

figure 3. plots of effects of stimulus parameters on
width of vulnerable window. panel a: effect ofstimulus
amplitude on duration of vulnerable window in presence
of a use-dependent sodium channel antagonist (kd, 4
second-1; e, 0.8 second-l; 1 hz drive frequency). as
current amplitude is increased, mostpremature boundary
(mpb) is reduced, whereas least premature boundary
(lpb) remains constant. similarly, panel b illustrates
that when stimulus energy is increased by increasing
duration of stimulus pulse, lpb remains relatively constant, whereas delay to mpb (relative refractory period) is
reduced.

.

690
1

3

2

5

4

6

7

8

current (ma)

effect of stimulus duration on window location

b

7400

m......m...rn

e

a a a a a m a

730e30
0

720

-

a
a

-i

a

a

710

aa
aam

aa
7w0

mb
lpb

ooo

a

°°ooaa

c0

ao

c

690 a
0

2

duration (meec)

the stimulus energy by increasing either the amplitude or duration prolonged the window duration by
decreasing the delay to the mpb.
when both drive and premature stimuli were
initiated from the same site, no window was detectable at 1-msec precision. when drive and premature
stimulation were initiated from different sites, a
window was detected. exploring this effect in more
detail, we systematically increased the separation
between the sites of drive and premature stimulation.
we found that the majority of the effects of electrode
separation occurred when the electrodes were separated by less than 1 mm.
to investigate the effects of drive frequency and
the level of steady-state blockade on the window
width, we simulated the response to a drug with an
intermediate recovery rate (c, 1.5 events/sec) at drive
intervals of 1.1, 1.0, 0.9, and 0.8 seconds. the window
width progressively increased with drive frequency,
ranging from 22 msec at 1.1-second drive interstimulus intervals to 25 msec at 0.8-second drive interstimulus intervals. results of simulations in which

drive frequency and binding and unbinding rates
varied are shown in table 4.
the effect of increasing the concentration on the
window duration was nonlinear and exhibited a typical sigmoid dose-response relation. shown in figure
4a is the relation between the mpb and lpb of the
vw as a function of the rate of binding. for a low
rate of binding and consequently a small fraction of
blocked channels, the window duration was 9 msec
and comparable to that under control conditions.
however, as the binding rate was increased, the
window duration increased until it stabilized at a
constant value of approximately 32 msec. similarly,
the mpb (indicative of the refractory interval that
reflects the antiarrhythmic potential) increased with
larger rates of binding, reflecting an increase in the
antiarrhythmic effect (i.e., the refractory period increased with increasing degrees of blockade). thus,
both the antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic potentials appear to reflect the blocking and unblocking
process, but the proarrhythmic potential appears to
saturate at a lower concentration.

were

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

1370

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991
table 4. window durations as a function of unbinding rate, concentration, and drive frequency

k[d] (second-')
0.0 (control)
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
2.4
1.6
8
4
3
2
1
4

1 (second-1)
0.0
4
4
4
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
0.8

drive interstimulus
interval (seconds)
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

window (msec)*
mbp
27
41
41
42
106
110
115
120
406
367
263
110
58
38
27
368

lpb
32
49
49
50
127
132
137
144
435
394
287
133
72
47
34
405

width
6
9
9
9
22
23
23
25
30
28
25
24
15
10
8
38

*most (mbp) and least premature boundaries (lbp) were measured relative to time when repolarizing membrane
potential passed through -60 mv.

the relation between the probabilities of a proarrhythmic event and unbinding rate is illustrated in
figure 4b. we chose to define the probability of a
proarrhythmic event in terms of the likelihood that
an unsuppressed premature stimulus would fall
within the vw. a premature stimulus would be
suppressed if it occurred at any time up to the mpb
of the vw. any premature stimulus occurring after
the mpb would be unsuppressed and has a likelihood
of falling within the vw. formally, then, the probability of a proarrhythmic event is the duration of the
vw divided by the excitable interval (isi minus lpb
of the window). note that the probability increases
dramatically, in concert with the antiarrhythmic potential (as reflected by the window boundary) displayed in figure 4a for large binding rates (large
drug concentrations) even though the window width
appears to have saturated. this is the result of
reducing the excitable interval as the refractory interval is prolonged.
to examine the possible mechanistic process underlying the window duration, we evaluated sodium
channel availability at the boundaries of the window.
we found that in the absence of drug, sodium
channel availability ranged from 1.2 ms/cm2 at the
mpb to 1.72 ms/cm2 at the lpb. in the presence of
drug with a binding rate of 4 events/sec and an
unbinding rate of 1.5 events/sec, we found sodium
channel availability ranged from 1.68 ms/cm2 at the
mpb to 1.72 ms/cm2 at the lpb. the duration of the
window appeared to reflect the time required for a
critical number of nonconducting (drug-complexed
or inactivated) channels in the region of the premature stimulation electrode to recover their conducting property (recovery from inactivation or unbinding). when the conductance exceeded 1.72 ms/cm2,

bidirectional propagating wave fronts were possible.
conductances less than this value supported either
unidirectional propagation or no propagation.
with the demonstration of unidirectional conduction in a cable, we questioned whether reentry could
be supported in a ring of cable with a physiologically
realistic circumference. with a 4-cm circumference,
reentry was not possible. however, with an 8-cm
circumference, premature stimulation in the absence
of drug yielded a premature response and one additional response. in the presence of drug (kd, 4
second-1; e, 4 second-') there was a continuously
reentrant action potential. although such a demonstration is to a certain extent arbitrary (we can select
any circumference), it demonstrates that given a
sufficiently long path, the unidirectional block we
studied in detail can initiate reentrant activation.
discussion
background of hypothesis
the focus of the present study was to investigate
the conditions necessary to produce a transient
"functional" unidirectional block in a uniform excitable cable and to explore how modification of sodium
channel availability with hypothetical class i agents
would influence the determinants of a transient
unidirectional block. our hypothesis was that usedependent sodium channel blockade would significantly increase the likelihood of unidirectional block
with premature stimulation. why was this our focus?
there is considerable evidence that anisotropy of
passive properties and structural dispersion of refractoriness provide a substrate suitable for initiating
reentrant rhythms.5.7 however, are the structural
complexities seen in cardiac tissue and reported in

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential
a

antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic potential
500-

e
c

400

0

300-

0.

mpb

e

lpb

200-

window

1000

-~
~

0.

00

~~~

probability of

b

- - -

a

a

0.01
binding rate (kd)

a

*

-s

0.02
eventslmsac

proarrhythmic event

0.05-

m

a
0.04

a

e

0.03-

a.

u
a.

prob (arrhythmia)

0.02 -

.0

0.

a

a

0.01 -

a

0.00
0.00
s

a

*

1

0.01
0.02
binding rate (kd) events/mssc

figure 4. plots of antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic potentials of a use-dependent sodium channel antagonist (kd,
variable; e, 1.5 second-'). in panel a, open squares represent
most premature boundary (mpb) of vulnerable window, and
closed diamonds represent least premature boundary (lpb) of
vulnerable window. difference between boundary values-the
window duration is plotted with filled squares. as binding rate
is increased by increasing concentration of drug, both boundaries become less premature, reflecting antiarrhythmic effect,
because premature stimuli injected before mpb experience
bidirectional conduction blockade. note that window duration,
reflecting proarrhythmic potential, stabilizes at a value near 30
msec in this simulation while mpb (refractory period reflecting
antiarrhythmic potential) continues to increase with higher rates
of binding. in panel b, we plotted conditional probability of a
proarrhythmic event. we have assumed that there is a uniform
probability of a random stimulus occurring at any time during
interstimulus interval. because there is no conduction of stimulus responses more premature than mpb, the denominator of
the probability is the interval of time during which conduction
can occur. thus, even though window duration remains relatively constant forkd of more than 0.04 event/sec, probability of
a proarrhythmic event increases because the interval where
premature responses are conducted is decreasing.
-

1371

the present study necessary for reentrant activity, or
do they amplify or attenuate responses derived from
some simpler substrate? we sought to explore the
simplest model (a structurally uniform cable of excitable membrane with no discontinuities, constant
passive properties, and identical refractory properties) to address questions about the minimally complex substrate for initiating and supporting reentrant
activity.
our numerical experiments revealed many interesting observations. first, "functional" unidirectional
block required anisotropic excitability relative to the
stimulating electrode. such conditions were achieved
by having different sites of drive and premature
stimulation. second, there was a vw during which
premature stimulation produced a transient unidirectional block in the antegrade direction. third, reduction of sodium channel availability increased the
duration of the vw. fourth, reduction of sodium
channel availability with hypothetical use-dependent
class i agents produced larger windows than a fixed
reduction in channel availability. fifth, the duration
of the window was longer with slowly unbinding
drugs than with rapidly unbinding drugs. last, the
drug-unbinding rate was coupled to both prolongation of the refractory period (antiarrhythmic effect)
and duration of the vw (proarrhythmic effect).
the existence of a vw was very interesting, but
had it been observed experimentally? allessie and
coworkers27 demonstrated that tachycardias could be
consistently initiated with a properly timed premature stimulus following a train of drive pulses in an
isolated left atrial rabbit preparation. they observed
a window of time (vw) during which a variety of
tachycardias of variable duration could be initiated.
premature stimulation before the mpb of the window resulted in no response, whereas premature
stimulation after the lpb of the window resulted in a
single response. within the window, however, tachycardias of variable duration could be consistently
initiated with a single premature stimulus.
soon after allessie et al's report,27 van capelle and
durrer6 studied the role of spatial interaction among
excitable elements in the production of both focal
and reentrant rhythms using simulations of a twodimensional array of identical excitable elements.
with different sites of drive and premature stimulation, they identified a vw similar to that observed by
allessie et al, where they were able to initiate
reentrant activity when premature stimulation occurred within the window. this was the first demonstration that the anisotropic properties necessary for
reentrant activity could be generated in an array of
identical cells by using separate sites for drive and
premature stimulation. from their studies, they
noted that the spatial anisotropy of excitability, necessary for initiation of reentry, could be induced by
propagation of the repolarization (recovery) wave
front and that spatial dispersion of the intrinsic
cellular properties was unnecessary. that such a
simple system was in qualitative agreement with the

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

1372

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991

experimental results of allessie et al caused us to
hypothesize that sodium channel availability as a
determinant of excitability might further influence
the duration of the vw by prolonging the excitability
recovery process.
can antiarrhythmic agents slow the recovery from
inexcitability in cardiac cells? grant and coworkers8
showed that lidocaine significantly prolonged the
recovery from inexcitability under normal ph and
further prolonged the recovery process in the presence of reduced ph. using the maximum upstroke
velocity of the action potential as a monitor of
sodium channel availability, they found that the time
course of recovery was prolonged from 10 msec
under drug-free conditions to 91 msec in the presence of 15 ,m lidocaine. although we could not find
evidence of studies of the vw in the presence of an
antiarrhythmic agent, we felt that loss of sodium
channel availability and the slowed recovery caused
by the voltage dependence of channel blockade might
prolong the duration of the vw and that the prolongation might reflect one dimension of a drug's proarrhythmic potential. recently, weirich and antoni4
studied many antiarrhythmic agents and found the
unbinding rate to be a particularly important parameter for classifying drug behavior (see table 5).
the interim results of the cast study1 lent support to this hypothesis. consistent with the fifth
observation listed above, flecainide10 (unbinding time
constant of approximately 16 seconds) and encainide1l (unbinding time constant of approximately 20
seconds) were each associated with an increase in the
incidence of sudden cardiac death compared with
that of the control group (recovery from inactivation
time constant of the order of 10-20 msec). also,
moricizine9 exhibits a recovery time constant of 1.3
seconds, and one might hypothesize that the rate of
sudden death in this group would be less than that in
the  xxxd2113xxx  and  xxxd1991xxx  groups.
the influence of the recovery time constant can be
readily illustrated. at a heart rate of 1 second-1,
approximately 60% of the channels blocked by  xxxd2669xxx  will become unblocked before the next cycle
of depolarization. on the other hand, with  xxxd2113xxx ,
only 6% of the blocked channels will become unblocked before the next cardiac cycle is initiated.
thus, the time a cell spends in recovering from
 xxxd2113xxx  blockade is significantly prolonged, which
we hypothesize will simultaneously prolong the delay
to and duration of the vw and reduce the conduction velocity. it is important to note that prolongation
of the channel recovery process will result in increased premature ventricular contraction suppression (antiarrhythmic effect) while simultaneously
prolonging the duration of vw (proarrhythmic effect), exposing unsuppressed premature ventricular
contractions to more vulnerable tissue.
in support of our hypothesis, we were able to locate
many reports of the proarrhythmic effects of drugs
acting as sodium channel antagonists.328-33 some reports cited an increased proarrhythmic potential in the

table 5. recovery time constants
drug
class
lidocaine
lb
mexiletine
lb
 xxxd3387xxx 
lb
 xxxd2669xxx 
lb
quinidine
ia
procainamide
ia
disopyramide
ia
ic
lorcainide
propafenone
ia
 xxxd2113xxx 
ic
 xxxd1991xxx 
ic
ic
nicainoprol
prajmaline
ic
adapted from references 4 and 9.

time constant (seconds)
0.23
0.47
1.1
1.3
4.7
6.3
12.2
13.2
15.5
15.5
20.3
47.1
184.3

presence of exercise or increased heart rate, consistent
with the use- and frequency-dependent nature of ion
channel blockers.431-33 with increased heart rate, less
time is available for unblocking of drug-complexed
channels. consequently, we would anticipate that the
degree of blockade would be increased, conduction
velocity would be reduced, and the duration of the vw
would be prolonged. in addition, we recently described34 a patient who experienced electrocardiographic abnormalities resulting from propoxyphene (a
slowly unbinding sodium channel antagonist) overdose
that was reversed through competition with lidocaine,
which reduced the average unbinding time of drugcomplexed channels.
in light of results from our study, reports in the
literature of proarrhythmic effects of  xxxd2113xxx , and
the recent results of the cast study, we felt that
there was a good possibility that factors influencing
the interaction between drug molecules and channels
might reflect a dimension of a drug's proarrhythmic
potential. thus, these studies were designed to test
this hypothesis first in a series of numerical experiments and then in an in vitro preparation.13

role of sodium channel availability
several significant findings resulted from these
numerical experiments. we found that reducing the
available sodium conductance (gna) simultaneously
reduced the conduction velocity and delayed the
appearance and extended the duration of the vw.
these specific results differ qualitatively from the
numerical studies of quan and rudy.25 they found
that reducing the maximum available sodium conductance in the ebijara-johnson sodium model from 23
to 11.5 ms/cm2 resulted in a small reduction of the
duration of the vw from 1.4 to 1.2 msec. using the
original beeler-reuter sodium channel model, we
found that incrementally reducing the sodium conductance from 8 to 2.5 ms/cm2 produced monotonic
increases in the mpb from 320 to 359 msec and in the
duration of the vw from 4 to 13 msec (table 2). the
difference between these observations may reside in

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

stanner et al modeling proarrhythmic potential

the complexity of their model and the large values of
the cell-to-cell coupling resistance. our results
clearly show that transient unidirectional block can
be initiated by premature stimulation without modifying cell-to-cell coupling or other passive properties.
our results were consistent with other maneuvers
that reduced sodium channel availability. for instance, we found that depolarizing the rest potential,
which would increase the degree of sodium channel
inactivation, resulted in delay in the appearance time
of the vw as well as prolongation of the vw
duration and reduction of the conduction velocity.
consequently, our attempt to simulate ischemia resulted in an amplified proarrhythmic potential. further amplification could result from the ph-induced
prolongation of the drug-unbinding time observed by
grant and coworkers8 and could result in conversion
of a drug with a low proarrhythmic potential under
normal conditions to a drug with a greater proarrhythmic potential in the presence of ischemia.
we found that the instantaneous sodium channel
availability at the time of the mpb was considerably
larger (1.68 ms/cm2) for use-dependent antagonists
than that observed under drug-free conditions (1.20
ms/cm2). these results indicate that the window duration is sensitive to the dynamics of channel blockade,
possibly reflecting the blockade of channels during the
initial depolarization of the action potential evoked by
premature stimulation. use-dependent antagonists exhibit binding and unbinding rates that are voltage
dependent. therefore, as the membrane is slowly depolarized during the foot of the action potential, sodium channels can become blocked, decreasing the
number of channels available for conduction and increasing the likelihood of conduction block.
role of stimulation parameters
stimulus intensity also affected the mpb of the
vw. low-energy, short-duration stimuli produced a
small window with a delayed mpb, whereas higherenergy, long-duration stimuli produced larger windows with an early mpb. higher energies appear to
depolarize larger spatial regions, thus recruiting
more sodium channels into the propagation process.
these results were reassuring because long-duration
windows under control conditions appear to be incompatible with life. under in vivo conditions, the
available current for premature excitation is limited
to that available from a local cluster of cells. thus,
one would expect the vw duration under drug-free
conditions to be negligible, consistent with the observed low incidence in spontaneously occurring reentrant rhythms in humans.
perhaps the most important observation we made
was that in a homogeneous one-dimensional excitable cable, the site of premature stimulation must be
different from the drive site to initiate a unidirectional activation wave front. when the drive and
premature sites were the same, the premature activation wave front encountered isotropic excitability.
in the presence of isotropy, only isotropic responses

1373

can be expected (i.e., either bidirectional conduction
or bidirectional block). however, when the sites were
different, then as the drive activation wave front
passed over the premature stimulation site, the premature activation wave front "saw" a region of
functionally anisotropic excitability where the antegrade region was more refractory than the retrograde
region. the conduction velocity and the time course
of the sodium channel recovery process control this
gradient of excitability, which in these numerical
experiments reflects a spatial gradient in sodium
channel availability. in real preparations, there may
be anisotropic dispersion of refractoriness and sodium channel availability derived from structural
inhomogeneities among cells. our results suggest
that it is essential that there be anisotropic sodium
channel availability relative to the site of premature
stimulation for a unidirectional response to be
evoked but that structural inhomogeneities are not
necessary. whether the structural complexities amplify or attenuate this basic response is unclear. we
conclude that conduction velocity is central to modulating the anisotropy of the spatial gradient of
channel availability.
we found that the temporal location and duration
of the vw were sensitive to stimulus frequency and
to drug concentration. increases in the rate of binding (reflecting increases in the drug concentration)
resulted in greater delay before the onset of the vw
and an increased duration of the vw. similarly,
increases in the apparent rate of binding (reflecting
increases in the rate of stimulation) produced parallel results. the delay in the vw reflects the degree of
blockade that exists at the initiation of the repolarization process. because a critical population of
sodium channels is required to support propagation,
recovery from a larger initial block will require more
time to reach the critical value of available channels
than a smaller amount of initial block. we view this
recovery time as well as the degree of blockade when
repolarization is initiated as a reflection of the antiarrhythmic potential because premature stimulation
during this time experiences conduction block. during the vw, unidirectional conduction is supported
through a complex balance of conduction velocity,
time course of recovery from blockade, time course
of recovery from sodium channel inactivation, and
balance of background ionic currents. in general, we
found that the duration of the window was also
related to the speed of blockade recovery as well as
the degree of blockade (see table 4).
reentry
in an 8-cm ring of cells under control conditions,
we were able to observe only two responses to a
premature stimulus timed to occur within the vw.
however, in the presence of drug, the response to
premature stimulation continued to circulate around
the ring, a sort of sustained tachycardia. rinkenberger and colleagues28 observed similar drug con-

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

1374

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991

versions of nonsustained responses to sustained responses in patients.
slowed conduction appears to have two effects:
increased anisotropy of sodium channel availability
in the region of the premature stimulation site and
decreased path length required for sustaining a reentrant wave front. the effect of slowed conduction
on the gradient of channel availability is essential for
the initiation of a potentially reentrant wave front. in
a homogeneous setting, the spatial distribution of
availability is directly related to the conduction velocity. thus, when the conduction velocity is reduced,
the spatial distribution of excitability as determined
by sodium channel availability is to some extent
compressed, thereby increasing the gradient of excitability. with stimulation in a region exhibiting a
gradient of excitability, the likelihood of meeting the
conditions for unidirectional conduction would be
greater than when the gradient is less, as in the case
of a normal conduction velocity. the effect of structural inhomogeneities in supporting gradients of excitability is unknown and could act to either amplify
or attenuate such gradients.

clinical implications
there are several clinical implications from the
model and our experiments. programmed stimulation with one or more premature stimuli is frequently
used to induce reentrant rhythms in patients.35 multiple premature stimuli appear more effective than a
single premature stimulus.36 our results suggest that
the use of different drive and premature sites may be
effective in initiating a reentrant rhythm. recently,
frazier and coworkers37 showed that colliding wave
fronts derived from perpendicular drive and premature stimulus sites could initiate a reentrant rhythm.
their research supports the concept that careful
selection of stimulation sites can be used to produce
the required anisotropy of sodium channel availability necessary for initiation of reentry.
reversing reentrant rhythms, though, may be more
difficult in the presence of class i drugs. we hypothesize that reversal of reentrant rhythms induced in
the presence of class ic agents (slowly unbinding)
would be more difficult than with faster unbinding
class ia or lb agents because of the increased mass of
tissue that is in transition between inexcitable and
excitable states.
in the setting of managing a patient receiving a
use-dependent sodium channel-blocking antiarrhythmic drug, increased heart rate, perhaps induced by
exercise, will increase its proarrhythmic potential. we
have shown that with an increased stimulation rate,
window duration is increased. with accelerating heart
rate, the window will thus increase in duration as well
as occur progressively later during the cardiac cycle
(figure 5). under these conditions, a "normally"
conducted sinus activation wave front could serve as a
"gpremature stimulus" by occurring within the window
as it is delayed later and later in the cardiac cycle.
although we have shown that the window does not

exist when the drive and premature sites are the same,
anisotropy as described by spach and coworkers38
within the conduction pathway of sinus beats may be
adequate to meet the requirements for establishing an
anisotropic spatial gradient in sodium channel availability, leading to unidirectional block and initiation of
reentry. anastasiou-nana and coworkers32 have observed an effect consistent with this hypothesis.
a similar effect can be achieved by using drugs
with progressively longer unbinding time constants as
shown in the lower half of figure 5. with a short
unbinding time constant, we hypothesize that there
will be a small window and a small increase in the
refractory period. as the unbinding time constant is
increased, both the refractory period and the duration of vw are increased. clearly, the drugs that
exhibit slow unbinding rates will achieve a high
degree of premature ventricular contraction suppression because of the increased refractory period, but
simultaneously, the unsuppressed premature ventricular contractions will have a higher probability of
provoking a proarrhythmic event. this coupling of
the antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic effects to
channel unbinding rate is a property of all pure
sodium channel-blocking agents.
the increase in window duration in response to
increased drug concentration, stimulus frequency, or
diminished unbinding rate may also be important in
determining energy requirements for reversing reentrant or fibrillatory activity. long temporal windows
derived from slowly unbinding drugs may reflect a
large spatial mass of tissue that is in transition
between inexcitable and excitable states. thus, one
might infer that rhythms initiated under conditions of
prolonged windows will require greater (defibrillation) energy to terminate than rhythms initiated
under conditions of a narrow window. this effect may
be particularly important when considering the use of
programmed stimulation to induce reentrant activity
in the presence of slowly unbinding sodium channel
antagonists and when adjusting energy levels in implantable devices.
ischemia provides a complex setting that can be
proarrhythmic. under some conditions, ischemia may
reduce the resting membrane potential to more positive
potentials and decrease extracellular ph. in the presence of many class i agents, these two effects will
amplify each other. the slightly depolarized resting
potential will increase the fractions of inactivated and
drug-complexed channels (for inactivated channel antagonists). furthermore, reduced ph has been observed to reduce the rate of unbinding of drug-complexed channels.8 as we have shown, reducing the rate
of unbinding will increase the duration of the vw while
simultaneously increasing the refractory period (a result of the larger fraction of blocked channels). thus,
we hypothesize that with ischemia, slowly unbinding
class i agents will increase the fraction of suppressed
premature ventricular contractions and simultaneously
increase the vulnerability of unsuppressed premature
ventricular contractions.

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential

1375

effect of stimulus frequency

rate = 60

figure 5. effects ofheart rate and unbinding time
constant on location and duration of vulnerable
window in presence ofuse-dependent sodium channel
blockade. at a normal heart rate (60 beats/min), there
is a small fraction of blocked channels leaving refractory (absolute plus relative) period and vulnerable
window almost unchanged with respect to drug-free
conditions. note vulnerable window is depicted as
occuring during t wave, consistent with arrhythmogenic effects of r on t. with increasing heart rate
or increasing unbinding time constant, refractory interval is increased (reflecting increase in steady-state
sodium channel blockade), resulting in increased
premature ventricular contraction (pvc) suppression.
however, simultaneously, duration ofvulnerable window is increased and now located beyond boundary of
twave. increased heart rate or use of agents with long
unbinding time constants promotes pvc suppression,
but simultaneously, unsuppressed pvcs enjoy a
greater probability of initiating a reentrant rhythm.
thus, in the presence of such agents, programmed
stimulation can result in arrhythmogenic responses in
regions remote to t wave.

effect of recovery time-constant

refractory interval (pvc supression)
vulnerable window (arrhythmogenic responses to pvcs)

role of class iii agents
it is interesting to speculate about the action of
class iii agents that dominantly block the potassium
currents responsible for repolarization.39 one would
postulate that with prolonged action potential duration, the proarrhythmic potential associated with
premature events would remain fixed while the antiarrhythmic potential would be modulated by the
increase in the action potential duration. however,
 xxxg1232xxx  blockade may influence other
types of proarrhythmic events such as early afterdepolarizations and/or the failure to repolarize. to
date, most antiarrhythmic agents block sodium, calcium, and potassium channels. further studies will be
required to explore the role of various channel
antagonists in modulating antiarrhythmic and proarrhythmic events, particularly with respect to their
multichannel blocking capacity. models such as this
may provide a useful tool for predicting different
dimensions of a drug's proarrhythmic and antiar-

rhythmic potentials and evaluating the collective
response to multichannel blockade.
summary
we have demonstrated with numerical experiments in a one-dimensional cable that there is an
interval of time after repolarization during which
premature stimulation encounters a functional unidirectional conduction block. modulation of the processes controlling sodium channel availability leads
to modulation of the temporal location (antiarrhythmic potential) and duration (proarrhythmic potential) of the vw. the temporal location of the window
relative to the predecessor response derived from a
drive stimulus reflects both the fraction of available
sodium channels and the time course of recovery
from channel blockade and channel inactivation.
slowed conduction in the presence of drug affects the
likelihood of both initiating a unidirectionally conducted wave front (by increasing the anisotropy of
sodium channel availability at the site of premature

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

1376

circulation vol 84, no 3 september 1991

stimulation) and sustaining a small reentrant path.
the duration of the window is predominantly modulated by the channel blockade and sodium channel
inactivation recovery processes. for class i agents
that predominantly block sodium channels, it appears impossible to separate the antiarrhythmic potential from the proarrhythmic potential.
references
1. cardiac arrhythmia suppression trial (cast) investigators:
preliminary report: effect of  xxxd1991xxx  and  xxxd2113xxx  on
mortality in a randomized trial of arrhythmia suppression after
myocardial infarction. n engl j med 1989;321:406-412
2. arnsdorf mf, schmidt ga, sawicki gj: effects of  xxxd1991xxx 
on the determinants of cardiac excitability in sheep purkinje
fibers. j pharmacol exp ther 1985;232:40-48
3. ranger s, talajic m, lemery r, roy d, nattel s: amplification of  xxxd2113xxx -induced ventricular conduction slowing by
exercise: a potentially significant clinical consequence of
use-dependent sodium channel blockade. circulation 1989;79:
1000-1006
4. weirich j, antoni h: differential analysis of the frequencydependent effects of class i antiarrhythmic drugs according to
periodical ligand binding: implications for antiarrhythmic and
proarrhythmic efficacy. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1990;15:
998-1009
5. han j, moe gk: nonuniform recovery of excitability in
ventricular muscle. circ res 1964;14:44-60
6. van capelle fjl, durrer d: computer simulation of arrhythmias in a network of coupled excitable elements. circ res
1980;47:454-466
7. spach ms, dolber pc, heidlage jf: influence of the passive
anisotropic properties on directional differences in propagation following modification of the sodium conductance in
human atrial muscle: a model of reentry based on anisotropic
discontinuous propagation. circ res 1988;62:811-832
8. grant ao, strauss lj, wallace ag, strauss hc: the influence of ph on the electrophysiological effects of lidocaine in
guinea pig ventricular myocardium. circ res 1980;47:542-550
9. shubert b, hering s, bodewei r, rosenshtraukh lv, wollenberger a: use- and voltage-dependent depression of  xxxd2669xxx  ( xxxd2669xxx ) of the rapid inward sodium current in
single rat ventricular muscle cells. j cardiovasc pharmacol
1986;8:358-366
10. campbell tj, vaughan williams em: voltage- and timedependent depression of maximum rate of depolarization of
guinea-pig ventricular action potentials by two new antiarrhythmic drugs,  xxxd2113xxx  and lorcainide. cardiovasc res
1983;17:251-258
11. campbell tj: resting and rate-dependent depression of maximum rate of depolarization (vm,,) in guinea pig ventricular
action potentials by mexiletine, disopyramide and  xxxd1991xxx . j
cardiovasc pharmacol 1983;5:291-296
12. beeler gw, reuter h: reconstruction of the action potential
of ventricular myocardial fibers. j physiol (lond) 1977;286:
177-210
13. nesterenko vv, lastra aa, rosenshtraukh lv, starmer cf:
a proarrhythmic response to sodium channel blockade: 2. the
influence of antiarrhythmic drugs on the window of vulnerability in guinea pig myocardium.
14. joyner rw, ramza bm, osaka t, tan rc: cellular mechanisms of delayed recovery of excitability in ventricular tissue.
am j physiol 1991;260:h225-h233
15. lesh md, pring m, spear jf: cellular uncoupling can unmask
dispersion of action potential duration in ventricular myocardium: a computer modeling study. circ res 1989;65:
1426-1440
16. cooley jw, dodge fd: digital computer solutions for excitation and propagation of the nerve impulse. biophys j 1966;6:
583-599

17. crank j, nicolson p: practical method for numerical evaluation of solutions of partial differential equations of the heatconduction type. proc cambridge phil soc 1947;43:50-67
18. armstrong cm: time course of tea'-induced anomalous
rectification in squid giant axons. j gen physiol 1966;50:
491-503
19. hondeghem lm, katzung bg: time- and voltage-dependent
interactions of antiarrhythmic drugs with cardiac sodium
channels. biochim biophys acta 1977;472:373-398
20. starmer cf, grant ao, strauss hc: mechanisms of usedependent block of sodium channels in excitable membranes
by local anesthetics. biophys j 1984;46:15-27
21. starmer cf, packer dl, grant ao: ligand binding to transiently accessible sites: mechanisms for varying apparent
binding rates. j theoret biol 1987;124:335-341
22. gilliam fr, starmer cf, grant ao: blockade of rabbit
atrial sodium channels by lidocaine: characterization of
continuous and frequency-dependent blocking. circ res
1989;65:723-739
23. starmer cf, nesterenko vv, undrovinas ai, grant ao,
rosenshtraukh lv: lidocaine blockade of a transiently accessible site in cardiac sodium channels. j mol cell cardiol

1991;23(suppl):73-83
24. gruber r, carmeliet e: the activation gate of the sodium
channel controls blockade and deblockade by disopyramide in
rabbit purkinje fibres. br j pharmacol 1989;97:41-50
25. quan w, rudy y: unidirectional block and reentry of cardiac
excitation: a model study. circ res 1990;66:367-382
26. ebihara l, johnson ea: fast sodium current in cardiac
muscle: a quantitative description. biophys j 1980;32:779-790
27. allessie ma, bonke fim, schopman fjg: circus movement
in rabbit atrial muscle as a mechanism of tachycardia. circ res

1973;33:54-62
28. rinkenberger r, prystowsky en, jackman wm, naccarelli
gv, heger jj, zipes dp: drug conversion of nonsustained
ventricular tachycardia to sustained ventricular tachycardia
during serial electrophysiologic studies: identification of drugs
that exacerbate tachycardia and potential mechanisms. am
heart j 1982;103:177-184
29. nathan aw, hellestrand kj, bexton rs, banim so, spurrell raj, camm aj: proarrhythmic effects of the new
antiarrhythmic agent,  xxxd2113xxx  acetate. am heart j 1984;
107:222-228
30. morganroth j, horowitz ln:  xxxd2113xxx : its proarrhythmic
effect and expected changes on the surface electrocardiogram.
am j cardiol 1984;53:89b-94b
31. boehnert mt, lovejoy fh jr: value of the qrs duration
versus the serum drug level in predicting seizures and ventricular arrhythmias after an acute overdose of tricyclic antidepressants. n englj med 1984;313:474-479
32. anastasiou-nana mi, anderson jl, stewart jr, crevey bj,
yanowitz fg, lutz jr, johnson ta: occurrence of exerciseinduced and spontaneous wide complex tachycardia during
therapy with  xxxd2113xxx  for complex ventricular arrhythmias: a
probable proarrhythmic effect. am heart j 1987;113:
1071-1077
33. anderson kp, walker r, lux rl, ershler pr, menlove r,
williams mr, krall r, moddrelle d: conduction velocity
depression and drug-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias:
effects of lidocaine in the intact canine heart. circulation

1990;81:1024-1038
34. whitcomb dc, gilliam fr iii, starmer cf, grant ao:
marked qrs complex abnormalities and sodium channel
blockade by propoxyphene reversed with lidocaine. j clin
invest 1989;84:1629-1636
35. wellens hj, schuileabure rm, durrer d: electrical stimulation of the heart in patients with ventricular tachycardia.
circulation 1972;46:216-226
36. bugada p, green m, abdollah h, wellens hjj: significance of
ventricular arrhythmias initiated by programmed ventricular
stimulation: the importance of the type of ventricular arrhythmia induced and the number of premature stimuli required.
circulation 1984;69:87-92

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

starmer et al modeling proarrhythmic potential
37. frazier dw, wolf pd, wharton jm, tang asl, smith wm,
ideker re: stimulus induced critical point: mechanism for
electrical initiation of reentry in normal canine myocardium. j
clin invest 1989;83:1039-1052
38. spach ms, dolber pc, heidlage jf: interaction of inhomogeneities of repolarization with anisotropic propagation in dog
atria: a mechanism for both preventing and initiating reentry.
circ res 1989;65:1612-1631

1377

39. colatsky tj, follmer ch, starmer cf: channel specificity in
antiarrhythmic drug action: mechanism of  xxxg1232xxx 
block and its role in suppressing and aggravating cardiac

arrhythmias. circulation 1990;82:2235-2242
key words * sodium channel blockade * arrhythmias m
proarrhythmias * clinical trials

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

proarrhythmic response to sodium channel blockade. theoretical model and numerical
experiments.
c f starmer, a a lastra, v v nesterenko and a o grant
circulation. 1991;84:1364-1377
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.84.3.1364
circulation is published by the american heart association, 7272 greenville avenue, dallas, tx 75231
copyright © 1991 american heart association, inc. all rights reserved.
print issn: 0009-7322. online issn: 1524-4539

the online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on
the world wide web at:
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/84/3/1364

permissions: requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally
published in circulation can be obtained via rightslink, a service of the copyright clearance center, not the
editorial office. once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is
located, click request permissions in the middle column of the web page under services. further
information about this process is available in the permissions and rights question and answer document.
reprints: information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
subscriptions: information about subscribing to circulation is online at:
http://circ.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on march 14, 2015

