pyridoxine-dependent seizures: new genetic and biochemical
clues to help with diagnosis and treatment
sidney m. gospe jr

purpose of review
pyridoxine dependency is an uncommon but important
cause of intractable seizures presenting in infancy and early
childhood. this paper discusses recent clinical,
biochemical and genetic studies and how the findings
should change our approach in evaluating young patients
with antiepileptic drug-resistant seizures.
recent findings
originally thought to be due to abnormal binding of
 xxxd3047xxx  to  xxxd2431xxx  decarboxylase
resulting in decreased g- xxxd2177xxx , mutations in the
gene encoding this enzyme have been ruled out. while
linkage to 5q31 has been demonstrated, a disease-causing
gene in that region has not been identified. further
haplotype analysis of six affected kindreds has
demonstrated genetic heterogeneity for this rare disorder.
other studies demonstrate that some children with
intractable seizures respond to  xxxd3047xxx  rather
than pyridoxine, including a rare form of neonatal epileptic
encephalopathy shown to be due to mutations in the  xxxg1793xxx 
gene for pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase. while the
biochemical explanation for this finding is not clear, elevated
pipecolic acid levels may serve as a diagnostic marker for
patients with pyridoxine-dependent seizures.
summary
the results of these studies should prompt clinicians to
adopt new strategies for diagnosis and therapy for young
patients with intractable seizures. levels of both pipecolic
acid and certain metabolites shown to be elevated in
patients with  xxxg1793xxx  mutations should be measured, and
therapeutic trials of  xxxd3047xxx  as well as
pyridoxine should be considered early in the course of the
management of infants and young children with intractable
seizures.
keywords
pipecolic acid,  xxxd3047xxx , pyridoxine-dependent
epilepsy, pyridoxine-dependent seizures,  xxxd3049xxx 
curr opin  xxxd122xxx  19:148–153. ß 2006 lippincott williams & wilkins.
division of pediatric neurology, departments of neurology and pediatrics,
university of washington, and children’s hospital and regional medical center,
center on human development and disability, center for neurogenetics and
neurotherapeutics, university of washington, seattle, washington, usa
correspondence to dr sidney m. gospe, jr, children’s hospital and regional
medical center, 4800 sand point way ne, neurology, b-5552, seattle, wa
98105, usa
tel: +1 206 987 2078; fax: +1 206 987 2649; e-mail: sgospe@u.washington.edu
current opinion in neurology 2006, 19:148–153

abbreviations
aed
csf
gaba
gad
plp
 xxxg1793xxx 

antiepileptic drug
cerebrospinal fluid
g- xxxd2177xxx 
 xxxd2431xxx  decarboxylase
 xxxd3047xxx 
pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase gene

ß 2006 lippincott williams & wilkins
1350-7540

introduction
intractable seizures presenting in infants and young
children that become controlled only after the administration and daily use of pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine have been recognized as a clinical entity for over
50 years. pyridoxine-dependent seizures (mim 266100)
is an autosomal recessive disorder with an estimated
birth incidence between approximately 1:400 000 and
1:750 000 [1,2]. consequently, research concerning the
genetic and biochemical aspects of this disorder has
been constrained, and controlled clinical trials developed
to either facilitate its diagnosis or determine the optimal
treatment regimen have not been conducted. more than
100 cases of pyridoxine-dependent seizure have been
reported, with many reports concentrating on atypical
presentations; electroencephalogram and imaging findings; the recognition of patients with pyridoxine-responsive (rather than pyridoxine-dependent) seizures; and
the cognitive outcome of affected patients as it relates
to the age of clinical onset, the time of diagnosis and
treatment, and the dose of pyridoxine prescribed. more
recently, several review papers and monographs have
appeared that summarize these case reports and clinical
observations [1,3–7], and a few additional papers have
been published that report specific clinical features
[8–13] and epidemiologic research [2]. previously, it
had been hypothesized that a genetic abnormality of
 xxxd2431xxx  decarboxylase (gad), which requires  xxxd3047xxx  (plp) to synthesize g- xxxd2177xxx 
(gaba), underlies pyridoxine-dependent seizures. however, genetic abnormalities of this enzyme have been
definitively ruled out [14,15]. this review will discuss the
subsequent research findings and how these discoveries
should prompt clinicians to revise the manner by which
they evaluate and manage young patients with intractable
seizures.

148

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

pyridoxine-dependent seizures gospe 149

which is better: pyridoxine or
 xxxd3047xxx ?
the term pyridoxine signifies the various forms of  xxxd3049xxx  that are widely available in foods. while an
essential nutrient in humans, given its ubiquitous distribution  xxxd3049xxx  is sometimes considered to be a
‘vitamin without a deficiency’.  xxxd3049xxx  consists of six
vitamers: the alcohol pyridoxine (referred to as pyridoxol
in older literature), the aldehyde pyridoxal, the amine
pyridoxamine, and their respective 50 -phosphorylated
esters. pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine are phosphorylated via a kinase, and both pyridoxine phospate
and  xxxd3048xxx  are converted to the active
cofactor plp by an oxidase (figure 1). plp plays numerous metabolic roles including transamination of amino
acids, decarboxylation reactions, modulation of the activity of steroid hormones and regulation of gene expression [16].
the diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent seizures may be
made by administering from one to five 100 mg doses of
pyridoxine intravenously (ideally under electroencephalography and vital-sign monitoring) during a clinical
seizure and demonstrating prompt resolution of the
clinical and electrographic features of the event, followed
by continued control with daily administration of pyridoxine. alternatively, the disorder may be diagnosed by
giving 15 mg/kg per day of oral pyridoxine to a patient
who experiences frequent seizures and noting complete
figure 1 the six  xxxd3049xxx  vitamers and the enzymatic reactions leading to their interconversion

control of the events within a week [4,6]. in either case, to
confirm the diagnosis, all concomitantly used antiepileptic drugs (aeds) must be sequentially discontinued and
at some point the pyridoxine must also be withdrawn. in
definite cases of pyridoxine dependency, seizures will
recur but will be promptly controlled again after the readministration of pyridoxine. however, if seizures recur
in the setting of daily pyridoxine administration but
after the elimination of one or more aeds, or there is
no seizure recurrence after all therapy is eliminated, the
seizures of affected patients are designated as being
pyridoxine-responsive rather than pyridoxine-dependent
[17].
recently, reports have been published describing
patients with intractable seizures that would not respond
to pyridoxine but alternatively responded to the administration of plp [18,19,20,21]. in particular, a form of
neonatal epileptic encephalopathy due to mutations in
the  xxxg1793xxx  gene, which encodes pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase (the enzyme that interconverts the phosphorylated forms of pyridoxine and pyridoxamine to
plp), has been characterized [20]. affected patients
present within hours of birth with intractable seizures and
encephalopathy that are unresponsive to aeds and pyridoxine but that cease after the enteral administration of
plp. dietary plp is converted to pyridoxal in the gut
prior to absorption, so it is likely that high doses of
pyridoxal would have a similar therapeutic effect in
patients with a mutation in the  xxxg1793xxx  gene [20]. longitudinal clinical information is available for only one
patient with this disorder; at 21 months of age he has
acquired microcephaly, marked developmental delay,
dystonia and some seizures. other affected patients
expired during the neonatal period but were diagnosed
retrospectively via sequencing of the  xxxg1793xxx  gene.
for the clinician managing a neonate with status epilepticus, clues to this diagnosis may be found in the biochemical analyses of cerebrospinal fluid (csf) and urine
(figure 2). here, abnormalities of the plp-dependent
enzyme  xxxg618xxx  activity
result in increases in csf l-dopa and 3-methoxytyrosine, decreased levels of csf homovanillic acid and 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid, and urinary excretion of vanillacetic acid. in addition, there are abnormalities of two
other plp-dependent enzymes: threonine dehydratase
and glycine-cleavage enzyme, resulting in increases in
csf threonine and glycine, respectively. it is these latter
two biochemical findings that differentiate patients with
plp-responsive neonatal epileptic encephalopathy from
patients with  xxxg618xxx 
deficiency [18,20].

 xxxg1793xxx , pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase.

in addition to these rare neonates with plp-responsive
epileptic encephalopathy, other patients with medically

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

150 developmental disorders

figure 2 metabolic abnormalities demonstrated in urine and
cerebrospinal fluid (csf) from patients with mutations in the
gene encoding pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase ( xxxg1793xxx )

reactions involving  xxxd3047xxx -dependent enzymes –  xxxg618xxx  ( xxxg618xxx ), threonine dehydratase
(td) and glycine cleavage enzyme (gce) – are indicated. 5htp, 5hydroxytryptophan.

intractable epilepsy that respond to plp rather than
pyridoxine have now been described. wang et al. [21]
studied the effectiveness of plp and pyridoxine in controlling seizures in 94 children between the ages of
8 months and 15 years with intractable idiopathic epilepsy. using a somewhat complex protocol, subjects were
first given intravenous plp, and if seizures did not recur
plp was continued for an additional 3 days. for those
patients who did not have a seizure recurrence, the
parenteral plp was then replaced with oral pyridoxine.
for the patients treated with oral pyridoxine who then
had a seizure relapse, intravenous plp was again administered followed by daily oral plp. for patients who
were then free of seizures for more than 1 month, aeds
were sequentially withdrawn and the patient remained
on either oral plp or pyridoxine.
eleven of the 94 children responded to the intravenous
plp with complete seizure control. of these 11 patients,
six had a recurrence when plp was replaced with pyridoxine and again achieved seizure control when plp
therapy was re-instituted. three of these six patients
remained seizure-free when their aeds were discontinued while the other three required concomitant use of
plp and aeds. of the remaining five patients who were
controlled on pyridoxine, two continued to be seizurefree on pyridoxine monotherapy (and were therefore
considered to be pyridoxine-dependent) while the other
three required the concomitant use of aeds. of the

11 children who responded to either vitamer, all of them
had the onset of epilepsy prior to 15 months of age and six
of the patients had infantile spasms. of these patients
with infantile spasms, four of them responded only to
plp (but two of them required the use of two or three
aeds along with plp). in addition to these six patients,
one of the additional five responders was a 15-year-old
male with intractable focal seizures that began at
9 months of age. this boy achieved complete seizure
control on plp monotherapy (but did not respond to
pyridoxine).
all of the patients studied by wang et al. [21] had
idiopathic epilepsy; inborn errors of metabolism were
excluded (however, it is not reported whether csf
metabolic studies were conducted). as infants with
untreated neonatal epileptic encephalopathy associated
with a  xxxg1793xxx  gene mutation all expire within the first
month of life [20], and the youngest patient studied by
wang et al. [21] was 8 months of age (a female who
developed infantile spasms at 1 month and who responded to plp monotherapy), it is not likely that the seizures in the plp responders were due to a  xxxg1793xxx  gene
mutation (unless somewhat less severe phenotypes
exist). rather, as suggested by baxter [22], both pyridoxine and plp (as well as pyridoxal) may have an anticonvulsant effect in these patients, as well as in those
reported in studies of west syndrome and other catastrophic epilepsies, and were not treating any specific
metabolic defect. despite our lack of understanding of
the anticonvulsant mechanism(s) of action of these vitamers, the early trial of pyridoxine and/or plp in the
treatment of infantile spasms and other intractable epilepsies of early childhood is encouraged (see below).
while both vitamers are relatively inexpensive (plp
tablets cost six to ten times more than pyridoxine products), in the usa plp is less readily available. therefore, from a practical standpoint, local and national
availability of plp may determine how this particular
vitamer will be used and studied.

identifying the causal gene(s) for
pyridoxine-dependent seizures
six years after the first report of pyridoxine-dependent
seizures, scriver [23] suggested that it might be due to
abnormal metabolism of gaba. this led to the hypothesis that an abnormality of the binding of plp to gad,
thereby resulting in a reduction of the levels of inhibitory
gaba, was the cause of the intractable seizures and
encephalopathy in affected patients. with the support
of the results of a few neurochemical studies of tissue and
csf from affected patients, for the following four decades this hypothesis was accepted and frequently stated
in clinical texts and journal articles. however, research
independently conducted by two laboratories subsequently demonstrated that there were no genetic

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

pyridoxine-dependent seizures gospe 151

abnormalities in either of the genes encoding the two
isoforms of gad in affected patients [14,15]. in addition,
alterations in other enzymes involved in gaba and
pyridoxine metabolism, including  xxxg8xxx ,
the plasma membrane gaba transporter ( xxxg2143xxx ) and
 xxxg1720xxx , were also shown to be unlikely disease
candidates [14]. cormier-daire et al. [15] undertook a
genome-wide search in four consanguineous and one
non-consanguineous north african kindreds and found
linkage to markers at chromosome 5q31. however, a
disease-causing gene in that region was not identified.
likely due to the rarity of this condition, additional
reports of genetic research did not appear until 2005
when bennet et al. [24] published the results of haplotype analysis of six non-consanguineous north american
kindreds. this study, despite being hampered by small
kindreds, demonstrated genetic heterogeneity for pyridoxine-dependent seizures, as the 5q31 locus was
excluded from one kindred. although independent linkage of the remaining five pedigrees was not individually
possible, owing to their small size, an effort to reduce
the 5q critical interval was undertaken, resulting in 11
putative genes. however, an obvious candidate gene
within this interval has not emerged. as pyridoxine dependency is a rare autosomal recessive condition, the
demonstration of genetic heterogeneity, which was also
reported anecdotally in some uk kindreds [4], was somewhat surprising. however, given the clinical recognition
of classic neonatal-onset pyridoxine-dependent seizures,
later-onset pyridoxine-dependent seizures, epileptic conditions that initially respond to anticonvulsants but which
then respond only to pyridoxine, and seizures that
initially respond to very small doses of pyridoxine but
then later require pharmacologic doses, multiple genetic
loci, as well as a variety of mutations, might be expected
to account for this phenotypic heterogeneity.
abnormal cellular transport within the central nervous
system of one or more of the vitamers might underlie one
of the phenotypes of pyridoxine-dependent seizures.
the dietary absorption, metabolism and systemic distribution of  xxxd3049xxx  involve a number of steps [16].
ingested phosphorylated  xxxd3049xxx  vitamers are dephosphorylated via intestinal membrane-bound alkaline
phosphatase and the resulting vitamer, as well as ingested
pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine, are then rapidly
absorbed by a carrier-mediated diffusion process. within
intestinal mucosal cells the absorbed vitamers are then
converted via  xxxg1720xxx  and pyridox(am)ine 50 phosphate oxidase to plp and this vitamer accumulates
via metabolic trapping. pyridoxal then finds its way to the
portal circulation after dephosphorylation of plp at the
serosal surface. a similar sequence of steps occurs as the
various  xxxd3049xxx  vitamers accumulate and are interconverted within the liver, released to the systemic
circulation, and then transported to and metabolized

by other tissues including the brain, where the concentrations of these vitamers are 25–50 times higher than the
concentrations in plasma [25]. accumulation of vitamin
b6 vitamers within the blood, brain and other tissues after
intestinal administration of either pyridoxine or pyridoxal
has been shown to be a rapid process with more than 50%
of an ingested dose appearing within 7 min, the vast
majority appearing as plp within the tissues and pyridoxal in the blood [26]. presumably an even more rapid
accumulation of plp within the brain would occur after
parenteral administration. given the above physiology, it
is possible that an abnormality of pyridoxal transport
into certain cells of the central nervous system might
account for the clinical features observed in patients with
pyridoxine-dependent seizures. support for this hypothetical mechanism can be found by the demonstration of
genetic abnormalities of the vitamin transporters for folic
acid and thiamine that have been shown to underlie
specific clinical disorders [27–30]. recently, a carriermediated mechanism for pyridoxine uptake has been
demonstrated in human intestinal cells [31]. while the
gene for this human pyridoxine transporter has not been
identified, a physiologically similar pyridoxine transporter has been characterized in the fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe and this transporter is encoded by the
gene bsu1þ [32]. a mammalian homologue of this gene
has not yet been identified.

pipecolic acid as a biological marker for
pyridoxine-dependent seizures
in 2000, plecko et al. [33] reported elevations of pipecolic
acid in plasma and csf in three patients with pyridoxinedependent seizures. this observation has recently been
confirmed and expanded in a study of six more patients
[34]. pipecolic acid was shown to be 4.3- to 15.3-fold
elevated in plasma, with greater elevations in csf.
these elevated pipecolic acid levels persisted even after
long-term treatment with pyridoxine but were lower than
levels measured prior to treatment.
the metabolic abnormality responsible for these findings
is not known. whereas a-aminoadipic acid, a downstream
metabolite of pipecolic acid, is further metabolized by
the pyridoxine-dependent enzyme a-aminoadipic acid
transaminase, a deficiency of this enzyme has not been
demonstrated in a subset of these patients. as pipecolic
acid elevations in these affected patients is higher in csf
than in plasma, this suggests that the biochemical
abnormality is likely expressed in the brain rather than
in the liver. in addition, the persistent elevation of pipecolic acid, despite long-term seizure control with pyridoxine therapy, suggests that the increased levels of this
substance might be a secondary phenomenon, and that
the primary abnormality in pyridoxine-dependent seizures is not related directly to pipecolic acid metabolism
[33,34].

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

152 developmental disorders

while the discovery of elevated pipecolic acid levels in
patients with pyridoxine-dependent seizures has not led
us closer to identifying one of the genes responsible for
this disorder (please see conclusion), the demonstration
of this biochemical abnormality has emerged as an
important (if non-specific) diagnostic marker. however,
the final diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent seizures may
only be convincingly diagnosed by using strict clinical
criteria. these are comprised of the elimination of pyridoxine monotherapy after the initial successful control of
intractable seizures with the vitamin, and the subsequent
reappearance of clinical seizures that are then followed by
another seizure remission once pyridoxine monotherapy is
re-instituted. for very obvious reasons, parents commonly
refuse to follow this diagnostic pathway; therefore many
children who likely have pyridoxine-dependent seizures
must be strictly classified as having ‘possible pyridoxinedependent seizures’, and other patients under these
circumstances may actually have pyridoxine-responsive
seizures [17]. the demonstration of elevated pipecolic
acid levels in patients with a presumptive diagnosis of
pyridoxine-dependent seizures may enable clinicians to
confirm the diagnosis in an alternative fashion without
withdrawing vitamin therapy, thereby preventing these
children from having additional seizures that would have
otherwise been induced by this classic diagnostic test.

conclusion
while the genes responsible for pyridoxine-dependent
seizures have yet to be identified, the findings from
recent biochemical and clinical research described above
permit us to develop a strategy for diagnosing and managing children with intractable seizures that may be due to
one of perhaps several abnormalities of central nervous
system metabolism linked to  xxxd3049xxx . clearly, pyridoxine dependency must be considered as a cause of
intractable neonatal seizures, particularly in those infants
who also display irritability and other encephalopathic
features. clinicians must also remember this disorder
when faced with older infants and toddlers who present
with intractable seizures, or who presented earlier in
infancy with seizures that were initially controlled with
aeds but which then become intractable. under each of
these sets of circumstances these patients should receive
pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine by either the intravenous or oral route as both a diagnostic test and for urgent
therapy. assays of plasma amino acids and urine organic
acids are frequently ordered in these circumstances and
a csf analysis to evaluate both for a central nervous
system infection and for neuro-metabolic disorders such
as nonketotic hyperglycinemia or glucose-transporter
deficiency may be performed [35]. in these circumstances, i would suggest measuring pipecolic acid in
plasma or csf, as an elevation in either fluid supports
a diagnosis of pyridoxine dependency. patients who carry
a presumed diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent seizures,

but who have never undergone a diagnostic withdrawal of
pyridoxine therapy, should also have their plasma pipecolic acid level measured. in such patients who are then
found to have normal levels of pipecolic acid, withdrawal
of pyridoxine therapy can be considered, as these patients
may have experienced seizures that were pyridoxineresponsive but no longer warrant treatment with the
vitamin.
while extremely rare, a  xxxg1793xxx  gene mutation could be
responsible for a severe neonatal epileptic encephalopathy [20]. therefore, in this clinical setting, csf
should also be assayed for threonine and glycine, levels
of vanillacetic acid should be measured in urine and
measurement of csf neurotransmitters may also be considered. if the metabolic pattern characteristic of pyridox(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase deficiency is detected,
the infant should be treated with an initial dose of 50 mg
of plp. if seizures are controlled with this intervention,
plp should be continued at a dose of 10–15 mg/kg per
day. the routine use of plp rather than pyridoxine for
both diagnosis and treatment of childhood intractable
epilepsy needs additional study. once one or more genes
for pyridoxine dependency are discovered, this diagnostic
pathway and the management of these patients may
become simplified.
after the acceptance of this review for publication, the
results of a collaborative study from several european
centers were presented at the 2005 annual meeting of the
society for the study of inborn errors of metabolism.
these investigators reported a variety of mutations in the
antiquitin ( xxxg140xxx ) gene (located at 5q31) in patients
with pyridoxine-dependant seizures. this group also
reported increased levels of a-aminoadipic semialdehyde
in various body fluids (including urine) of patients with
pyridoxine-dependant seizures and suggested that this
metabolite should serve as a biomaker for the disorder.

acknowledgements
i thank dr t. bird and dr i. glass for their helpful reviews of the
manuscript. this work was supported, in part, by the research
endowments of the division of pediatric neurology of children’s
hospital and regional medical center.

references and recommended reading
papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have
been highlighted as:

of special interest
 of outstanding interest
additional references related to this topic can also be found in the current
world literature section in this issue (p. 202).
1

baxter p. pyridoxine dependent and pyridoxine responsive seizures. in: baxter
p, editor. vitamin responsive conditions in paediatric neurology. london:
mackeith press; 2001. pp. 109–165.

2

been jv, bok ja, andriessen p, renier wo. epidemiology of pyridoxinedependent seizures in the netherlands. arch dis child 2005 (epub ahead of
print).

3

baxter p. pyridoxine-dependent and pyridoxine-responsive seizures. dev med
child  xxxd122xxx  2001; 43:416–420.

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

pyridoxine-dependent seizures gospe 153
4

baxter p. pyridoxine-dependent seizures: a clinical and biochemical conundrum. biochim biophys acta 2003; 1647:36–41.

22 baxter p. pyridoxine or  xxxd3047xxx  for intractable seizures? arch dis
child 2005; 90:441–442.

5

gospe sm jr. current perspectives on pyridoxine-dependent seizures.
j pediatr 1998; 132:919–923.

23 scriver cr.  xxxd3049xxx -dependency and infantile convulsions. pediatrics
1960; 26:62–74.

6

gospe sm jr. pyridoxine-dependent seizures: findings from recent studies
pose new questions. pediatr  xxxd122xxx  2002; 26:181–185.

7

rajesh r, girija as. pyridoxine-dependent seizures: a review. indian pediatr
2003; 40:633–638.

8

alkan a, kutlu r, aslan m, et al. pyridoxine-dependent seizures: magnetic
resonance spectroscopy findings. j child  xxxd122xxx  2004; 19:75–78.

24 bennett cl, huynh hm, chance pf, et al. genetic heterogeneity for
 autosomal recessive pyridoxine-dependent seizures. neurogenetics 2005;
6:143–149.
clinical genetics study demonstrating that one of six kindreds with pyridoxinedependent seizures did not demonstrate linkage to the previously identified 5q31
locus. this suggests genetic heterogeneity for this disorder.

9

baynes k, tomaszewski farias s, gospe sm jr. pyridoxine-dependent seizures
and cognition in adulthood. dev med child  xxxd122xxx  2003; 45:782–785.

10 mishra d, gupta vk. pyridoxine dependent and pyridoxine responsive
seizures. indian pediatr 2005; 42:291–292.

25 spector r, greenwald ll. transport and metabolism of  xxxd3049xxx  in rabbit
brain and choroid plexus. j biol chem 1977; 253:2373–2379.
26 sakurai t, asakura t, matsuda m. transport and metabolism of pyridoxine and
pyridoxal in mice. j nutr sci vitaminol 1987; 33:11–19.

11 nunes ml, mugnol f, bica i, fiori rm. pyridoxine-dependent seizures associated with hypophosphatasia in a newborn. j child  xxxd122xxx  2002; 17:222–224.

27 diaz ga, banikazemi m, oishi k, et al. mutations in a new gene encoding a
thiamine transporter cause thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anaemia syndrome. nat genet 1999; 22:309–312.

12 schulze-bonhage a, kurthen m, walger p, elger ce. pharmacorefractory
status epilepticus due to low  xxxd3049xxx  levels during pregnancy. epilepsia
2004; 45:81–84.

28 fleming jc, tartaglini e, steinkamp mp, et al. the gene mutated in thiamineresponsive anaemia with diabetes and deafness ( xxxg2100xxx ) encodes a functional
thiamine transporter. nat genet 1999; 22:305–308.

13 tan h, kardas f, büyükavc m, karakelloğlu c. pyridoxine-dependent seizures
and microcephaly. pediatr  xxxd122xxx  2004; 31:211–213.
14 battaglioli g, rosen dr, gospe sm jr, martin dl.  xxxg913xxx 
is not genetically linked to pyridoxine-dependent seizures. neurology 2000;
55:309–311.
15 cormier-daire v, dagoneau n, nabbout r, et al. a gene for pyridoxinedependent epilepsy maps to chromosome 5q31. am j hum genet 2000;
67:991–993.
16 bender da.  xxxd3049xxx . in: nutritional biochemistry of the vitamins, 2nd ed.
cambridge: cambridge university press; 2003. pp. 232–269.
17 baxter p. epidemiology of pyridoxine dependent and pyridoxine responsive
seizures in the uk. arch dis child 1999; 81:431–433.
18 clayton pt, surtees rah, devile c, et al. neonatal epileptic encephalopathy.
lancet 2003; 361:1614.
19 kuo mf, wang hs.  xxxd3047xxx -responsive epilepsy with resistance
to pyridoxine. pediatr  xxxd122xxx  2002; 26:146–147.
20 mills pb, surtees rah, champion mp, et al. neonatal epileptic enceph alopathy caused by mutations in the  xxxg1793xxx  gene encoding pyridox
(am)ine 50 -phosphate oxidase. human mol genet 2005; 14:1077–1086.
report of the discovery of the genetic abnormality that underlies neonatal epileptic
encephalopathy. this condition is differentiated from pyridoxine-dependent
seizures by its severe clinical features, and its response to  xxxd3047xxx 
rather than to pyridoxine.
21 wang h-s, chou m-l, hung p-c, et al.  xxxd3047xxx  is better than
 pyridoxine for controlling idiopathic intractable epilepsy. arch dis child 2005;
90:512–515.
clinical research study demonstrating that some children with intractable epilepsy
achieve seizure control after the use of  xxxd3047xxx  as opposed to pyridoxine. responders included patients with infantile spasms as well as focal seizures.

29 gong m, yess j, connolly t, et al. molecular mechanisms of antifolate
transport-deficiency in a methotrexate-resistant molt-3 human leukemia cell
line. blood 1997; 87:2494–2499.
30 kobayashi h, takemura y, ohnuma t. variable expression of rfc1 in
human leukemia cell lines resistant to antifolates. cancer lett 1998; 124:
135–142.
31 said hm, ortiz a, ma ty. a carrier-mediated mechanism for pyridoxine uptake
by human intestinal epithelial caco-2 cells: regulation by a pka-mediated
pathway. am j physiol cell physiol 2003; 285:1219–1225.
32 stolz j, wöhrmann hjp, vogl c. amiloride uptake and toxicity in fission yeast

are caused by the pyridoxine transporter encoded by bsu1þ (car1þ). eukaryot
cell 2005; 4:319–326.
report of the gene encoding a pyridoxine transporter in yeast that shares
similar physiological functions to a transporter identified in human intestinal
cells.
33 plecko b, stöckler-ipsiroglu s, paschke e, et al. pipecolic acid elevation in
plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of two patients with pyridoxine-dependent
epilepsy. ann  xxxd122xxx  2000; 48:121–125.
34 plecko b, hikel c, korenke g-c, et al. pipecolic acid as a diagnostic
 marker of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy. neuropediatrics 2005; 36:200–
205.
pipecolic acid is elevated in both plasma and csf of patients with pyridoxinedependent seizures. this elevation persists long after pyridoxine treatment is
initiated. pipecolic acid elevations may serve as a diagnostic marker for patients
with pyridoxine-dependent seizures.
35 wolf ni, bast t, surtees r. epilepsy in inborn errors of metabolism. epileptic

disord 2005; 7:67–81.
review of various metabolic disorders (including pyridoxine dependency) that can
present with intractable seizures in infancy and early childhood.

copyright © lippincott williams & wilkins. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

