osteoarthritis and cartilage (2006) 14, 769e776
ª 2006 osteoarthritis research society international. published by elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.joca.2006.01.013

international
cartilage
repair
society

a quantitative approach to measure joint pain in experimental
osteoarthritisdevidence of a role for  xxxd2738xxx 
r. r. castro m.s.y, f. q. cunha ph.dz, dr f. s. silva jr.x and f. a. c. rocha ph.dk*
y department of physiology and pharmacology, faculty of medicine, federal university of ceará, brazil
~ o preto,
z professor of pharmacology, department of pharmacology, faculty of medicine of ribeira
~ o paulo, brazil
university of sa
~ o paulo, brazil
x department of rheumatology, faculty of medicine, university of sa
k professor of rheumatology, department of internal medicine, faculty of medicine,
federal university of ceará, brazil
summary
objectives: to describe a method to study joint pain in experimental osteoarthritis (oa) and to study  xxxd2738xxx  (no) participation in experimental oa.
design: rats were subjected to anterior cruciate ligament transection (aclt) (oa group) of the right knee and evaluated during 28 days. a sham
group was false operated and a naive group received no manipulation. joint pain was measured by recording the time the right hind paw fails to
touch the surface while walking. cell inﬂux (ci) and nitrite levels were measured in joint exudates. expression of  xxxg1578xxx  (inos)
in synovia was detected by immunostaining. for the speciﬁc purpose of pharmacological manipulation, groups received either indomethacin
(2 mg/kg/day s.c. (subcutaneous)),  xxxd2561xxx  (6 mg/kg/day s.c.), morphine (200 mg intra-articularly), the non-selective nos inhibitor l-n gnitroarginine methyl ester (l-name; 30 mg/kg/bid i.p. (intra-peritoneal)) or the selective inos inhibitor  xxxd21xxx  (0.5 mg/kg/day s.c.), given
30 min prior (prophylactic) or 4 days after (therapeutic) aclt, until sacriﬁce,  xxxd2274xxx  days. the respective non-treated groups received the vehicles.
results: the oa group developed joint pain, as compared to sham and control groups (p < 0.05). signiﬁcantly increased nitrite levels and
inos immunostaining were seen in the oa group. both indomethacin and  xxxd2561xxx  inhibited joint pain (p < 0.05). morphine inhibited joint
pain, whereas this effect was blocked by co-administration of the m-opioid receptor naloxone. ci was similar among all groups. prophylactic
but not therapeutic l-name or  xxxd21xxx  reduced joint pain.
conclusion: we describe a method to quantitate joint pain associated to weight bearing in the aclt model. the joint pain is sensitive to
classical antinociceptive compounds. no release is associated to joint pain though nos inhibition does not inhibit ongoing pain.
ª 2006 osteoarthritis research society international. published by elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
key words: osteoarthritis, hyperalgesia,  xxxd2738xxx , pain.

capsule3. the subchondral bone, due to its rich supply of
small-diameter nerve ﬁbers and non-adrenergic/non-cholinergic innervation, has also been involved in the pain evoked
by oa patients4,5. actually, subchondral ischemia and increased venous pressure due to joint loading may induce
the liberation of non-adrenergic/non-cholinergic pain mediators, such as  xxxg2240xxx  and the calcitonin gene-related
peptide in the subjacent bone6.
 xxxd2738xxx  (no) is a radical produced by a variety of
cells, including synoviocytes and chondrocytes7 and has
been shown to be involved in the pathophysiology of oa.
raised levels of nitrite e used as a measurement of no e
were reported both in serum and in the synovial ﬂuid of oa
patients8. either no per se or reactive species following no
release may induce chondrocyte apoptosis9,10 and inhibit
 xxxg33xxx  synthesis11, besides activating matrix metalloproteases12,13. additionally, the participation of no in nociception, whether being analgesic or hyperalgesic, is still
controversial. while there are reports showing that no
donors promoted pain relief in shoulder periarthritis,14
others have shown that intradermal administration of no
donors induces hyperalgesia15. with regard to experimental

introduction
osteoarthritis (oa) is a leading cause of disability in the
elderly. the treatment of this disease remains limited to
symptomatic relief and, ultimately, joint replacement. despite the progress made in understanding the pathophysiology of oa, effective disease-modifying drugs are still
lacking1. although joint pain is the most frequent complaint
of oa patients as well as a leading cause of disability, the
pharmacological therapy of this symptom is still unsatisfactory and relies on paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, opioids, and corticosteroids1.
the mechanisms involved in pain in oa are multifactorial.
cartilage degradation products may induce pain, either by
inducing local inﬂammation2 or by distension of the joint
*address correspondence and reprint requests to: dr francisco
airton castro rocha, ph.d., department of internal medicine,
faculty of medicine, federal university of ceará, rua dr. josé
lourenço, 1930, 60115281 fortaleza, ceará, brazil. tel/fax: 5585-32446215; e-mail: arocha@ufc.br
received 21 august 2005; revision accepted 26 january 2006.

769

770

r. r. castro et al.: no role in joint pain in osteoarthritis
were wrapped around both hind paws. after placement of
the gaiters, the animals were allowed to walk freely for habituation. the right paw was then connected via a simple circuit
to a microcomputer data input/output port. the paw elevation time (pet), as recorded in the present study, is the
time in seconds that during a 10 min period the hind paw
is not in contact with the cylinder. this is assumed to give
a measure of joint pain. results are reported either as the
mean of the maximal pet for a group of animals achieved
between 4 and 7 days or as the percent inhibition of the maximal pet obtained. this was assumed to represent the highest pain value in that particular period of evaluation.

arthritis, we have recently shown that no donors, rather
than no synthase (nos) inhibitors prevented the hyperalgesia in ongoing zymosan arthritis in rats16. however, to
our knowledge, there are no reports focusing on a possible
role for no in mediating pain in oa.
the anterior cruciate ligament transection (aclt) model
in rats has been used as an experimental oa model17. in
this model, swollen chondrocytes, ﬁbrillation of the articular
cartilage and chondrocyte loss were described as early as 7
days after aclt. these changes progress at later stages
coupled to loss of proteoglycans from the articular cartilage
and denaturation of type ii collagen ﬁbers. however, there
are no reports demonstrating the occurrence of joint pain
in this model. to our knowledge, attempts to quantify joint
pain in experimental oa were based on observation of
animals’ gait, using semiquantitative approaches18. recently, another tentative approach was reported, by an adaptation of the paw-pressure test (randalleselitto’s test)
as well as through measuring tactile allodynia19 that may reﬂect joint hyperalgesia, but may not properly reﬂect joint pain
secondary to oa changes. the articular incapacitation test,
deﬁned as the inability of a rat to walk normally after the injection of an inﬂammatory stimulus into the knee joint, is an
easily reproducible, quantitative approach to measure joint
pain that is independent of the observer. it was originally described using carrageenin as the inciting agent20 and we
have been using this method in the zymosan-induced arthritis model16,21. in the present study, we adapted this method
to directly assess joint pain in the aclt model in rats. additionally, using this approach, we present evidence of no
participation and that nos inhibitors do not inhibit the
ongoing hypernociceptive response in this oa model.

 xxxd2274xxx  days after starting the experiment, the animals were
terminally anaesthetized (chloral hydrate 400 mg/kg i.p.
(intra-peritoneal)), killed by cervical dislocation, and ex-sanguinated. the synovial cavity of the knee joints was then
washed with 0.4 ml phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) containing 10 mm ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. the synovial exudates were collected by aspiration and total and
differential cell counts were performed using a neubauer
chamber and stained smears, respectively. after centrifuging (500 g/10 min), the supernatants were stored at 20(c
and used for determination of total nitrite/nitrate (no
2/
no
3 ) levels (see below). the synovial membranes were
surgically excised, parafﬁn embedded and routinely processed for staining with hematoxylineeosin as well as for
the detection of the  xxxg1578xxx  (inos) isoenzyme, using
immunohistochemistry (see below).

methods

determination of no production

animals

the degree of no production was determined as

a measure of total no
2 /no3 levels by the griess reac

tion. total no2 /no3 levels were determined, with the
no
3 in the synovial exudates supernatants (0.08 ml) converted to no
2 by incubation of 0.01 ml nitrate reductase
from aspergillus species (1 unit/ml) and 0.01 ml nadph
(1 mm) for 30 min at 37(c. no
2 levels were determined
spectrophotometrically at 540 nm by comparing the
absorbance of 0.1 ml sample after adding 0.1 ml griess
reagent (sulfanilic acid (1% w/v) and n-(1-naphythyl)ethylenediamine (0.1% w/v) in 5% phosphoric acid) to
a nano2 (1e100 mm) standard.

male wistar rats (180e200 g) from our own animal facilities were used throughout the experiments. all efforts
were made to minimize animal suffering and the number
of animals used. the experimental protocol was approved
by our local ethics committee (protocol number 03/03) that
follows the guidelines of the brazilian college of animal
experimentation.
anterior cruciate ligament transection

animals were brieﬂy anesthetized under inhalation with
ether. after shaving of the right knee joint and local assepsia,
a parapatellar incision was made, followed by lateral displacement of the patella, thereby providing access to the
joint space. the anterior cruciate ligament is then easily visible and was surgically excised. the increased anterior
displacement of the tibia in relation to the femur was used
to assure that the ligament was transected. the surgical
wound was then closed. a sham group was subjected to
the same surgical procedure, without the excision of the ligament and a control (naive) group received no manipulation.
the animals were killed at various time intervals and the
results obtained in the group subjected to the aclt (oa
group) were compared to both the sham and naive groups.
measurement of the joint pain

we used the articular incapacitation method, as described
earlier, with slight modiﬁcations20. the animals were put to
walk on a steel rotary drum (30 cm wide  50 cm diameter),
which rotates at 3 rpm. specially designed metal gaiters

collection of synovial exudates and synovial
membranes

immunohistochemistry for inos detection

the synovial samples were used to assess the expression of the inos enzyme, using a commercially available
rabbit anti-human inos antibody (santa cruz biotechnology, ca, usa). brieﬂy, after deparafﬁnization, the tissues
were incubated with  xxxd2298xxx  and washed. after
incubation in citrate buffer, the tissues were subjected to
slight heating in a microwave oven. after overnight unspeciﬁc blocking with rabbit serum, the samples were incubated
with the rabbit anti-inos antibody (diluted 1:100 in pbs
plus 1% of bovine  xxxg124xxx , 2 h). after rinsing, the
sections were incubated with a secondary biotinylated
anti-rabbit immunoglobulin g antibody. the reaction product was detected with avidinebiotineperoxidase complex
(vector laboratories, burlingame, ca), and the color of
the reaction was developed with diamino-benzidine tetrahydrochloride (dab, sigma, usa). the slides were counterstained with mayer hematoxylin.

771

osteoarthritis and cartilage vol. 14, no. 8
drug treatments

as a means of validating the hyperalgesic test in an oa
model, we administered either the non-selective cyclooxygenase (cox) inhibitor indomethacin (2 mg/kg/day s.c.
(subcutaneous)) dissolved in a 5% w/v nahco3 solution
or the selective cox-2 inhibitor  xxxd2561xxx  ( xxxd2561xxx  e
boehringereingelheim brasil ltda.) (6 mg/kg/day i.p.), starting 4 days after aclt, until sacriﬁce,  xxxd2274xxx  days. another
group received morphine (200 mg) intra-articularly (i.art.),
at day 4, diluted in 50 ml of saline, and was compared to
a group that received a combined i.art. administration of
the m-opioid-receptor antagonist naloxone (500 mg) and
morphine (200 mg). other groups received either the nonselective nos inhibitor l-n g-nitroarginine methyl ester
(l-name: 30 mg/kg/bid) or the selective inos inhibitor
n-(3-(aminomethyl)benzyl) xxxd63xxx  ( xxxd21xxx : 0.5 mg/kg/
day), either 30 min before (prophylactic strategy) or starting
4 days after (therapeutic strategy) the aclt until sacriﬁce,
 xxxd2274xxx  days. reversion of l-name inhibition was evaluated
by prior administration of l-arginine (500 mg/kg/bid), followed by l-name. these groups were compared to groups
of animals subjected to the aclt transection that received
the respective vehicles (non-terated (nt) groups). indomethacin, l-name and l-arginine were purchased from
sigma, st. louis, mo, and  xxxd21xxx  was purchased from
cayman chem. co., usa. morphine and naloxone were
purchased from laboratórios cristália brasil ltda.
statistics

results are presented as the means  sd (standard
deviation) of measurements made on six animals in each

group. differences between means were compared using
one-way analysis of variance (anova) followed by tukey’s
test; p < 0.05 was considered as signiﬁcant.

results
development of the joint hyperalgesia
in the aclt model

the fig. 1(aed) illustrates the kinetics of the development of hyperalgesia in the aclt (oa), sham, and control
groups. animals of the oa group developed a signiﬁcant
increase in the pet, as compared to both the sham
and control groups (p < 0.05). the increase in the pet
started in the ﬁrst day after the surgical procedure and
reached its peak during the ﬁrst week in the oa group remaining elevated until the end of the second week postsurgery.
analysis of the cell influx into the joints

the cell counts in the articular exudates did not differ between the three groups in any of the time points evaluated
(table i). in all groups, there was predominance (80%) of
mononuclear cells in joint exudates.
kinetics of no release into the joint exudates

figure 2 illustrates the total amounts of nitrite in the different groups, including baseline levels and  xxxd2274xxx , 14, or 28
days after aclt. the concentrations in the oa group
were signiﬁcantly increased (236%) compared to those

fig. 1. kinetics of the articular hyperalgesia in rats subjected to aclt. a group of rats was subjected to aclt (oa) (-), a sham group (;)
was subjected to the surgical procedure without aclt and the control (naive) (,) group was not manipulated. the hyperalgesia was evaluated daily until 7 (a), 14 (b), 21 (c) or 28 days (d) after the procedure. results are expressed as the means  sd of groups of six animals.
*p < 0.05 compared to the sham group. (one-way anova followed by tukey’s test.)

772

r. r. castro et al.: no role in joint pain in osteoarthritis

table i
ci into the articular exudates of rats subjected to aclt. a group of
rats was subjected to aclt (oa), a sham group was subjected to
the surgical procedure without aclt and the control (naive) group
was not manipulated. the ci was assessed in the joint lavage
collected  xxxd2274xxx , 14 or 28 days after the procedure. results are
expressed as the means  sd of groups of six animals (one-way
anova followed by tukey’s test)

naive
sham
oa

discussion

cells/mm3

group

of l-arginine and l-name reversed the effect of the later
compound, while l-arginine isolated had no effect. however, the therapeutic administration of l-name or  xxxd21xxx 
did not alter joint pain, as compared to the respective nt
group (p > 0.05).

7 days

14 days

28 days

49  29
70  59
45  39

49  12
74  61
42  19

52  32
45  29
69  39

obtained in the sham group,  xxxd2274xxx  days post-surgery
(p < 0.05). as compared to the control (naive) group, the nitrite levels in the oa group were signiﬁcantly increased at
all time points evaluated (p < 0.05). nitrite levels in the
sham and control groups did not differ signiﬁcantly.
expression of the inos activity in the synovia

the fig. 3(aef) illustrates the photomicrographs of
the immunostaining for inos activity in the synovia
obtained from control (b), sham (d), and oa (f) groups.
the fig. 3(aec) represents the synovia incubated without the primary inos antibody. the immunostaining
was more intense in the synovia obtained from the
oa groups and it was more evident in the superﬁcial
(synovial) cells.
effect of the administration of cox inhibitors,
morphine and of nos inhibitors in the joint pain

the prophylactic administration of either indomethacin or
 xxxd2561xxx  signiﬁcantly reduced the joint pain, as compared
to the nt group (p < 0.01) (fig. 4). in addition, the local
(i.art.) administration of morphine did also signiﬁcantly reverse joint pain (fig. 5). this effect was totally inhibited by
the combined administration of naloxone and morphine.
the effect of the prophylactic administration of the nos
inhibitors in joint pain is illustrated in fig. 6. both l-name
and  xxxd21xxx  signiﬁcantly inhibited the pain, as compared
to the nt group (p < 0.001). the combined administration

fig. 2. nitrite levels in the articular exudates of rats subjected to
aclt. a group of rats was subjected to aclt (oa), a sham group
was subjected to the surgical procedure without aclt and the control (naive) group was not manipulated. results are expressed as
the means  sd of groups of six animals. *p < 0.05 compared to
the sham group; #p < 0.05 compared to the naive group. (oneway anova followed by tukey’s test.)

the integrity of the anterior cruciate ligament is essential
to knee joint stability, through reducing the intensity of
the anterior translocation and rotation of the tibia22. the destabilizing effect secondary to the aclt has been used as
a model for the study of joint alterations that closely
resemble those of human oa23. these include superﬁcial
ﬁbrillation, disorganization of the collagen and proteoglycans network, joint capsule thickening, and osteophyte
formation24.
we standardized a method for an objective and reproducible study of joint pain in the aclt model in rats. in previous
studies, our group has utilized the test for articular incapacitation for the study of the hyperalgesia that occurs in the
zymosan-induced arthritis in rats. using this approach, we
demonstrated that sensitization of the periarticular tissues
is involved in the hyperalgesia development21.
the test for articular incapacitation in rats was originally
described as a method that allows a quantitative, reproducible approach to study experimental joint pain. measures
taken are independent of the observer, thus avoiding subjective and non-parametric results. in this method, a computer-assisted device measures the time that the animal
walks without touching the surface of a rotating cylinder.
this period, called the pet, is assumed to be directly proportional to the articular incapacitation, and represents joint
pain. in their original report, the authors showed that the
commonly used analgesic and/or anti-inﬂammatory compounds such as indomethacin, sodium diclofenac, dypirone,
as well as morphine, provided, as expected, inhibition of
joint pain that occurs as a consequence of the injection of
carrageenin into the knee20. in the present study, we
assumed that joint pain in an oa model would be less
prominent than that of the zymosan model21. hence, we
adapted the prior method to the aclt model by measuring
the pet for a more prolonged period, so that it would reﬂect
joint pain associated to weight bearing during movement.
after preliminary studies, we standardized a 10 min daily
recording period since it reproducibly reﬂected joint pain,
as observed visually.
in the present study, animals had increased pet as early
as 6 h (data not shown) after aclt and pet remained elevated until 14 days, as compared to the sham group. indeed,
animals of the sham group did not display increase in pet, as
compared to naive animals. though joint pain persisted until
14 days, it was maximal during the initial 7 days. in order to
avoid the possible bias linked to surgical trauma and also
due to ethical reasons to minimize animal suffering, we decided to study the participation of inﬂammatory mediators in
the mechanisms of joint pain analyzing pet obtained from
4 to 7 days after aclt.
gait abnormalities following aclt could be due to protective behavior to stabilize the joint. in a dog model, the reduction in the reaction force against the ﬂoor appeared to
depend on the integrity of the afferent nerves. ipsilateral
ganglionectomy of the dorsal roots done prior to the aclt
increased the vertical impulse force compared to controls,
although the increase was not statistically signiﬁcant in
that study25. dogs with aclt showed only temporary

osteoarthritis and cartilage vol. 14, no. 8

773

fig. 3. immunohistochemistry for inos in the synovia of rats subjected to aclt. a group of rats was subjected to aclt (oa), a sham group
was subjected to the surgical procedure without aclt and the control (naive) group was not manipulated. figures represent the naive, sham
and oa groups, respectively, in the presence (b, d, f) or absence (a, c, e) of the primary anti-inos antibody (original 400).

decrease in the duration of stance phase26, whereas increased extension of the knee with decreased ‘‘yield’’ during weight acceptance was seen during the entire
observation period25,26. increased knee extension likely decreases demands on the quadriceps muscle when landing
on the affected extremity and therefore reduces anterior
tibial translation. gait analysis has shown comparable
adaptations in acl deﬁcient humans, i.e., quadriceps
avoidance gait27. development of such adaptations in the
rat may explain the return to normal pet after 2 weeks,
as seen in this study.
there are some reports of methods aiming to evaluate
joint pain in experimental oa. dogs presenting hip dysplasia had locomotor alterations that were interpreted as signs
of pain18. in the iodoacetate oa model in rats, a reduction of
the force derived from the injected hind paw was assumed
as reﬂecting joint hyperalgesia28. more recently, a quantitative approach was used to measure allodynia and reﬂected
paw-hyperalgesia in the iodoacetate model19. our present
work adds to these previous reports since we measured
joint pain associated to joint instability and development of
oa. we believe that pain on weight bearing, as assessed

in the present study, represents a major component of the
multifactorial mechanism of joint pain in oa.
methods to evaluate joint pain include pharmacological
modulation by classical analgesic and/or anti-inﬂammatory
compounds. we found that both indomethacin and  xxxd2561xxx  signiﬁcantly inhibited joint pain, as compared to
vehicle-treated animals. besides useful to validate the
method, this result clearly suggests a prostanoid component participating in joint pain of the aclt model.
in another attempt to further characterize the joint pain,
we tested the efﬁcacy of the classical opioid-receptor agonist morphine. the local administration of morphine signiﬁcantly inhibited joint pain. this effect was inhibited by the
combined administration of the m-opioid-receptor antagonist, naloxone, and morphine. we found that intra-peritoneal
administration of morphine (6 mg/g) inhibited joint pain
(data not shown). however, in order to avoid a systemic
sedative effect, we chose to evaluate morphine i.art. in
addition to the indication of the participation of endogenous
m-opioid-receptor agonists in joint pain, this result
strengthens the similarity of the pain, as measured in the
present model, to that observed in oa in humans1.

774

fig. 4. effect of the administration of cox inhibitors in the articular
hyperalgesia of rats subjected to aclt. either indomethacin (2 mg/
kg/d s.c.) or  xxxd2561xxx  (6 mg/kg/d s.c.) was given starting at 4 days
after the aclt and then daily until sacriﬁce at day 7. an nt group
was subjected to aclt and received the vehicle. the pet represents the maximal hyperalgesia obtained between days 4 and 7
after aclt, expressed as the means  sd of groups of six animals.
*p < 0.01; **p < 0.001 compared to nt group. (one-way anova
followed by tukey’s test.)

moreover, the local response to morphine argues for a pain
rather than a behavioral component for the alteration in
pet.
the cell inﬂux (ci) into the joints in human oa is mild and
it is usually composed of lymphocytes and mononuclear
cells29,30. there were no signiﬁcant differences in cell
counts of the various groups. it was reported that dogs subjected to aclt presented a mild mononuclear cell inﬁltrate
in the synovium31. to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report
to directly quantitate ci into the joints in an oa model. our
data suggest that cell inﬁltration does not contribute to joint

fig. 5. effect of the administration of morphine in the articular hyperalgesia of rats subjected to aclt. i.art. morphine (200 mg)
was given at day 4 after aclt. an nt group was subjected to
aclt and received the vehicle. another group received a combined
i.art. administration of the m-opioid-receptor antagonist naloxone
(500 mg) and morphine (200 mg). the pet represents the percent
inhibition of the hyperalgesia obtained at day 4, 30 min after the
i.art. injections, expressed as the means  sd of groups of six
animals. *p < 0.05 compared to nt group; #p < 0.001 compared
to morphine. (one-way anova followed by tukey’s test.)

r. r. castro et al.: no role in joint pain in osteoarthritis

fig. 6. effect of the administration of nos inhibitors in the articular
hyperalgesia of rats subjected to aclt. either the non-selective
nos inhibitor l-name (30 mg/kg/bid i.p.) or the selective inos inhibitor  xxxd21xxx  (0.5 mg/kg/day s.c.) was given 30 min prior (prophylactic) to aclt or starting at day 4 (therapeutic) after aclt and
then daily until sacriﬁce at day 7. an nt group was subjected to
aclt and received the vehicle. l-arginine ( xxxd220xxx : 500 mg/kg/bid
s.c.), in combination with l-name or isolated, was given prior to
aclt and then daily, until sacriﬁce. the pet represents the maximal hyperalgesia obtained between days 4 and 7 after aclt,
expressed as the means  sd of groups of six animals. results
are expressed as the means  sd of groups of six animals.
*p < 0.001 compared to nt. (one-way anova followed by tukey’s
test.)

pain in the aclt model in rats. we speculate that the sensitization of periarticular structures accounts for this mechanism. direct stimulation of non-adrenergic/non-cholinergic
receptors present in the synovium32 may also contribute
to joint pain.
increased nitrite levels have been reported in the synovial
ﬂuid of oa patients8,33. we found increased no levels in
the joint exudates, being maximal  xxxd2274xxx  days. apart from
local endothelial cells, synoviocytes as well as chondrocytes are potential sources of no release in joints7. indeed,
normal cultured human chondrocytes express inos after
in vitro stimulation34. chondrocytes obtained from dogs
subjected to aclt produce no spontaneously in vitro35,36
and chondrocytes from patients presenting oa express
the neuronal isoform of the nos and spontaneously produce no in vitro37. compressive mechanical stress was
shown to induce the release of nitrite from bovine cartilage
slices in vitro38. it is known that ligamentous and meniscal
tears disturb the normal distribution of forces acting upon
the joint cartilage in vivo24. in the present study, since we
detected increased inos activity in the superﬁcial synovial
cells of the animals subjected to aclt, we propose that
these cells and, possibly, chondrocytes are responsible
for the increased no levels. indeed, in synovia obtained
from oa patients, increased inos expression was present
in cd68þ macrophages39.
we found a close association between the increased no
levels and development of joint pain. prophylactic administration of either l-name or  xxxd21xxx  signiﬁcantly inhibited
pain. since l-name effect was abrogated by the combined
administration of l-arginine and considering the high selectivity of  xxxd21xxx  for the inos isoform, it is our belief that the
antinociceptive effect of these compounds was mostly due
to a speciﬁc inhibitory effect of inos. on the other hand,

osteoarthritis and cartilage vol. 14, no. 8
when administered in an ongoing pain (therapeutic strategy), neither l-name nor  xxxd21xxx  showed an effect. these
data suggest, for the ﬁrst time, that inos activation is linked
to joint pain in the aclt model. hence, the prophylactic administration of nos inhibitors might block synoviocytes and/
or chondrocytes activation, thus inhibiting joint pain. however, in an ongoing process, nos inhibitors do not display
intrinsic antinociceptive activity.
l-name was antinociceptive in the formalin test in the rat
paw as well as in the abdominal writhings test provoked by
acetic acid injection40. intra-techal injection of the selective
inos inhibitors  xxxd2951xxx  or 2 xxxd2850xxx -5,6-hydroximethylthyazine inhibited carrageenin-induced thermal
hyperalgesia in rats41. the no donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine (sin-1) promoted hyperalgesia in the paw-pressure
test in rats42, while intradermal injection of an no donor produced pain in humans15,43. paradoxical as it may seem,
there are also data reporting antinociceptive effects for
no. in the paw-pressure test in rats, after injecting either
carrageenin or  xxxd1903xxx , the acetylcholine induced
analgesia was linked to the l-arginine:no:cgmp (cyclic
 xxxd1067xxx ) system44. in humans, transdermal nitrate patches, used as no donors, provided relief
in post-surgical pain45 as well as in shoulder periarthritis
patients14. we have reported that nos inhibitors display
anti-hypernociceptive activity in zymosan arthritis only
when used prophylactically, while sodium nitroprusside
and sin-1 signiﬁcantly inhibited joint hyperalgesia16. therefore, a dual role for no in the aclt model seems probable.
additionally, the indirect participation of no in joint pain
through the release of reactive nitrogen species cannot be
ruled out. though the present data argue against nos inhibitors as pain killers in oa, the use of no donors with
this purpose warrants further studies.
in conclusion, the present study presents a low-cost,
practical, easy-to-handle, reproducible, objective method
to directly assess joint pain in experimental oa in rats.
using this method we found evidence that prostanoids
and nos products play a role in joint pain.

references
1. brandt kd. non-surgical treatment of osteoarthritis:
a half century of ‘‘advances’’. ann rheum dis 2004;
63:117e22.
2. schumacher hr. the role of inﬂammation and crystals
in the pain of osteoarthritis. semin arthritis rheum
1999;18:81e5.
3. altman r, lozada cj. osteoarthritis and related disorders: clinical features. in: hochberg mc, silman aj,
smolen js, weinblat me, weisman m, eds. rheumatology. london: mosby 2003:1793e1802.
4. serre cm, farlay d, delmas pd, chenu c. evidence for
a dense and intimate innervation of bone tissue, including glutamate-containing ﬁbers. bone 1999;25:
623e9.
5. mach db, rogers sd, sabino mc, luger nm,
schwei mj, pomonis jd, et al. origins of skeletal
pain: sensory and sympathetic innervation of the
mouse femur. neuroscience 2002;113:155e66.
6. kiaer t, gronlund j, sorensen kh. intraosseous pressure and partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in osteoarthritis. semin arthritis rheum 1989;18:
57e60.
7. stefanovic-racic m, stadler j, evans ch.  xxxd2738xxx 
and arthritis. arthritis rheum 1993;36:1038e44.

775
8. farrell aj, blake dr, palmer rmj, moncada s. increased concentrations of nitrite in synovial ﬂuid and
serum samples suggest increased  xxxd2738xxx  synthesis in rheumatic diseases. ann rheum dis 1992;51:
1219e22.
9. blanco fj, ochs rl, schwarz rl, lotz m. chondrocyte
apoptosis induced by  xxxd2738xxx . am j pathol 1995;
146:75e85.
10. del carlo m, loeser rf.  xxxd2738xxx -mediated chondrocyte cell death requires the generation of additional
reactive oxygen species. arthritis rheum 2002;46:
394e403.
11. taskiran d, stefanovic-racic m, georgescu h,
evans c.  xxxd2738xxx  mediates suppression of cartilage proteoglycan synthesis by interleukin-1. biochem
biophys res commun 1994;200:142e8.
12. sasaki k, hatton t, fujisawa t, takahashi k, inoue h,
takigawa m.  xxxd2738xxx  mediates interleukin-1induced gene expression of matrix metalloproteinases
and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor in cultured rabbit
articular chondrocytes. j biochem (tokyo) 1998;123:
431e9.
13. murrell ga, jang d, williams rj.  xxxd2738xxx  activates
metalloproteinase enzymes in articular cartilage. biochem biophys res commun 1995;206:15e21.
14. berrazueta jr, losada a, poveda j, ochoteco a,
riestra a, salas a, et al. successful treatment of
shoulder pain syndrome due to supraspinatus tendinitis with transdermal nitroglycerin. a double blind study.
pain 1996;66:63e7.
15. holthusen h, arndt j.  xxxd2738xxx  evokes pain in humans on intracutaneous injection. neurosci lett
1994;165:71e4.
16. rocha jcs, peixoto meb, jancar s, cunha fq,
ribeiro ra, rocha fac. dual effect of  xxxd2738xxx  in
articular inﬂammmatory pain in zymosan-induced arthritis in rats. br j pharmacol 2002;136:588e96.
17. stoop r, buma p, van der kraan pm, hollander ap,
billinghurst rc, meijers thm, et al. type ii collagen
degradation in articular cartilage ﬁbrillation after anterior cruciate ligament transection in rats. osteoarthritis
cartilage 2001;9:308e15.
18. hielm-bjorkman ak, kuusela e, liman a, markkola a,
saarto e, huttunen p, et al. evaluation of methods
for assessment of pain associated with chronic osteoarthritis in dogs. j am vet med assoc 2003;222:
1552e8.
19. fernihough j, gentry c, malgangio m, fox a,
rediske j, pellas t, et al. pain related behavior in
two models of osteoarthritis in the rat knee. pain
2004;112:83e93.
20. tonussi cr, ferreira sh. rat knee-joint carrageenin incapacitation test: an objective screen for central and
peripheral analgesics. pain 1992;48:421e7.
~o agm jr, oliveira rc,
21. rocha fac, araga
pompeu mml, vale mr, ribeiro ra. periarthritis promotes gait disturbance in zymosan-induced arthritis.
inﬂamm res 1999;48:485e90.
22. li g, suggs j, gill t. the effect of anterior cruciate ligament injury on knee joint function under a stimulated
muscle load: a three-dimensional computational simulation. ann biomed eng 2002;30:713e20.
23. brandt kd, braunstein em, visco dm, o’conner b,
heck d, albrecht m. anterior (cranial) cruciate ligament transection in the dog: a bona ﬁde model of osteoarthritis, not merely of cartilage injury and repair.
j rheumatol 1991;18:436e46.

776
24. setton la, elliott dm, mow vc. altered mechanics of
cartilage with osteoarthritis: human osteoarthritis and
an experimental model of joint degeneration. osteoarthritis cartilage 1999;7:2e14.
25. o’connor bl, visco dm, rogers pi, mamlim la,
brandt kd. serial force plate analysis of dogs with
unilateral knee instability, with or without interruption
of sensory input from the ipsilateral limb. osteoarthritis
cartilage 1999;7:567e73.
26. vilensky ja, o’connor bl, brandt k, dunn ea,
rogers pi. serial kinematic analysis of the trunk and
limb joints after anterior cruciate ligament transaction:
temporal, spatial, and angular changes in a canine
model of osteoarthritis. j electromyogr kinesiol
1994;4:181e92.
27. andriacchi tp, birac d. functional testing in the anterior cruciate ligament-deﬁcient knee. clin orthop
1993;288:40e7.
28. kobayashi k, imaizumi r, sumichika h, tanaka h,
goda m, fukunari a, et al. sodium iodoacetateinduced experimental osteoarthritis and associated
pain model in rats. j vet med sci 2003;65:1195e9.
29. ishii h, tanaka h, katoh k, nakamura h, nagashima m,
yoshino s. characterization of inﬁltrating t cells and
th1/th2-type cytokines in the synovium of patients with
osteoarthritis. osteoarthritis cartilage 2002;10:277e81.
30. saito i, koshino t, nakashima k, uesug im, saito t.
increased cellular inﬁltrate in inﬂammatory synovia of
osteoarthritic knees. osteoarthritis cartilage 2002;10:
156e62.
31. brandt kd, myers sl, burr d, albrecht m. osteoarthritic
changes in canine articular cartilage, subchondral
bone and synovium ﬁfty-four months after transection
of the anterior cruciate ligament. arthritis rheum
1991;34:1560e70.
32. walsh da, salmon m, mapp pi, wharton j, garrett n,
blake dr, et al. microvascular  xxxg2240xxx  binding
to normal and inﬂamed rat and human synovium.
j pharmacol exp ther 1993;267:951e60.
33. karan a, karan ma, vural p, erten n, tascioglu c,
aksoy c, et al. synovial ﬂuid  xxxd2738xxx  levels in patients with knee osteoarthritis. clin rheumatol 2003;
22:397e9.
34. charles ig, palmer rm, hickey ms, bayliss mt,
chubb ap, hall vs, et al. cloning, characterization
and expression of a cdna encoding an inducible nitric
oxide synthase from the human chondrocyte. proc
natl acad sci u s a 1993;90:419e23.

r. r. castro et al.: no role in joint pain in osteoarthritis
35. pelletier jp, jovanovic d, fernandes jc, manning p,
connor jr, currie mg, et al. reduced progression
of experimental osteoarthritis in vivo by selective inhibition of  xxxg1578xxx . arthritis
rheum 1998;41:1275e86.
36. spreng d, sigrist n, jungi t, busato a, lang j,
pﬁster h, et al.  xxxd2738xxx  metabolite production
in the cranial cruciate ligament, synovial membrane and articular cartilage in dogs with cranial
cruciate ligament rupture. am j vet res 2000;
61:530e6.
37. amin ar, di cesare pe, vyas p, attur m, tzeng e,
billiar tr, et al. the expression and regulation of
 xxxd2738xxx  synthase in human osteoarthritisaffected chondrocyte: evidence for up-regulated
neuronal  xxxd2738xxx  synthase. j exp med 1995;
182:2097e102.
38. loening am, james ie, levenston me, badger am,
frank eh, kurz b, et al. injurious mechanical compression of bovine articular cartilage induces chondrocyte apoptosis. arch biochem biophys 2000;381:
205e12.
39. grabowski ps, wright pk, vant’hof rj, helfrich mh,
ohshima h, ralston sh. immunolocalization of  xxxg1578xxx  in synovium and cartilage in
rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. br j rheumatol
1997;36:651e6.
40. moore pk, oluyomi ao, babbedge rc, wallace p,
hart sl. l-ng-nitro-arginine methyl ester exhibits antinociceptive activity in the mouse. br j pharmacol
1991;102:198e202.
41. osborne mg, coderre tj. effects on intrathecal administration of  xxxd2738xxx  synthase inhibitors on carrageenan-induced thermal hyperalgesia. br j pharmacol
1999;126:1840e6.
42. aley ko, mccarter g, levine jd.  xxxd2738xxx  signaling
in pain and nociceptor sensitization in the rat. j neurosci 1998;18:7008e14.
43. kindgen-milles d, arndt jo.  xxxd2738xxx  as a chemical
link in generation of pain from veins in humans. pain
1996;64:139e42.
44. duarte idg, lorenzetti bb, ferreira sh. peripheral analgesia and activation of the  xxxd2738xxx - xxxd1274xxx 
pathway. eur j pharmacol 1990;186:289e93.
45. lauretti gr, de oliveira r, reis mp, mattos al,
pereira nl. transdermal nitroglycerine enhances spinal sulfentanil postoperative analgesia following orthopedic surgery. anesthesiology 1999;90:734e9.

