nurses are everywhere: a practical perspective
on the surgical team in managing
postoperative ileus
nancy m. saufl, ms, rn, cpan, capa
nancy strzyzewski, bsn, rn, cpan, capa
because the availability of new, peripherally acting mu-opioid-receptor antagonists is expected soon, it is important for all members of the surgical team to
familiarize themselves with new approaches and also re-evaluate older approaches to help improve patient outcomes. “preop nurses” have numerous
responsibilities, among which are mitigating some of the adverse outcomes of
surgery such as postoperative ileus (poi), making these nursing personnel
indispensable to the proper implementation of multimodal management
protocols for poi. establishing basic preoperative procedures is an important
primary consideration. preoperative evaluation of general health, medical
history (including surgical history), and an assessment of gastrointestinal (gi)
function and habits should all be part of careful up-front assessment for each
patient, especially because poi and other gi adverse effects are so often
encountered in the pacu. hand-in-hand with how we as nurses interact with
our surgical colleagues is patient education regarding hospitalization and
postrecovery expectations. pacu nurses will be key players in maintaining
proper implementation of multimodal regimens, essentially doing this in two
“phases”: phase i interventions comprise the ongoing assessment and monitoring of patients, administering medications, and evaluating patient satisfaction and overall status; phase ii considerations encompass a further set of
practice guidelines that center on optimizing discharge status, including pain
management and education as well as other discharge needs. where new
agents may fit into multimodal regimens that optimally incorporate preoperative and postanesthesia protocols remains to be determined. what is clear is
that as nurses and the entire surgical team strive to enhance patient satisfaction, nursing personnel must assume leadership roles in how new multimodal
strategies are implemented and executed. advanced clinical data for the new
peripherally acting mu-opioid-receptor antagonist  xxxd134xxx , and for the
drug class as a whole, have contributed to a greater impetus on reassessing
perioperative protocols and policy, helping to broach innovative clinical
frontiers of how we treat pain and poi, and thus improve patient outcomes.
© 2006 by american society of perianesthesia nurses.

nancy m. saufl, ms, rn, cpan, capa, is coordinator, preadmission
testing department florida hospital memorial system, ormond beach,
fl; and nancy strzyzewski, bsn, rn, cpan, capa, is clinical nurse
educator, william beaumont hospital, royal oak, mi.
address correspondence to nancy m. saufl, ms, rn, cpan,
capa, 114 pinion circle, ormond beach, fl; e-mail address:
saufl23@aol.com.
© 2006 by american society of perianesthesia nurses.
1089-9472/06/2102-0105$32.00/0
doi:10.1016/j.jopan.2006.01.014

approaches to effectively manage and reduce postoperative morbidities are paramount
concerns not only for nurses directly involved
in the postoperative care of patients, but also
for nurses who must assess and prepare that
patient for surgery and the entire perioperative/
perianesthesia experience. postoperative ileus
(poi) is a commonly encountered condition
that hinders recovery and successful outcomes.1,2 unfortunately, there has been little
progress to date in the management options

s24

journal of perianesthesia nursing, vol 21, no 2a (april), 2006: pp s24-s29

nursing perspectives on managing poi

available to nurses who must deal with this
clinical problem. for most patients undergoing
major surgery, management approaches for poi
and the entire surgical experience can vary
widely.3-6 the emergence of new strategies and
pharmacologic agents compound the difficulty
of keeping apprised of data that support the
more clinically reliable of these methods.5,7-10
even with a comprehensive familiarity of the
most current strategies, the application of good
communication skills within the surgical team
remains a vital tool toward achieving best practices.
major advances, to include enhanced multimodal protocols in the treatment and possibly
even the prevention of poi, are upon us.
these include innovative surgical techniques,
alternate anesthesia, and analgesia options, as
well as novel pharmacologic agents such as
the new class of peripherally acting mu-opioid-receptor antagonists. these have all
proven effective, to varying degrees, in helping to prevent or to reduce the duration of
poi. because the availability of at least one
new mu-opioid-receptor antagonist for poi is
imminent, it is important for all members of
the surgical team to not only familiarize themselves with new strategies that may incorporate these drugs, but to also re-evaluate older
approaches and their role in improving patient outcomes. potentially more effective
drugs for poi may lead to better management
options, enhancing the multimodal treatment
of poi and in turn signaling a need for redefinition of individual surgical team members’
roles in achieving optimal surgical outcomes.
a recent clinical trial involving almost 2,000
patients compared preoperative nursing assessments with those by house medical staff
and found the nursing assessments to be of
equal quality and carry similar impact on subsequent patient management; 13% and 15% of
assessments carried out by nurses and house
officers, respectively, affected subsequent patient management.11

s25

preoperative/preanesthesia
assessment
the preoperative nurse has a range of responsibilities that may be daunting but are nevertheless critical to optimizing the perioperative experience. mitigating poi and other adverse
outcomes of surgery are among these responsibilities. preoperative nursing personnel are integral members of the “first-line” in carrying out
multimodal management protocols for the prevention and management of poi.
regardless of the standardized multimodal regimen implemented, there are basic preoperative procedures that should always be followed.
preoperative evaluation goes a long way towards achieving the goal of decreased length of
stay (los) and gives patients an opportunity to
understand their pre- and postoperative routine
and expectations. the overall goal of preoperative care is to optimize patient care, comfort,
and satisfaction. good basic procedures include
a preoperative evaluation of general health and
medical history, being careful to assess mobility
issues and to identify physical handicaps that
might be potentially problematic. psychological
assessment is also important, and mental health
issues such as depression should be identified if
possible, or at least inquired about. taking a
thorough surgical history, as well as an assessment of gastrointestinal (gi) function and habits, is crucial. because poi and other gi adverse
effects are so often encountered in the pacu,
careful up-front assessment may improve overall management, not only in terms of actual time
and labor but also as clinical outcomes. assessing the patient’s individual bowel elimination
patterns, use of any medications or laxatives,
and any history of constipation with prior surgery during this preoperative evaluation becomes a potentially indispensable component
of the postoperative management plan. most
preoperative nurses already ask patients if they
have ever had problems related to anesthesia;
however, inquiring about previous experience
with constipation after surgery is also important. good dialogue with anesthesiology col-

s26

leagues during this period is also necessary to
help reduce related risk factors postoperatively.
pre-anesthetic screening questionnaires given
by nurses have proven useful in helping to
streamline communications between nursing
and anesthesia personnel.12,13
the cooperation of anesthesia colleagues, surgeons, and nurses has been recognized as essential for the proper implementation of fasting
guidelines published by the american society of
anesthesiologists.14 patients should not be under “nothing by mouth” (npo) orders for extended periods of time and may have clear
liquids up to 2 to 4 hours preprocedure to
maintain their fluid status. maintaining fluid and
electrolyte balance is a crucial component of
care for patients scheduled to undergo surgery.15
patients are also key participants in the optimization of their own care and therapy. to help
them realize that potential, patient education is
a critical part of preoperative assessment protocols and should cover hospitalization and postrecovery expectations. a recent review of the
benefits of preoperative information programs
include decreased los, less demand for postoperative analgesia, increased patient satisfaction,
and associated potential financial savings.16 participation of the entire perioperative team is
fundamental in preparing the patient both psychologically and physically for the consequences of the overall surgical experience.17
table 1 provides a summary of basic preoperative evaluation needs.
before surgery, the preanesthesia assessment to
include npo status and preemptive fluid management should be completed. medication protocols should be reviewed and postoperative
expectations and fears addressed. pain management education is another major area to be
addressed. the use of pre- and postoperative
pain assessment and description tools, which
include the assessment of pain perception, pain
acceptance, tolerance for pain, and pain-related

nancy m. saufl and nancy strzyzewski
table 1. good preoperative evaluation
general health
chief complaints
symptoms that led patient to seek medical attention
present problem(s)
medical history
usual height and weight
nutrition needs
allergies to food, drugs, latex, other substances
surgical history
prior surgeries, invasive procedures
anesthesia experiences
gi assessment
nutrition
bowel elimination patterns
use of medications or laxatives
history of constipation with prior surgery
patient education
medication protocol
peripherally acting mu-opioid-receptor
antagonists?
postoperative expectations
benefits of early ambulation
hydration
resuming diet

anxiety, have been shown to enhance surgical
outcomes.18 where new mu-opioid-receptor
antagonists may fit into preoperative evaluation
protocols remains to be determined; clinical
trials have shown these drugs to decrease poi
while still allowing the use of opioids for
pain.7,9
preanesthesia assessment is the foundation of
care for surgical patients.19 together with a
thorough history, by providing necessary information, and assessing the patient’s understanding and potential for compliance with pre- and
postoperative instructions, preoperative nurses
become active advocates for the patient, helping to motivate them and set the stage for
optimal postoperative outcomes.

poi and the pacu: new frontiers
the exact causes of poi are still being elucidated, but it is generally accepted that there are

nursing perspectives on managing poi

two major causes: stress and other chemical
mediators that result from surgical manipulation, and opioids that bind to specific receptors
in the gi tract, affect certain pathways, and
cause gut dysmotility. recent advances in understanding poi may have a profound impact
on nursing practices in the surgical setting and
their role as members of the surgical team.
attempts to address surgical causes center on
less invasive procedures, with the expectation
that a diminished stress response may lead to a
lower risk of poi. multimodal analgesia regimens attempt, in part, to lower the risk of
adverse effects from opioids by substituting
other analgesic agents (eg, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [nsaids]) or alternative
techniques (thoracic epidural analgesia). this
emerging information has several effects on
pacu nursing practices.
“phase i interventions” in the pacu comprise,
in part, keeping the airway patent, keeping the
heart beating, and keeping the patient breathing. in phase i, any reduced blood flow to the
gut will impair the gut and potentially add to the
inflammatory process. hypotension, hypothermia, and hypoxia all cause vasoconstriction and
a decrease in delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
often, listening to bowel sounds has not been
part of phase i concerns, primarily because
bowel sounds do not generally occur at this
early postoperative stage. however, surgical
practice is rapidly changing so that most patients can now reasonably be expected to recover and return home sooner. we need to be
more vigilant in helping the patient to maintain
a healthy bowel. the necessity of a multimodal
approach in phase i can readily be appreciated,
therefore, because interventions at this stage of
care complement those initiated preoperatively, and at the stage of the operation itself.
alternate analgesia regimens both preoperatively and postoperatively are useful, as is a
direct reduction of the opioid burden, but while
maintaining adequate analgesia. phase 3 data
suggest that giving peripherally acting mu-opi-

s27

oid-receptor antagonists early in the preoperative process, before the opioid burden accumulates in a patient, might block gi mu-opioid
receptors so opioids can be maintained postoperatively with less fear of the patient developing
prolonged poi.8
management of acute pain is a priority in phase
i nursing care. because poi has been linked to
opioid burden, phase i nurses are in a key
position to play a key role in the prevention of
poi. the management of acute pain in phase i
must include considerations of the effects of
opioids on postoperative outcomes. multimodal
approaches to analgesia do not center simply
on reducing opioid burden, but take advantage
of the synergy of pharmacology that we use
postoperatively. the need to be ever vigilant
about pain assessment and documentation, and
how patients are responding to these new multimodalities remains a critical focus of phase i
care. another way that pacu nurses can positively impact patient outcomes regarding poi is
through education of peers and of patients.
promoting communication and discussion
among other anesthesia team members about
the potentially great negative impact poi can
have, and effective perianesthesia interventions
to lessen that impact, can lead to the successful
avoidance of poi. for example, the use of
nsaids, low-dose ketorolac, and ketamine for
the treatment of acute pain in the perianesthesia phases of care may help reduce the total
opioid burden and, thus, the overall risk of
developing poi.
phase ii considerations comprise a further set
of practice guidelines that center on optimizing discharge status. this includes discharge
teaching to address ongoing pain management and education, as well as other discharge teaching needs. attaining and maintaining optimal pain scores, proper use of
pain medications, and the benefits of motility
as well as stimulation of the gi tract are
important, not only for poi needs but also to
lower the risk of readmission as a result of

s28

nancy m. saufl and nancy strzyzewski

postoperative complications. with the growing trend towards earlier patient discharge
and the use of protocols to help facilitate
earlier discharge, nurses need to be educating
the patient and family regarding healthy
bowel regimens, what constitutes a “bowel
movement,” and other signs and symptoms
that the outpatient needs to be aware of. after
patient discharge, a postoperative phone call
that includes teaching regarding pain and
medication usage as well as bowel function
can be quite useful.

hance patient satisfaction and overall quality
of the preoperative, perianesthesia, and postoperative experiences, nursing personnel
must integrate new approaches into the design of multimodal strategies. preoperative
and phase i nurses can play a pivotal role in
possibly preventing poi. by providing a preoperative assessment that addresses gi history and specific concerns, as well as education about, and advocating for, the inclusion
of peripherally acting mu-opioid receptor antagonists preoperatively, the preoperative
nurse can initiate a care plan that reduces the
potential for poi. fitting new agents such as
peripherally acting mu-opioid-receptor antagonists into existing preoperative protocols
may be plausible; many of us are already
letting patients take their medications for
blood pressure or seizures, for example, on
the morning of surgery with a sip of water.
postanesthesia nurses can positively impact
patient outcomes by incorporating a multimodal approach to pain management, initiating
and improving communication among team
members, and active patient education. incorporating emerging information regarding poi
and new agents as they become available
remains a challenge towards the design and
implementation of advanced multimodal protocols, a challenge that all nurses involved
in the perioperative care of patients are
uniquely suited to meet.

as perianesthesia nurses reevaluate their roles
on the surgical team, a constant dialogue is
crucial to growing and improving nursing practices. new agents such as peripherally acting
mu-opioid-receptor antagonists have led to a
greater impetus on reassessing perioperative
protocols and policy and are helping to reshape
new frontiers of how we treat pain and poi in
the pacu, and thus improve patient outcomes.
by research, constantly assessing and reassessing how our interventions have affected our
patients’ outcomes, and by partnering with
other care providers within and outside of the
surgical team (eg, anesthesia team, pharmacists,
inpatient nursing), we can grow our practice
and help improve and optimize patient outcomes.

conclusion
clearly, the participation of all surgical team
members, especially perianesthesia/perioperative nursing personnel, is vital toward
achieving the best overall postoperative outcome; this begins with good pre- and perioperative procedures. as nurses strive to en-

acknowledgment
the authors thank susan carter, bsn, rn, cpan, capa, for
critical reading of the manuscript; michael g. pellegrino, phd,
for editorial contributions; and robert coover for technical
assistance.

references
1. kehlet h, holte k. review of postoperative ileus. am j
surg. 2001;182(5a suppl):3s-10s.
2. steinbrook r. postoperative ileus: why we should treat.
contemp surg. 2005;(suppl):4-7.
3. holte k, kehlet h. postoperative ileus: a preventable
event. br j surg. 2000;87(11):1480-1493.
4. holte k, kehlet h. postoperative ileus: progress towards
effective management. drugs. 2002;62(18):2603-2615.

5. holte k, kehlet h. diverse therapeutic solutions to a
challenging problem: a multimodal approach to postoperative
ileus. contemp surg. 2005;(suppl):8-11.
6. kurz a, sessler di. opioid-induced bowel dysfunction:
pathophysiology and potential new therapies. drugs. 2003;
63(7):649-671.
7. delaney cp, weese jl, hyman nh, et al. phase iii trial
of  xxxd134xxx , a novel, peripherally acting mu opioid antag-

nursing perspectives on managing poi
onist for postoperative ileus after major abdominal surgery.
dis colon rectum. 2005;48(6):1114-1125, discussion
1125-1116; author reply 1127-1119.
8. leslie jb.  xxxd134xxx  for the management of postoperative ileus. ann pharmacother. 2005;39(9):1502-1510.
9. wolff bg, michelassi f, gerkin tm, et al.  xxxd134xxx , a
novel, peripherally acting mu opioid antagonist: results of a
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase iii trial of major abdominal surgery and postoperative ileus. ann surg. 2004;240(4):728-734, discussion
734-725.
10. delaney c. surgical and pharmacologic considerations
in the management of postoperative ileus: enhancing postoperative care. contemp surg. 2005;(suppl):12-15.
11. kinley h, czoski-murray c, george s, et al. effectiveness
of appropriately trained nurses in preoperative assessment:
randomised controlled equivalence/non-inferiority trial. bmj.
2002;325(7376):1323.
12. hilditch wg, asbury aj, crawford jm. pre-operative
screening: criteria for referring to anaesthetists. anaesthesia.
2003;58(2):117-124.

s29

13. hilditch wg, asbury aj, jack e, et al. validation of a
pre-anaesthetic screening questionnaire. anaesthesia. 2003;
58(9):874-877.
14. american society of anesthesiologist task force on
preoperative fasting: practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of
pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: a report by the american society of
anesthesiologist task force on preoperative fasting. anesthesiology. 1999;90(3):896-905.
15. lobo dn. fluid, electrolytes and nutrition: physiological
and clinical aspects. proc nutr soc. 2004;63(3):453-466.
16. garretson s. benefits of pre-operative information programmes. nurs stand. 2004;18(47):33-37.
17. hughes s. the effects of giving patients pre-operative
information. nurs stand. 2002;16(28):33-37.
18. haefeli m, elfering a. pain assessment. eur spine j.
2005;15(suppl 1):s17-24.
19. ziolkowski l, strzyzewski n. perianesthesia assessment: foundation of care. j perianesth nurs. 2001;16(6):
359-370.

