review article

doi: 10.1111/j.1463–1326.2005.00510.x

adiponectin – a key adipokine in the metabolic syndrome
j. p. whitehead,1 a. a. richards,1 i. j. hickman,1,3 g. a. macdonald1,2 and j. b. prins1,3
1

centre for diabetes and endocrine research, university of
queensland, princess alexandra hospital, brisbane, australia
2
departments of gastroenterology & hepatology, university of queensland, princess alexandra hospital, brisbane, australia
3
departments of diabetes & endocrinology, university of queensland, princess alexandra hospital, brisbane, australia

adiponectin is a recently described adipokine that has been recognized as a key regulator of insulin sensitivity
and tissue inflammation. it is produced by adipose tissue (white and brown) and circulates in the blood at very
high concentrations. it has direct actions in liver, skeletal muscle and the vasculature, with prominent roles to
improve hepatic insulin sensitivity, increase fuel oxidation [via up-regulation of adenosine monophosphateactivated protein kinase (ampk) activity] and decrease vascular inflammation. adiponectin exists in the circulation as varying molecular weight forms, produced by multimerization. recent data indicate that the highmolecular weight (hmw) complexes have the predominant action in the liver. in contrast to other adipokines,
adiponectin secretion and circulating levels are inversely proportional to body fat content. levels are further
reduced in subjects with diabetes and coronary artery disease. adiponectin antagonizes many effects of tumour
necrosis factor-a ( xxxg2296xxx ) and this, in turn, suppresses adiponectin production. furthermore, adiponectin secretion from adipocytes is enhanced by thiazolidinediones (which also act to antagonize  xxxg2296xxx  effects). thus,
adiponectin may be the common mechanism by which  xxxg2296xxx  promotes, and the thiazolidinediones suppress,
insulin resistance and inflammation. two adiponectin receptors, termed adipor1 and adipor2, have been
identified and these are ubiquitously expressed. adipor1 is most highly expressed in skeletal muscle and has
a prominent action to activate ampk, and hence promote lipid oxidation. adipor2 is most highly expressed in
liver, where it enhances insulin sensitivity and reduces steatosis via activation of ampk and increased peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor a ligand activity. t-cadherin, which is expressed in endothelium and
smooth muscle, has been identified as an adiponectin-binding protein with preference for hmw adiponectin
multimers. given the low levels of adiponectin in subjects with the metabolic syndrome, and the beneficial
effect of the adipokine in animal studies, there is exciting potential for adiponectin replacement therapy in
insulin resistance and related disorders.
keywords: adipokine, adiponectin, inflammation, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, obesity
received 28 january 2005; revised version accepted 18 march 2005

introduction
appreciation of the role of adipose tissue as more than just
an inert storage depot for triglyceride has increased enormously following the discovery of leptin by friedman and

colleagues [1]. the current view of the adipocyte is of a
dynamic endocrine cell releasing free- xxxd2154xxx  and
secreting a number of factors, termed adipokines, including  xxxg2296xxx -a ( xxxg2296xxx ), interleukins,

correspondence:
dr j. p. whitehead, associate director/prof j. b. prins, director, centre for diabetes and endocrine research, department of diabetes
and endocrinology, university of queensland, princess alexandra hospital, ipswich road, woolloongabba, brisbane qld 4102,
australia.
e-mail:
jwhitehead@cder.soms.uq.edu.au/jprins@cder.soms.uq.edu.au

264

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

plasminogen-activator inhibitor type 1, leptin, resistin
and adiponectin. these adipokines contribute to the
regulation of a variety of processes ranging from
appetite and insulin sensitivity to inflammation and
atherogenesis. adipokines exert their effects both
centrally, at the level of the central nervous system,
and peripherally in tissues such as skeletal muscle
and the liver.
adiponectin was originally identified and named by
four independent groups, a decade ago. it was first discovered by scherer and lodish [2], who called it adipocyte complement-related protein of 30 kda ( xxxg78xxx ), in
a subtractive hybridization screen comparing 3t3-l1
adipocytes with undifferentiated preadipocytes. a similar approach was employed by spiegelman and colleagues [3], who termed the protein they isolated  xxxg78xxx .
these studies showed that mrna for adiponectin was
induced over 100-fold during differentiation and suggested that its expression was limited exclusively to
adipocytes. human adiponectin (which shares 83%
similarity with the mouse polypeptide) was first cloned
from adipose tissue by matsuzawa and colleagues [4],
who called it  xxxg78xxx 
( xxxg78xxx ). finally, a very different approach was
employed by tomita and colleagues [5], who isolated
adiponectin from human plasma by virtue of its affinity
for gelatin, naming it  xxxg78xxx  of 28 kda
( xxxg78xxx ). although there was a surprising lag following
the original descriptions of this adipokine, the nomenclature and both the physiological and pathophysiological importance of adiponectin have been established
over recent years.
adiponectin is present in the circulation of healthy
humans and mice at high concentrations. it accounts for
approximately 0.01% of total plasma protein with plasma
levels in the mg/ml range, around three orders of magnitude
higher than leptin. importantly, and in contrast to other
adipokines whose levels increase with fat mass, adiponectin levels decrease in individuals with obesity [6]. in
humans, and animal models, adiponectin levels are further
reduced in individuals with type 2 diabetes and show
strong negative correlations with multiple indices of insulin
resistance [7,8]. indeed, one study reported that adiponectin
levels accounted for 73% of the variance in insulin sensitivity [9]. similarly, decreased adiponectin levels correlate
with reduced vascular function and increased coronary
artery disease (cad) [10].
several recent reviews provide excellent commentaries on specific aspects of adiponectin biology and
function [11–13]. in the current review, we present a
broad and somewhat historical perspective on the
current understanding of adiponectin.

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

adiponectin structure and multimerization
human adiponectin is a 244 amino acid protein of
approximately 28 kda, which belongs to the complement
factor c1q family of proteins (figure 1a). it contains an
amino-terminal signal peptide; a short non-helical, variable
region that shows no homology to other proteins; 22 g-x-y
or g-x-x collagen repeats involved in collagen-triple helix
formation; and a globular head at the carboxyl-terminus
which shows a very high degree of homology with subunits
of c1q and the globular domains of type viii and type x
collagens [2,5,14].
biochemical analysis of adiponectin by a number of
methods including size exclusion chromatography,
velocity sedimentation analysis and non-reducing,
non-heat
denaturing
sodium
dodecylsulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis indicated that
adiponectin existed in a number of forms essentially
comprised of homotrimers, which further combine to
make up larger multimeric complexes [2,5] (figure 1b).
adiponectin is found in serum in a number of
complexes which include trimers and hexamers,
collectively described as low-molecular weight (lmw)
oligomers, and high-molecular weight (hmw) multimers (12-, 18-mers and possibly larger). analysis of
crystals of the globular domain of mouse adiponectin
(residues 111–247) revealed a trimeric structure with
unexpected homology to the tnf family and features
common to all c1q family proteins [15]. formation of
trimers within the globular domain is thought to facilitate nucleation of the collagen triple-helices [15].
adiponectin is subject to several post-translational
modifications. although our understanding of the roles
and regulation of these modifications is incomplete, it is
clear that they contribute to adiponectin multimerization and function. the cysteine residue situated in the
amino-terminal variable domain (c36 in human and c39
in mouse adiponectin, respectively) is involved in disulphide bond formation which is essential for formation
of oligomeric complexes greater than the basic homotrimer [16–18]. other post-translational modifications
include hydroxylation of highly conserved proline and
lysine residues within the variable and collagenous
domain [19,20]. these hydroxylated-lysine residues are
further modified by the addition of a glucosylgalactosyl
group [19,20]. although the structural significance of
these glycosylation events have not been reported,
mutation of four of the five glycosylated lysine residues
significantly attenuates the insulin-sensitizing action of
recombinant adiponectin on primary rat hepatocytes
[19]. adiponectin has also been reported to undergo
sialylation [21], although further characterization is

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

265

ra

adiponectin

j. p. whitehead et al.

(a)
c36
(-s-s-)
variable
region

collagenous
domain

globular
domain

n

c
1

19

42

108

244alphaalpha

signal
sequence

kgactgwmagipghpghngapgrdgrdgtpgekgekgdpgligpkgdigetgvpgaegprgfpgiqgrkgepgeg

* 47
*

33

*

44

53

65

68

*

77

91

(-s-s-)

g-x-y repeats that form a triple helix

disulfide bonded cysteine

*

complement component c1q domain
(structural homology with  xxxg2296xxx  receptor-binding domain)
conserved proline
hydroxlated proline

k

conserved lysine-hydroxylated/glycosylated

p

101

(b)

monomer

trimer

hexamer
hmw multimer

lmw (2-7)

2

3

4

hmw (8-11)

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

fraction number
fig. 1 (a) domain structure of human adiponectin. numbering is given for human adiponectin. (b) adiponectin multimerization
and analysis by velocity sedimentation. separation of low-molecular weight (lmw) and high-molecular weight (hmw) multimers was performed by centrifugation on a 5–20% sucrose density gradient. fractions 2–7 of the gradient contain the lmw multimers, while hmw multimers are found in fractions 8–11.

required to identify the site and the structural and functional significance of this modification.
indirect evidence suggests that these post-translational
modifications are important for oligomerization. when

266

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

expressed in bacterial systems, which do not carry out
post-translational modifications other than disulphide
bond formation, hmw adiponectin complexes are virtually undetectable [22] or only found at low levels [18].

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

adiponectin expression, secretion and
metabolism
expression and secretion
current opinion, based on the early reports, is that adiponectin expression and secretion is restricted to adipocytes [2–4]. adiponectin expression occurs from an
intermediate stage of adipogenesis onwards [2,3] and
expression appears common to adipocytes found in
both white and brown adipose tissue [23,24]. studies
of isolated human explants or adipocytes suggest there
are no differences in adiponectin secretion from visceral
or subcutaneous depots [25], although secretion may be
regulated differentially in different depots [26]. early
evidence suggesting that adiponectin expression may
be reduced in states of obesity was provided by
spiegelman and colleagues [3], who observed decreased
adiponectin mrna in adipose tissue from obese (ob/ob)
mice and humans. matsuzawa’s group went on to
develop the first adiponectin elisa, using this to
show that plasma adiponectin levels were indeed
reduced in obese subjects [6]. they also demonstrated
that males had lower circulating adiponectin levels than
females and that weight loss increased serum adiponectin [6,7]. subsequent studies have confirmed these
observations and have established further correlations
between reduced serum adiponectin and disease states
including insulin resistance and cad [8,27]. these disease associations were independent of body mass index
(bmi) [8,27]. multiple additional factors, including age
and pregnancy, also appear to affect adiponectin levels,
and detailed longitudinal studies in mice suggest that
adiponectin expression and secretion is under complex
hormonal control, particularly at the post-transcriptional level [28,29].
recently, there have been several reports suggesting
adiponectin may be expressed from non-adipose cells.
adiponectin mrna has been detected in mouse liver
parenchyma cells following administration of carbon
tetrachloride [30], and adiponectin mrna and protein
have been detected in human liver biopsies from
patients with steatosis [31]. in the latter study, adiponectin protein was found by immunohistochemistry to
be localized primarily to endothelial cells of portal vessels and liver sinusoids, rather than in hepatocytes.
adiponectin expression has been observed in skeletal
muscle in cultured myotubes and in vivo [32,33].
incubation of human myotubes with recombinant adiponectin, from mammalian cells, resulted in a dramatic
increase in adiponectin mrna levels (80-fold) and protein (eightfold) [32]. moreover, adiponectin expression

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

is induced in skeletal muscle in response to inflammatory cytokines in both the in vivo and in vitro settings,
by a process that appears to involve  xxxd2738xxx  production [33]. regulation of adiponectin expression from
non-adipose tissues, particularly muscle, appears to be
different from that in adipose tissue [33]. expression of
adiponectin has also been detected in osteoblasts
although the physiological relevance of this is unclear
[34].

regulation of adiponectin expression and secretion
investigations have begun to elaborate the mechanisms
involved in the regulation of adiponectin expression
and secretion. studies have focused on the effects of
hormonal and environmental factors on circulating
adiponectin levels in the whole organism or on the
expression and secretion of adiponectin at a cellular level.
in vivo investigations found that circulating adiponectin levels per se are not subject to acute regulation.
however, adiponectin expression may be regulated relatively acutely (4–6 h) through fasting and refeeding, by
mechanisms thought to involve the nuclear receptors
c/ebpb and nuclear factor y [23,35]. in healthy normal
weight subjects, circulating adiponectin levels appear to
exhibit ultradian pulsatility and diurnal variation, with
a decline of up to 30% at night [36]. such diurnal
variations are lost in individuals with obesity or diabetes [7] but are restored upon weight loss [37].
there is a sexual dimorphism in circulating adiponectin levels, with females having higher levels than males
[6,38]. interestingly, there is also sexual dimorphism
with respect to oligomeric complexes, as males have a
reduced proportion of hmw multimers compared to
females [16]. in mice, differences in adiponectin levels
only become apparent upon sexual maturation [29].
several lines of evidence suggest both androgens and
oestrogens play negative roles in the production of
adiponectin protein. neonatal castration of male rats
results in adiponectin levels similar to those observed
in females, whilst ovariectomy of adult females also
increases circulating adiponectin levels [29]. long-term
(>3 months) caloric restriction results in increased circulating adiponectin, and insulin sensitivity, in mice
[29,39]. a recent study in humans found no change in
adiponectin levels after caloric restriction for 4 days
[40].
circulating adiponectin levels exhibit an inverse correlation with adipose tissue mass in adults [3,6,27,41].
however such a correlation does not exists in the newborn. adiponectin levels in cord-blood of full-term
infants are significantly higher than in adult subjects

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

267

ra

adiponectin

and correlate positively with birth weight and bmi [42].
whilst adiponectin levels remain largely unchanged in
neonates (postnatal days 3–7) [42], reversal of these
positive correlations occurs during childhood [43]. an
explanation for these differences has not been established, but contributing factors may include alterations
in adipose tissue distribution and adipocyte cell size
during development [42]. the finding that circulating
adiponectin levels are elevated in newborns is not conserved across species, as newborn mice display lower
adiponectin levels than their mature counterparts [29].
once again, differences in the extent and distribution of
fat tissue may account for these species differences [42].
although secretion of adiponectin from visceral and
subcutaneous depots appears comparable [25], regulation of adiponectin secretion exhibits some depot specificity. for example, there is a strong negative correlation
between adiponectin expression and secretion with bmi
in isolated visceral adipocytes but not in subcutaneous
adipocytes [26]. this observation may represent one
feature of visceral adipose tissue (vat) biology that
leads to its strong association with negative health outcomes and may also explain the finding that even after
controlling for bmi and fat mass individuals with higher
vat have lower adiponectin levels than subjects with
less vat [9].
investigations at a cellular level, using 3t3-l1 adipocytes, suggested adiponectin is located in intracellular
vesicles that are distinct from other cellular compartments such as those defined by the transferrin receptor
(a marker for the endosomal pathway) and the insulinresponsive glucose transporter glut4 [44]. acute insulin
treatment promotes increased adiponectin secretion
from 3t3-l1 cells and this, like insulin-stimulated
translocation of glut4, is dependent on pi 3-kinase
activity [2,44]. however, it remains to be determined
whether such insulin-stimulated secretion of adiponectin is particular to adipocytes, which would be consistent with a dedicated secretory pathway, or can be
recapitulated in other cell types. relatively chronic
insulin treatment (16–24 h) results in a decrease in
adiponectin expression in 3t3-l1 adipocytes [45] but
an increase in adiponectin mrna in isolated human
adipose tissue [46]. the explanation for these contrasting observations is unclear, but likely reflects intrinsic
differences between the murine 3t3-l1 system and that
of primary human adipose tissue. given the role of
hyperinsulinemia in the development of insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes, it will be important to
further elucidate the effects of insulin on adiponectin
production from isolated human adipocytes and
adipose tissue.

268

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

 xxxg2296xxx 
in vitro studies indicate that  xxxg2296xxx , which is elevated in
conditions of obesity, may be partially responsible for
decreased adiponectin production in obesity.  xxxg2296xxx 
treatment (for 24 h) reduced the expression and secretion of adiponectin from 3t3-l1 adipocytes [45,47],
whilst a significant inverse relationship between adiponectin and  xxxg2296xxx  expression has been reported in
human adipose tissue [27]. it is tempting to speculate
that  xxxg2296xxx  may contribute to the observed timedependent reduction in adiponectin expression from
isolated human adipocytes, however, strategies that
block  xxxg2296xxx  failed to inhibit the reduction in adiponectin mrna [46]. adenoviral expression of recombinant adiponectin reduced  xxxg2296xxx  levels in mice lacking
adiponectin further highlighting the reciprocal relationship between  xxxg2296xxx  and adiponectin [48].
other factors that have been shown to reduce adiponectin gene expression, and may therefore contribute to
associated metabolic and vascular complications,
include glucocorticoids (dexamethosone) [45,46],
interleukin-6 [49], chronic exposure to  xxxg674xxx 
[50] and b-adrenergic agonists [23].

thiazolidinediones
the insulin-sensitizing thiazolidinediones (tzds),
which serve as agonists for the transcription factor
 xxxg1807xxx , have positive effects on multiple aspects of
adiponectin production. long-term (12–16 week)
[47,51,52] or relatively acute (14–21 days) [53,54]
administration of tzds elevated serum adiponectin in
humans. importantly, in the latter studies, changes in
circulating adiponectin levels were achieved without
changes in fat mass or other circulating adipokines suggesting that tzd-induced alterations in serum adiponectin may be responsible for the insulin-sensitizing
effects of these agents. tzd treatment also increased
circulating adiponectin in several mouse models of
insulin resistance, each with varying degrees of obesity
and glucose intolerance [47,53,55].
tzds act directly on adipocytes, increasing adiponectin production from isolated human adipocytes
[26,51,52] and 3t3-l1 adipocytes [47,55]. in addition,
tzds ameliorate the effects of  xxxg2296xxx  on adiponectin
expression in 3t3-l1 adipocytes, suggesting one mode
of action of the tzds [47]. however, tzd treatment
increased adiponectin levels in lean mice without a
concomitant reduction in  xxxg2296xxx  expression, indicating
tzds can promote adiponectin expression through
 xxxg2296xxx  independent mechanisms [47].

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

the adiponectin promoter contains a functional
 xxxg1807xxx  response element, which binds the  xxxg1807xxx /rxr
dimer resulting in increased promoter activity, providing a direct link between the tzds and increased
adiponectin production [47,56]. further, albeit indirect,
evidence of the importance of  xxxg1807xxx  in adiponectin
gene expression comes from the finding that patients
with a dominant-negative mutation in  xxxg1807xxx  associated
with severe insulin resistance, display a fivefold reduction in circulating adiponectin levels [53].
the effects of tzds are not simply limited to increasing adiponectin expression. scherer’s group recently
reported that tzds promote a shift in the multimer
profile of adiponectin, with tzd treatment increasing
the amount of circulating hmw adiponectin, even in
individuals where there is no increase in total serum
adiponectin [24]. in a series of in vivo studies, they
found that following tzd treatment, the change in proportion of hmw adiponectin (d hmw/total adiponectin) or dsa showed a stronger correlation with improved
insulin sensitivity than change in total adiponectin
levels. they also provided evidence that the
multimeric composition of intracellular adiponectin
differs to that of circulating adiponectin, with adipocytes containing a much greater proportion of hmw
adiponectin than is present in the circulation [24].
moreover, tzd treatment promoted increased formation and subsequent secretion of hmw complexes
[24]. together these observations suggest that
multimerization of adiponectin can be regulated at an
intracellular level and afford further insight into the
mode of action of the tzds. although the mechanisms
underlying the tzd induced increase in hmw adiponectin remain to be elucidated a role for intracellular
chaperones has been proposed [24].
further evidence in support of an important role for
the hmw form of adiponectin comes from two recent
studies. in the first, relatively short-term treatment
(21 days) with the tzd pioglitazone increased adiponectin levels twofold in patients with type 2 diabetes
[54]. despite this, there was no significant correlation
between the percentage increase in adiponectin levels
with pioglitazone and either the percentage decrease in
endogenous glucose production (egp) or the percentage
increase in glucose uptake. in contrast, there was a
strong correlation between the percentage increase in
sa (there was a twofold increase in the percentage of
hmw adiponectin, which represents a fourfold increase
in circulating levels in absolute terms) and the percentage change in egp [54]. the second study examined
adiponectin complexes in individuals following weight
loss and in patients with cad [57]. weight loss

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

promoted a shift in the distribution of adiponectin,
with a relative increase in the proportion of hmw adiponectin and reduction in the lmw adiponectin forms.
in addition, patients with cad had reduced levels of
hmw but not lmw adiponectin compared with control
subjects.
like tzds, a novel insulin sensitizer, ikb kinase b
inhibitor, has recently been shown to increase adiponectin levels in mice without affecting whole body weight
[58]. in in vitro studies, the inhibitor blocked
 xxxg2296xxx -induced reduction in adiponectin secretion by a
mechanism which may involve akt [58].

adiponectin metabolism and excretion
relatively little is known about how plasma adiponectin
is metabolized and ultimately cleared from the circulation, with much of our current understanding coming
from studies in mice. it appears that once in the circulation, adiponectin oligomers are extremely stable and do
not undergo exchange from one form to another, even in
the face of an insulin or glucose challenge [16]. that
said, circulating hmw adiponectin has a longer halflife than lmw adiponectin (9 vs. 4.5 h) although
hmw multimers may be cleared more rapidly than
lmw adiponectin following metabolic challenges [16].
a recombinant form of adiponectin (c39s), that is
unable to form oligomers larger than trimers and is
sensitive to proteolytic cleavage following secretion,
appears to be more biologically active than hmw adiponectin and subject to more rapid clearance from the
circulation. together with the above observations that
suggest an important role for hmw adiponectin in insulin sensitivity, these findings have led to the proposal
that hmw adiponectin may be converted to a biologically active form, in response to metabolic challenge,
through reduction and proteolytic cleavage [24].
reduction, followed by proteolysis is an emerging
mechanism of ligand activation [59]. in support of
such a model for adiponectin activation, a small amount
of a c-terminal globular domain-containing fragment of
adiponectin has been detected in human serum following immunoprecipitation [60]. moreover, leucocyte elastase, which is secreted by monocytes, has recently been
identified as an enzyme capable of cleaving the collagenous domain of adiponectin to produce such fragments
[61].
although little is known about the process of adiponectin clearance, adiponectin has been detected in urine
from type 2 diabetic subjects and healthy males [62]
(jpw and jbp, unpublished observations). urinary
adiponectin levels, which are around three orders of

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

269

ra

adiponectin

magnitude lower than serum levels, were significantly
elevated in patients with macro-albuminuria and correlated with urinary albumin. these observations support
a model where leakage of circulating adiponectin,
through the damaged kidneys of these patients, is largely responsible for the high urinary adiponectin,
although additional physiological and pathophysiological factors may also be involved [62]. intriguingly,
serum adiponectin levels were also elevated in patients
with macro-albuminuria suggesting that there may be a
compensatory mechanism to assuage microvascular
damage in the advanced stages of diabetic nephropathy
by increased production of adiponectin.

adiponectin and insulin sensitivity
adiponectin as a diabetogene
it is well established that circulating adiponectin levels
are reduced in obese and insulin resistant states
[8,41,63]. studies in rhesus monkeys, which provide
good models of human obesity and type 2 diabetes,
have confirmed these findings and have also provided
evidence that adiponectin levels decrease in parallel
with the progression of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes [64]. increased plasma adiponectin is strongly
and independently associated with reduced risk of type
2 diabetes in healthy individuals [65]. adiponectin is
encoded by the  xxxg78xxx  gene which maps to chromosome
3q27, a region identified as a susceptibility locus for the
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes [66,67].
together these observations make the  xxxg78xxx  gene a candidate type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene.
several common single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(snps) have been identified in the  xxxg78xxx  gene and promoter region in japanese, french caucasian and
swedish caucasian populations [68–70]. in some
cases, but not all, these snps associate with adiponectin
levels and or type 2 diabetes [68–70]. a recent study
found little evidence to support the hypothesis that
genetic variation in the  xxxg78xxx  gene represents a major
contributor to type 2 diabetes in french caucasians,
rather it found evidence of a diabetes susceptibility
locus at 3q27 that influences genetic predisposition to
type 2 diabetes and reduced serum adiponectin in
patients with type 2 diabetes [71]. missense mutations
in adiponectin have been identified in subjects with
type 2 diabetes and hypoadiponectinemia, and several
of these mutations have been shown to inhibit adiponectin multimerization and secretion, consistent with a
causative role in diabetes [18,72].

270

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

lessons from adiponectin administration
administration of recombinant forms of adiponectin
affects glucose and lipid homeostasis at multiple points,
providing insight into the actions of adiponectin at both
a cellular level as well as in the whole animal. when
considering the effects of recombinant adiponectin, it is
important to bear in mind the expression system used
and the form of the recombinant protein employed.
such features have major implications as they determine whether post-translational modifications such as
glycosylation (which does not occur in bacteria) and
multimerization will be similar to that of the endogenous protein.
lodish and colleagues employed bacterially
expressed full-length adiponectin or globular adiponectin, produced by proteolytic cleavage of full-length
adiponectin (pcgad – aa’s 104–247) [60] or by expression
of the globular domain itself (gad – aa’s 107–247) [73].
acute administration of pcgad to mice (3  25 mg)
reduced plasma free- xxxd2154xxx  and glucose after a highfat meal or following injection of  xxxd3230xxx . in vitro
studies, performed on isolated muscle strips and c2c12
cells, suggested that these effects were mediated by activation of amp-activated protein kinase (ampk) leading to
increased fatty acid oxidation and glucose uptake in
muscle [60,73]. daily administration of pcgad also promoted weight reduction in mice fed a high-fat/sucrose
diet without affecting food intake [60]. administration of
full-length adiponectin at similar or higher dose
(3  50 mg) was without effect [60,73].
bacterial expression systems were also employed by
kadowaki’s group to produce full-length adiponectin or
gad [55]. in an animal model of lipoatrophy, prolonged
administration of low-dose gad (2.5 mg/day) promoted
partial restoration of insulin sensitivity and complete
reversal of insulin resistance when combined with leptin administration. the effects appeared to be due to
increased expression of molecules involved in fatty
acid transport (cd36), combustion (acyl-coa oxidase)
and energy dissipation ( xxxg2375xxx ) in skeletal muscle, with
reduced expression of cd36 in the liver. these changes
correlated with decreased triglyceride content in both
skeletal muscle and liver as well as improved insulin
signalling. similarly, insulin resistance in obese mice
was improved by administration of gad which promoted fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle.
throughout these studies, full-length adiponectin was
less efficacious and was used at a higher dose (50 mg/
day) to elicit similar effects to gad [55]. they concluded
that gad, and to a lesser extent full-length adiponectin,
elicited its primary effects at the level of skeletal

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

muscle, possibly through induction of  xxxg1807xxx / xxxg1805xxx .
in addition to these effects, goldstein and colleagues
[74] found that bacterially produced gad stimulated
ampk activity and glucose uptake in primary rat adipocytes suggesting a possible paracrine effect.
scherer and colleagues purified full-length adiponectin from mammalian hek293 cells, which would be
expected to secrete mature adiponectin exhibiting a
typical post-translational glycosylation pattern [39].
they found that a single dose of adiponectin (28 mg/g
body weight), resulting in a two to threefold increase in
circulating adiponectin, promoted a reduction in basal
blood glucose levels in healthy, obese and non-obese
diabetic mice, without affecting insulin levels. in contrast, a single dose of bacterially produced gad (aa’s
110–247), similar to that used by lodish, was without
effect [39]. in vitro studies, using isolated primary hepatocytes, demonstrated that full-length adiponectinimproved insulin’s ability to suppress hepatic glucose
output (hgo) [39]. further in vivo investigations, using
the pancreatic insulin clamp technique, found that
acute infusion of adiponectin inhibited glucose production without affecting glucose uptake [75]. these findings led to the proposal that suppression of hgo may
represent the main mechanism by which adiponectin
acutely lowers plasma glucose [39,75].
work from cooper and colleagues provided further
evidence in support of a direct role of full-length
adiponectin on hepatic tissue [19,76]. in vitro studies
confirmed the observations of scherer’s group, that
full-length adiponectin increased insulin-induced inhibition of glucose output in primary hepatocytes. they
also showed that such effects were limited to adiponectin produced from mammalian cells as full-length bacterially produced adiponectin was without effect [19].
administration of full-length adiponectin, generated in
hek293 cells, also ameliorated hepatic abnormality in
murine models of alcoholic (ash) and non-alcoholic
(nash) steatohepatitis [76]. induction of ash, by
chronic alcohol consumption, was associated with an
increase in  xxxg2296xxx  levels and reduced serum adiponectin concentrations. adiponectin treatment of these animals decreased hepatic expression of  xxxg2296xxx  and
reduced fatty acid synthesis (# acetyl-coa carboxylase
and  xxxg765xxx  activities) whilst increasing
hepatic fatty acid oxidation (" carnitine palmitoyltransferase i activity) [76].
in a recent study, cooper and co-workers compared
the effects of recombinant full-length adiponectin purified from bacteria with endogenous adiponectin purified from foetal bovine serum [20]. acute administration
of endogenous bovine adiponectin (40 mg/g body

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

weight) reduced blood glucose and lipid clearance following an oral lipid challenge. similarly, chronic treatment (using osmotic pumps for delivery) with bovine
adiponectin improved insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance in high-fat fed mice. in contrast, bacterially
expressed recombinant adiponectin administered at
the same dose failed to elicit any effects [20].
adiponectin also appears to have important central
effects. intracerebroventricular administration of adiponectin decreased body weight, and improved insulin
sensitivity, as a result of elevated energy expenditure
through increased thermogenesis [77]. full-length
wild-type adiponectin, c39s adiponectin and gad
were all effective.
one consensus from these studies is the lack of efficacy
of full-length adiponectin when produced in bacteria.
one possibility is that bacterially produced fulllength adiponectin may have increased susceptibility
to proteolytic degradation and/or enhanced clearance
from the circulation, although the latter would not contribute to its lack of activity in vitro. a more likely
explanation is that the lack of post-translational modifications and/or multimerization of such bacterially
produced adiponectin compromise its activity. as mentioned, bacterially produced adiponectin forms hmw
oligomers with limited efficiency [18,22]. in this context, it is intriguing that both bacterially produced gad
and a c39s mutant generated in mammalian cells [24]
appear to be active, even though oligomerization of both
proteins is limited to trimers. whilst the physiological
relevance of gad and putative proteolytic adiponectin
products, have recently been questioned [11,20],
the former studies highlight its potential benefits as a
pharmacological therapeutic.

lessons from adiponectin knockout (ko) mice and
transgenics
three groups have investigated the effects of deletion of
the  xxxg78xxx  gene on insulin sensitivity [48,78,79].
kadowaki’s and matsuzawa’s groups both found that
adiponectin ko mice were insulin resistant, although
there were some minor differences in the observations
from the two groups [48,78]. in both cases, ko mice
exhibited severe insulin resistance when challenged
with a high-fat diet. in kadowaki’s laboratory,
adiponectinþ/– mice displayed insulin resistance and
glucose intolerance, even when maintained on a standard chow diet, and this was further exacerbated in ko
mice suggesting a dose-dependent effect [78].
matsuzawa’s group observed severe insulin resistance

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

271

ra

adiponectin

coupled with defects in insulin signalling only after
high-fat feeding of their ko mice [48]. however, they
were able to detect changes in the expression of molecules associated with fatty acid metabolism (fatty-acid
transport protein 1) and insulin resistance ( xxxg2296xxx ) in
ko animals fed a standard diet [48]. they also showed
that adenoviral production of adiponectin reversed the
changes in expression of these molecules and ameliorated insulin resistance. somewhat perplexingly, chan
and colleagues failed to identify evidence of insulin
resistance in their ko mice, even after high-fat feeding,
and found that fatty acid oxidation was increased in
muscle and liver from ko animals [79]. the reasons
for this remain obscure.
in addition, kadowaki’s group reported that adiponectin ko mice displayed greater neointimal formation
in response to external vascular cuff injury than did
wild-type mice, providing evidence to support the antiatherogenic properties of adiponectin [78]. using the
ko mice, generated by matsuzawa’s group, walsh and
colleagues were able to show that adiponectin
was required for angiogenesis in response to tissue
ischemia and that this was through stimulation of
ampk [80].
scherer’s group generated a transgenic mouse that
displays elevated circulating adiponectin levels [81].
their initial observation was that low-level expression
of an adiponectin mutant lacking a portion of the collagenous domain, termed dgly-adiponectin, resulted in
increased secretion of endogenous adiponectin whilst
the mutant itself failed to be secreted. using this information, they produced a transgenic mouse expressing
dgly-adiponectin from an ap2 promoter, conferring
adipose-specific expression. this resulted in a threefold increase in serum adiponectin. this model of
hyperadiponectinaemia exhibited increased insulin
sensitivity through improved carbohydrate and lipid
metabolism associated with increased activation of
ampk in liver and expression of  xxxg1807xxx  in wat. the
transgenic mice were also resistant to diet-induced
decreases of insulin sensitivity. on a cautionary
note, elevated adiponectin also produced expansion
of bat-like tissue, particularly in the interscapular
region and bilateral exophthalmia as well as orbital
fat pads. with age, these adipose deposits expanded
wrapping around the neck and stretching around
regions of the head [81].
collectively, these studies confirm the importance of
adiponectin in the maintenance of metabolic control
and insulin sensitivity, although the latter report also
provides the caveat that too much adiponectin may
bring its own complications.

272

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

adiponectin receptors
adipor1 and adipor2
to identify adiponectin receptors, kadowaki and colleagues screened a human skeletal muscle library for gad
binding, using retroviral expression in ba/f3 cells [82].
they discovered a single cdna that encoded a protein
they termed adipor1. database searches revealed a
second homologous open reading frame, derived from
a distinct gene, which they termed adipor2. northern
blot analysis suggested ubiquitous expression of
adipor1 mrna that was most abundant in skeletal
muscle. adipor2 expression appeared more limited
with abundant expression in liver, although this differential expression of adipor2 was more apparent in
tissue from mouse than human [82,83]. within the
liver, adipor2 expression occurs principally on hepatocytes [31].
structural predictions for adipor1 (375 aa’s,
42.4 kda) and adipor2 (311 aa’s, 35.4 kda) suggest
that both are seven transmembrane domain proteins.
investigations of transiently expressed, epitope-tagged
adipor1 and adipor2 constructs indicate that both
are type iv-a proteins, with an intracellular n-terminus,
and that they may form homo-/hetero-oligomers [82].
they lack significant homology with other mammalian
proteins, being only distantly related to g-proteincoupled receptors, however, they are conserved from
yeast to humans. indeed, the yeast homologue has a
principal role in metabolic pathways regulating lipid
metabolism such as fatty acid oxidation. of further
interest is that the yeast homologue, pho36, is the
receptor for osmotin. osmotin has no sequence homology with adiponectin, but has structural similarity and
is able to bind and activate adipor1 and adipor2 [84].
this raises the possibility that there may be other mammalian ligands for the receptors.
exogenous expression of either adipor1 or adipor2,
in 293t cells or c2c12 myocytes, increased binding of
globular and full-length adiponectin. fatty acid oxidation was stimulated in response to gad in c2c12 myocytes, and this effect was potentiated in cells
overexpressing adipor1 or adipor2. in contrast, stimulation of fatty acid oxidation in response to full-length
adiponectin was only observed in cells overexpressing
adipor2. detailed studies investigating binding of
adiponectin to endogenous receptors in c2c12
myocytes, coupled with sirna approaches, shed some
insight into these observations. adipor1 seems to serve
as a high-affinity receptor for gad and a low-affinity
receptor for full-length adiponectin. adipor2 appears

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

adiponectin

ra

cns
receptor: unknown
multimer: lmw + hmw
bone
receptor: r1,r2

paracrine
?
?

liver
receptor: r2 > r1
multimer: hmw > lmw

fat

muscle
receptor: r1,r2
multimer: lmw + hmw

?

pancreas
receptor: r1,r2

fig. 2 summary of adiponectin receptor expression and multimer responsiveness in various target tissues.

to act as an intermediate-affinity receptor for full-length
and gad [82].
given the apparent differences in tissue expression
and binding affinities of adipor1 and adipor2
(figure 2), yamauchi and colleagues went on to compare
the effects of globular and full-length adiponectin in
different cell types [82]. whilst globular and full-length
adiponectin bound to c2c12 myocytes and promoted
 xxxg1805xxx  ligand activity and fatty acid oxidation, only
gad stimulated glucose uptake and this appeared to be
through adipor1. ampk, acetyl coa carboxylase (acc)
and p38mapk were phosphorylated in response to both
globular and full-length adiponectin and inhibition of
these pathways, using dn-ampk or the p38mapk inhibitor  xxxd3177xxx , reduced fatty acid oxidation and glucose uptake. in contrast to c2c12 myocytes, primary
hepatocytes bound only full-length adiponectin and
this stimulated ampk and acc phosphorylation as
well as  xxxg1805xxx  ligand activity. inhibition of adipor2
expression, by sirna, reduced binding of full-length
adiponectin and  xxxg1805xxx  ligand activity in hepatocytes.
it is noteworthy that the majority of these studies were
performed using bacterially expressed adiponectin and
that full-length adiponectin was typically required at an
order of magnitude higher than gad to elicit a similar
response.
kadowaki and colleagues recently reported on the
regulation of expression of adipor1 and adipor2 [85].
levels of both receptors decreased in response to physiological and pathophysiological increases in insulin
[85]. the insulin stimulated decrease in adipor1 and

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

heart
vascular
receptor: r1,r2
multimer: hmw > lmw

adipor2 appeared to be mediated by pi 3-kinase dependent inhibition of  xxxg812xxx , as these effects were blocked by
inhibition of pi 3-kinase or adenoviral expression of
constitutively active  xxxg812xxx . in the continued absence of
specific antibodies for adipor1 and adipor2, these
studies were limited to measurements of mrna.
however, evidence in support of a concomitant reduction
in receptor protein levels came from studies of the ob/ob
mouse, which is a model of obesity-induced insulin
resistance and extreme hyperinsulinemia. skeletal muscle
from ob/ob mice displayed decreased adipor1 and
adipor2 mrna expression and reduced binding of globular and full-length adiponectin. full-length adiponectin
failed to promote phosphorylation of ampk leading to the
suggestion that these mice may be adiponectin resistant
[85]. a teleological explanation for the observation that
insulin decreases adipor1 and adipor2 expression has
not yet been proposed, whilst others have failed to
recapitulate significant effects of insulin on adiponectin
receptor expression [86,87].
a small study by ravussin and colleagues found a
positive relationship between expression of adipor1
and adipor2 in skeletal muscle and insulin sensitivity
in non-diabetic mexican americans [83]. even though
subjects with a family history of type 2 diabetes were
matched with control subjects for bmi and body fat, the
expression levels of both receptors, as well as adiponectin, were lower in those subjects with a family history of
diabetes. thus, the impaired expression of the receptors, in combination with lower concentrations of the
circulating hormone, may predispose these subjects to

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

273

ra

adiponectin

the disease. a second study by häring and colleagues
failed to detect such associations between adiponectin
receptor expression and insulin sensitivity [86].
however, this latter study measured adiponectin receptor expression in cultured myotubes, so it is conceivable
that changes in adipor1 and adipor2 expression may
have occurred during culture. both studies did find that
expression of adipor1 was only moderately higher than
adipor2 (approximately 1.8 fold) in human muscle,
which is consistent with the original data from
kadowaki’s group [82], suggesting that the difference
in expression of adipor1 and adipor2 in human skeletal muscle may not be as pronounced as that in mouse
muscle.
recent reports have also examined the expression of
adipor1/r2 in various tissues and cell types.
kadowaki’s group reported adipor1 and adipor2
expression in wat and bat, with expression of both
markedly reduced in the ob/ob mouse [85]. both receptors are also expressed in mature 3t3-l1 adipocytes
[87]. adipor1 is expressed constitutively whereas
adipor2 expression is low in preadipocytes and
induced during differentiation. treatment with growth
hormone increased adipor2, but not adipor1, expression [87].
expression of adipor1 and adipor2 in primary
human and murine osteoblasts, which are of mesenchymal origin like adipocytes, has also been reported [34]
and is an area of considerable interest in the bone field.
these authors also found evidence of expression and
secretion of adiponectin from osteoblasts and have previously reported that leptin and leptin receptors are
expressed in human osteoblasts [88]. collectively,
these observations suggest a paracrine role for adiponectin in adipose tissue, and possibly bone, which may be
subject to regulation or perturbation by other circulating
factors.
transcripts for adipor1 and adipor2 have been
detected in human primary monocytes [89]. treatment
of macrophages with  xxxg1805xxx  and  xxxg1807xxx  agonists
increased adipor2 expression whilst a liver x receptor
(lxr) agonist increased levels of adipor1 and adipor2
[89]. incubation with adiponectin reduced macrophage
cholesterol content, and this effect was potentiated by
simultaneous treatment with a  xxxg1805xxx  ligand.
expression of both receptors was also found in vascular
cells, including human aortic smooth muscle cells and
human microvascular endothelial cells, and at moderately increased levels in regions of atherosclerotic
lesions [89]. together these data provide insight into
the anti-atherosclerotic and anti-atherogenic effects of
adiponectin. adipor1 and adipor2 have also been

274

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

detected in human and rat islets and beta cells [90].
treatment of these cells with globular or full-length
adiponectin failed to affect fatty acid oxidation although
gad promoted a modest increase in  xxxg1337xxx 
(lpl) expression. the significance of adiponectin receptors in islets and beta cells is currently unclear.

t-cadherin
lodish and colleagues employed retroviral expression
of a c2c12 myoblast cdna library in ba/f3 cells to
identify adiponectin-binding proteins [91]. a major difference between this study and that of kadowaki’s
group was the way the ligand, namely adiponectin,
was produced and presented. in the former [82], recombinant adiponectin (globular and full-length) was
expressed in bacteria. in the latter, adiponectin (flagtagged) was produced by expression in mammalian
(hek293) cells, and ba/f3 cells expressing adiponectin-binding protein(s) on their cell surface were
enriched by sequential sorting using adiponectin-coated
beads [91]. subsequent dna analysis revealed t-cadherin as the adiponectin-binding protein. expression of
t-cadherin conferred binding of hexameric and hmw
multimers but not trimeric adiponectin. globular or fulllength adiponectin produced in bacteria failed to bind
t-cadherin, leading to the suggestion that post-translational modifications other than disulphide bonds may
be required for the interaction. further investigations
demonstrated that binding of adiponectin to t-cadherin
required divalent cations and could be blocked by
edta. t-cadherin and wild-type adiponectin could be
co-immunoprecipitated from co-expressing cells. this
interaction appeared to be specific for hexameric/
hmw multimers as mutation of c39, which limits multimerization to the formation of trimers, prevented the
interaction. taken together, these results suggest that
t-cadherin may serve as a binding protein specific for
hexameric/hmw adiponectin.

adiponectin and inflammation
inflammation within tissues is now well recognized to
have an important role in the development of multiple
pathologies including vascular disease, liver disease,
cardiomyopathy and renal disease. the inflammatory
response correlates with multiple metabolic markers
including obesity (particularly visceral), dyslipidaemia,
hypertension and insulin resistance. a prominent systemic marker of this low-grade tissue inflammation is
 xxxg520xxx  (crp) [92]. circulating and adipose
levels of crp are reciprocally associated with

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

adiponectin levels [92]. the role of obesity in the initiation and acceleration of tissue inflammation has been
well studied. excess adipose tissue can contribute to
inflammation in two ways – (i) ectopic fat storage
induces lipotoxicity, promoting an intracellular inflammatory response and (ii) altered adipokine production
in obesity contributes to the inflammatory response. it is
now recognized that adiponectin has a role in both of
these processes.
a role for adiponectin in inflammation was immediately apparent, when it was recognized that the protein
had sequence and/or structural homology to immune
proteins such as complement and  xxxg2296xxx . it soon
became apparent that adiponectin had a predominantly
anti-inflammatory action, contrasting it with most other
adipokines [11,93]. epidemiological studies reproducibly showed an inverse association between serum
adiponectin concentrations and (vascular) inflammatory
markers and manifestations of the metabolic syndrome
including crp, fibrinogen, hypertension and endothelial function [94–97]. further support for an anti-inflammatory role of adiponectin came from genetic studies
demonstrating a relationship between the i164t adiponectin polymorphism and low-serum adiponectin,
hypertension [94], cad and the metabolic syndrome
[98].
in parallel with these studies, in vitro and transgenic
studies provided support and mechanistic insight into
the anti-inflammatory role of adiponectin. the adiponectin ko mouse has increased atherogenesis, and an
exaggerated neo-intimal and vascular smooth muscle
proliferative response to vascular injury. the latter
response can be attenuated with adiponectin administration [99]. adiponectin administration also significantly reduces atherogenesis in the  xxxg177xxx -deficient
mouse [100].
adiponectin has been shown to have a role in hepatic
inflammation and steatosis. hypo-adiponectinaemia is
associated with nash [101], and adiponectin has been
shown to have beneficial anti-inflammatory effects in
liver, reducing steatosis, hepatomegaly and inflammation in mouse models of alcoholic and non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease [76].
endothelial cells and the vasculature are targets of
adiponectin actions. in vitro studies demonstrate that
adiponectin adheres to injured vascular endothelium
[102] and inhibits  xxxg2296xxx -induced monocyte adhesion
to endothelial cells [103]. it also decreases the expression of endothelial cell adhesion molecules [103], and
 xxxg2296xxx -induced nfkb activation [104]. adiponectin has
direct in vitro effects on macrophages including inhibition of macrophage to foam-cell progression [105],

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

phagocytic activity and lipopolysaccharide-induced
 xxxg2296xxx  production [106].
in normal tissues, angiogenesis is a controlled process
and this control is perturbed in many tumours and their
metastases. adiponectin has anti-angiogenic activities
in this setting, through dual mechanisms of inhibition
of endothelial cell proliferation and migration and the
promotion of endothelial cell apoptosis [107]. in contrast, injured vasculature is characterized by accelerated
endothelial cell turnover and apoptosis and reduced
angiogenesis, especially in the setting of ischaemia. in
these settings, adiponectin regulates the endothelial
response to injury [108] by suppression of endothelial
cell apoptosis [57] and stimulation of angiogenesis [80].
the clinical relevance of the differing molecular weight
multimers is again demonstrated by the more potent
vascular-protection afforded by the hmw isoforms [57].
the contrasting actions of adiponectin in ‘normal’
and ‘diseased’ tissue suggest that adiponectin expression forms part of the normal anti-inflammatory/reparative response to injury. in addition to studies in vascular
tissue [108], support for this concept comes from studies
in liver and skeletal muscle. serum adiponectin has
been shown to be reduced in nash compared to age,
sex and bmi-matched controls [109]. kaser et al. [31]
studied human liver tissue and found that hepatic adiponectin (and adipor2) expression is reduced in nash
compared with hepatic steatosis. this study did not
include any histologically normal liver, and adiponectin
protein was localized predominantly in endothelial
cells rather than hepatocytes. overall, the finding of
low-adiponectin ‘expression’ in liver is consistent with
the low levels of circulating adiponectin seen in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (nafld) [101,110] and may
simply reflect the association between nash, insulin
resistance and obesity. alternatively, it could represent
paracrine effects related to the disease process in hepatocytes and/or the inflammatory infiltrate in the hepatic
lobule; or an attenuated or subnormal adiponectin
response to the initial insult, leading to the situation
where individuals who are unable to appropriately
increase adiponectin production in response to injury
get progressive disease. in a complementary study,
delaigle et al. [33] show that adiponectin expression
can be induced in skeletal muscle by exposure to
inflammatory cytokines. the authors postulate that the
adiponectin response could be viewed as local antiinflammatory protection and a means of providing
energy supply to the myocytes.
to summarize, adiponectin has anti-inflammatory
actions in a variety of tissues. these actions include
direct effects on monocyte/macrophages, endothelial

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

275

ra

adiponectin

cells, hepatic and muscle cells plus indirect effects via
inhibition of  xxxg2296xxx  production and action.

therapeutic potential and conclusions
the strong association between hypoadiponectinaemia
and metabolic dysfunction [28,94–97] provides the perfect scenario for adiponectin (replacement) therapy [93].
cellular and animal studies provide proof of concept of
the benefit of adiponectin therapy in multiple disease
states [57,76,111,112]. in man, such therapy could
involve identification of individuals with metabolic
dysfunction and hypoadiponectinemia followed by
restoration of lean ‘healthy’ adiponectin levels by
administration of recombinant hormone.
an alternative approach is to provide therapies that
have an effect to increase adiponectin levels. the tzd
class of compounds is in widespread clinical use for
type 2 diabetes, and one of the effects of these drugs
is to increase adiponectin production and circulating
levels [54,113]. these drugs are given orally, but it is
not clear to what extent the efficacy of the compounds is
adiponectin mediated. an additional question is
whether provision of supra-physiological (or pharmacological) concentrations of adiponectin will be even more
beneficial than providing normal levels.
a further complexity arises when one considers what
form of adiponectin to provide as therapy. as outlined
above, hmw multimers appear to provide more ‘metabolic’ benefit than do the lmw oligomers. therefore,
one strategy might be to change the distribution of existing adiponectin rather than increase total circulating
levels. interestingly, the tzds appear to preferentially
promote production of the beneficial hmw forms [24].
it is not yet clear whether the distribution of adiponectin multimers (which gives the sa) or the absolute
amount of specific adiponectin complexes is the most
important parameter. for example, it may be that a lowcirculating concentration of adiponectin, which is predominantly hmw, multimer provides greater metabolic
advantage than a high-circulating concentration of
adiponectin, with relatively low amounts of the hmw
form. this question needs to be addressed in more
detail, although work by matsuzawa’s group suggests
that the absolute amount of hmw multimer may be
the important parameter [57].
overall, the prospect of adiponectin therapy, or regulation of adiponectin multimer distribution, production,
clearance or action is an exciting one for the treatment of
many facets of the metabolic syndrome.

276

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

references
1 zhang y, proenca r, maffei m et al. positional cloning of
the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. nature
1994; 372: 425–432.
2 scherer pe, williams s, fogliano m, baldini g,
lodish hf. a novel serum protein similar to c1q,
produced exclusively in adipocytes. j biol chem 1995;
270: 26746–26749.
3 hu e, liang p, spiegelman bm.  xxxg78xxx  is a novel
adipose-specific gene dysregulated in obesity. j biol
chem 1996; 271: 10697–10703.
4 maeda k, okubo k, shimomura i et al. cdna cloning
and expression of a novel adipose specific collagen-like
factor,  xxxg78xxx  ( xxxg78xxx ).
biochem biophys res commun 1996; 221: 286–289.
5 nakano y, tobe t, choi-miura nh, mazda t, tomita m.
isolation and characterization of  xxxg78xxx , a novel gelatinbinding protein purified from human plasma. j biochem
(tokyo) 1996; 120: 803–812.
6 arita y, kihara s, ouchi n et al. paradoxical decrease
of an adipose-specific protein, adiponectin, in obesity.
biochem biophys res commun 1999; 257: 79–83.
7 hotta k, funahashi t, arita y et al. plasma concentrations of a novel, adipose-specific protein, adiponectin,
in type 2 diabetic patients. arterioscler thromb vasc
biol 2000; 20: 1595–1599.
8 weyer c, funahashi t, tanaka s et al.
hypoadiponectinemia in obesity and type 2 diabetes:
close association with insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia. j clin endocrinol metab 2001; 86:
1930–1935.
9 bacha f, saad r, gungor n, arslanian sa. adiponectin
in youth. relationship to visceral adiposity, insulin
sensitivity, and beta-cell function. diabetes care 2004;
27: 547–552.
10 goldstein bj, scalia r. adiponectin. a novel adipokine
linking adipocytes and vascular function. j clin
endocrinol metab 2004; 89: 2563–2568.
11 nawrocki ar, scherer pe. the delicate balance between
fat and muscle: adipokines in metabolic disease and
musculoskeletal inflammation. curr opin pharmacol
2004; 4: 281–289.
12 haluzik m, parizkova j, haluzik mm. adiponectin
and its role in the obesity-induced insulin resistance
and related complications. physiol res 2004; 53:
123–129.
13 shimada k, miyazaki t, daida h. adiponectin and
atherosclerotic disease. clin chim acta 2004; 344: 1–12.
14 zhang z, henzel wj. signal peptide prediction based
on analysis of experimentally verified cleavage sites.
protein sci 2004; 13: 2819–2824.
15 shapiro l, scherer pe. the crystal structure of a complement-1q family protein suggests an evolutionary link
to  xxxg2296xxx . curr biol 1998; 8: 335–340.
16 pajvani ubx, combs tp et al. structure-function
studies of the adipocyte-secreted hormone  xxxg78xxx /

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

#

adiponectin. implications for metabolic regulation and
bioactivity. j biol chem 2003; 278: 9073–9085.
tsao t-s, tomas e, murrey he et al. role of disulfide
bonds
in
 xxxg78xxx /adiponectin
structure
and
signaling specificity: different oligomers activate
different signal transduction pathways. j biol chem
2003; 278: 50810–50817.
waki h, yamauchi t, kamon j et al. impaired multimerization of human adiponectin mutants associated with
diabetes: molecular structure and multimer formation of
adiponectin. j biol chem 2003; 278: 40352–40363.
wang y, xu a, knight c, xu ly, cooper gjs.
hydroxylation and glycosylation of the four
conserved lysine residues in the collagenous domain
of adiponectin. potential role in the modulation of its
insulin-sensitizing activity. j biol chem 2002; 277:
19521–19529.
wang y, lu g, wong wp et al. proteomic and functional
characterization of endogenous adiponectin purified
from fetal bovine serum. proteomics 2004; 4: 3933–3942.
sato c, yasukawa z, honda n, matsuda t, kitajima k.
identification and adipocyte differentiation-dependent
expression of the unique disialic acid residue in an
adipose tissue-specific glycoprotein, adipo q. j biol
chem 2001; 276: 28849–28856.
tsao ts, murrey he, hug c, lee dh, lodish hf.
oligomerization state-dependent activation of nfkappa b signaling pathway by adipocyte complementrelated protein of 30 kda ( xxxg78xxx ). j biol chem 2002;
277: 29359–29362.
zhang y, matheny m, zolotukhin s, tumer n, scarpace
pj. regulation of adiponectin and leptin gene expression
in white and brown adipose tissues: influence of beta
3-adrenergic agonists,  xxxd3417xxx , leptin and fasting.
biochim biophys acta 2002; 1584: 115–122.
pajvani ub, hawkins m, combs tp et al. complex distribution, not absolute amount of adiponectin, correlates
with thiazolidinedione -mediated improvement in insulin sensitivity. j biol chem 2004; 279: 12152–12162.
fain jn, madan ak, hiler ml, cheema p, bahouth sw.
comparison of the release of adipokines by adipose tissue, adipose tissue matrix and adipocytes from visceral
and subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissues of obese
humans. endocrinology 2004; 145: 2273–2282.
motoshima h, wu x, sinha mk et al. differential
regulation of adiponectin secretion from cultured
human omental and subcutaneous adipocytes: effects
of insulin and rosiglitazone. j clin endocrinol metab
2002; 87: 5662–5667.
kern pa, di gregorio gb, lu t, rassouli n, ranganathan g.
adiponectin expression from human adipose tissue:
relation to obesity, insulin resistance, and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha expression. diabetes 2003; 52:
1779–1785.
cnop m, havel pj, utzschneider km et al. relationship
of adiponectin to body fat distribution, insulin

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

ra

sensitivity and plasma lipoproteins: evidence for independent roles of age and sex. diabetologia 2003; 46:
459–469.
combs tp, berg ah, rajala mw et al. sexual differentiation, pregnancy, calorie restriction, and aging affect the
adipocyte-specific secretory protein adiponectin.
diabetes 2003; 52: 268–276.
yoda-murakami m, taniguchi m, takahashi k et al.
change in expression of  xxxg78xxx /adiponectin in carbon
tetrachloride-administrated mouse liver. biochem
biophys res commun 2001; 285: 372–377.
kaser s, moschen a, cayon a et al. adiponectin and its
receptors in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. gut 2005; 54:
117–121.
staiger h, kausch c, guirguis a et al. induction of
adiponectin gene expression in human myotubes by an
adiponectin-containing hek293 cell culture supernatant. diabetologia 2003; 46: 956–960.
delaigle am, jonas jc, bauche ib, cornu o, brichard sm.
induction of adiponectin in skeletal muscle by inflammatory cytokines: in vivo and in vitro studies.
endocrinology 2004; 145: 5589–5597.
berner hs, lyngstadaas sp, spahr a et al. adiponectin
and its receptors are expressed in bone-forming cells.
bone 2004; 35: 842–849.
park s-k, oh s-y, lee m-y et al. ccaat/enhancer binding protein nuclear factor-y regulate adiponectin gene
expression adipose tissue. diabetes 2004; 53: 2757–2766.
gavrila a, peng ck, chan jl et al. diurnal and ultradian
dynamics of serum adiponectin in healthy men:
comparison with leptin, circulating soluble  xxxg1320xxx , and cortisol patterns. j clin endocrinol metab 2003;
88: 2838–2843.
calvani m, scarfone a, granato l et al. restoration
adiponectin pulsatility severely obese subjects after
weight loss. diabetes 2004; 53: 939–947.
yang ws, lee wj, funahashi t et al. weight reduction
increases plasma levels of an adipose-derived antiinflammatory protein, adiponectin. j clin endocrinol
metab 2001; 86: 3815–3819.
berg ah, du combs tpx, brownlee m, scherer pe. the
adipocyte-secreted protein  xxxg78xxx  enhances hepatic
insulin action. nat med 2001; 7: 947–953.
imbeault p, pomerleau m, harper me, doucet e.
unchanged fasting and postprandial adiponectin levels
following a 4-day caloric restriction in young healthy
men. clin endocrinol (oxf) 2004; 60: 429–433.
abbasi f, chu jw, lamendola c et al. discrimination
between obesity insulin resistance relationship with
adiponectin. diabetes 2004; 53: 585–590.
kotani y, yokota i, kitamura s et al. plasma adiponectin
levels in newborns are higher than those in adults and
positively correlated with birth weight. clin endocrinol
(oxf) 2004; 61: 418–423.
stefan n, bunt jc, salbe ad et al. plasma adiponectin
concentrations in children: relationships with obesity

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

277

adiponectin

ra

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

278

and insulinemia. j clin endocrinol metab 2002; 87:
4652–4656.
bogan js, lodish hf. two compartments for insulinstimulated exocytosis in 3t3-l1 adipocytes defined by
endogenous  xxxg78xxx  and glut4. j cell biol 1999; 146:
609–620.
fasshauer m, klein j, neumann s, eszlinger m, paschke r.
hormonal regulation of adiponectin gene expression in
3t3-l1 adipocytes. biochem biophys res commun
2002; 290: 1084–1089.
halleux cm, takahashi m, delporte ml et al. secretion
of adiponectin and regulation of  xxxg78xxx  gene expression
in human visceral adipose tissue. biochem biophys res
commun 2001; 288: 1102–1107.
maeda n, takahashi m, funahashi t et al.  xxxg1807xxx 
ligands increase expression and plasma concentrations
of adiponectin, an adipose-derived protein. diabetes
2001; 50: 2094–2099.
maeda n, shimomura i, kishida k et al. diet-induced
insulin resistance in mice lacking adiponectin/ xxxg78xxx .
nat med 2002; 8: 731–737.
fasshauer m, kralisch s, klier m et al. adiponectin
gene expression and secretion is inhibited by interleukin-6 in 3t3-l1 adipocytes. biochem biophys res
commun 2003; 301: 1045–1050.
clarke kj, zhong q, schwartz dd et al. regulation of
adiponectin secretion by  xxxg674xxx . biochem
biophys res commun 2003; 312: 945–949.
phillips sa, ciaraldi tp, kong ap et al. modulation of
circulating and adipose tissue adiponectin levels by
antidiabetic therapy. diabetes 2003; 52: 667–674.
tiikkainen m, hakkinen a-m, korsheninnikova e et al.
effects of rosiglitazone and metformin on liver fat
content, hepatic insulin resistance, insulin clearance,
and gene expression in adipose tissue in patients with
type 2 diabetes. diabetes 2004; 53: 2169–2176.
combs tp, wagner ja, berger j et al. induction of adipocyte complement-related protein of 30 kilodaltons by
 xxxg1807xxx  agonists: a potential mechanism of insulin
sensitization. endocrinology 2002; 143: 998–1007.
tonelli j, li w, kishore p et al. mechanisms early insulin-sensitizing effects thiazolidinediones type 2 diabetes. diabetes 2004; 53: 1621–1629.
yamauchi t, kamon j, waki h et al. the fat-derived
hormone adiponectin reverses insulin resistance associated with both lipoatrophy and obesity. nat med
2001; 7: 941–946.
iwaki m, matsuda m, maeda n et al. induction of adiponectin, a fat-derived antidiabetic antiatherogenic factor, by nuclear receptors. diabetes 2003; 52: 1655–1663.
kobayashi h, ouchi n, kihara s et al. selective suppression of endothelial cell apoptosis by the high molecular weight form of adiponectin. circ res 2004; 94:
27–31.
kamon j, yamauchi t, muto s et al. a novel ikk[beta]
inhibitor stimulates adiponectin levels and ameliorates

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

59
60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

obesity-linked insulin resistance. biochem biophys res
comms 2004; 323: 242–248.
hogg pj. disulfide bonds as switches for protein function. trends biochem sci 2003; 28: 210–214.
fruebis j, tsao ts, javorschi s et al. proteolytic cleavage
product of 30-kda adipocyte complement-related protein increases fatty acid oxidation in muscle and causes
weight loss in mice. proc natl acad sci usa 2001; 98:
2005–2010.
waki h, yamauchi t, kamon j et al. generation of globular fragment of adiponectin by  xxxg694xxx 
secreted by monocytic cell line thp-1.endocrinology
2004; 146: 790–796.
koshimura j, fujita h, narita t et al. urinary adiponectin excretion is increased in patients with overt diabetic
nephropathy. biochem biophys res comms 2004; 316:
165–169.
tschritter o, fritsche a, thamer c et al. plasma adiponectin concentrations predict insulin sensitivity of both
glucose and lipid metabolism. diabetes 2003; 52:
239–243.
hotta k, funahashi t, bodkin nl et al. circulating
concentrations of the adipocyte protein adiponectin
are decreased in parallel with reduced insulin
sensitivity during the progression to type 2
diabetes in rhesus monkeys. diabetes 2001; 50:
1126–1133.
spranger j, kroke a, mohlig m et al. adiponectin and
protection against type 2 diabetes mellitus. lancet 2003;
361: 226–228.
kissebah ah, sonnenberg ge, myklebust j et al.
quantitative trait loci on chromosomes 3 and 17 influence phenotypes of the metabolic syndrome. proc natl
acad sci usa 2000; 97: 14478–14483.
vionnet n, hani el h, dupont s et al. genomewide
search for type 2 diabetes-susceptibility genes in
french whites: evidence for a novel susceptibility
locus for early-onset diabetes on chromosome 3q27-qter
and independent replication of a type 2-diabetes locus
on chromosome 1q21-q24. am j hum genet 2000; 67:
1470–1480.
hara k, boutin p, mori y et al. genetic variation in
the gene encoding adiponectin is associated with an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes in the japanese population. diabetes 2002; 51: 536–540.
vasseur f, helbecque n, dina c et al. single-nucleotide
polymorphism haplotypes in the both proximal promoter and exon 3 of the  xxxg78xxx  gene modulate adipocytesecreted adiponectin hormone levels and contribute to
the genetic risk for type 2 diabetes in french caucasians.
hum mol genet 2002; 11: 2607–2614.
gu hf, abulaiti a, ostenson cg et al. single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the proximal promoter region of the
adiponectin ( xxxg78xxx ) gene are associated with type 2
diabetes in swedish caucasians. diabetes 2004; 53
(suppl. 1):  xxxg1111xxx –s35.

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

j. p. whitehead et al.

71 gibson f, froguel p. genetics of the  xxxg78xxx  locus and its
contribution to type 2 diabetes susceptibility in french
caucasians. diabetes 2004; 53: 2977–2983.
72 kondo h, shimomura i, matsukawa y et al. association
of adiponectin mutation with type 2 diabetes: a candidate gene for the insulin resistance syndrome. diabetes
2002; 51: 2325–2328.
73 tomas e, tsao ts, saha ak et al. enhanced muscle fat
oxidation and glucose transport by  xxxg78xxx  globular
domain: acetyl-coa carboxylase inhibition and ampactivated protein kinase activation. proc natl acad sci
usa 2002; 99: 16309–16313.
74 wu x, motoshima h, mahadev k et al. involvement of
amp-activated protein kinase in glucose uptake
stimulated by the globular domain of adiponectin in
primary rat adipocytes. diabetes 2003; 52: 1355–1363.
75 combs tp, berg ah, obici s, scherer pe, rossetti l.
endogenous glucose production is inhibited by the
adipose-derived protein  xxxg78xxx . j clin invest 2001;
108: 1875–1881.
76 xu a, wang y, keshaw h et al. the fat-derived hormone
adiponectin alleviates alcoholic and nonalcoholic fatty
liver diseases in mice. j clin invest 2003; 112: 91–100.
77 qi y, takahashi n, hileman sm et al. adiponectin acts
in the brain to decrease body weight. nat med 2004; 10:
524–529.
78 kubota n, terauchi y, yamauchi t et al. disruption
adiponectin causes insulin resistance neointimal formation. j biol chem 2002; 277: 25863–25866.
79 ma k, cabrero a, saha pk et al. increased beta -oxidation
but no insulin resistance or glucose intolerance in mice
lacking adiponectin. j biol chem 2002; 277: 34658–34661.
80 shibata r, ouchi n, kihara s et al. adiponectin stimulates angiogenesis in response to tissue ischemia
through stimulation of amp-activated protein kinase
signaling. j biol chem 2004; 279: 28670–28674
81 combs tp, pajvani ub, berg ah et al. a transgenic
mouse with a deletion in the collagenous domain of
adiponectin displays elevated circulating adiponectin
and improved insulin sensitivity. endocrinology 2004;
145: 367–383.
82 yamauchi t, kamon j, ito y et al. cloning of adiponectin
receptors that mediate antidiabetic metabolic effects.
nature 2003; 423: 762–769.
83 civitarese ae, jenkinson cp, richardson d et al.
adiponectin receptors gene expression and insulin
sensitivity in non-diabetic mexican americans with
or without a family history of type 2 diabetes.
diabetologia 2004; 47: 816–820.
84 narasimhan ml, coca ma, jin j et al. osmotin is a
homolog of mammalian adiponectin and controls
apoptosis in yeast through a homolog of mammalian
adiponectin receptor. mol cell 2005; 17: 171–180.
85 tsuchida a, yamauchi t, ito y et al. insulin/ xxxg812xxx  pathway regulates expression levels adiponectin receptors adiponectin sensitivity. j biol chem 2004; 279: 30817–30822.

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

adiponectin

ra

86 staiger h, kaltenbach s, staiger k et al. expression of
adiponectin receptor mrna in human skeletal muscle
cells is related to in vivo parameters of glucose and
lipid metabolism. diabetes 2004; 53: 2195–2201.
87 fasshauer m, klein j, kralisch s et al.  xxxd2864xxx   xxxd3223xxx 
is a positive regulator of adiponectin receptor 2 in 3t3l1 adipocytes. febs lett 2004; 558: 27–32.
88 reseland je, syversen u, bakke i et al. leptin is
expressed in and secreted from primary cultures of
human osteoblasts and promotes bone mineralization.
j bone miner res 2001; 16: 1426–1433.
89 chinetti g, zawadski c, fruchart jc, staels b.
expression of adiponectin receptors in human macrophages and regulation by agonists of the nuclear receptors ppar[alpha], ppar[gamma], and lxr. biochem
biophys res comms 2004; 314: 151–158.
90 kharroubi i, rasschaert j, eizirik dl, cnop m.
expression of adiponectin receptors in pancreatic beta
cells. biochem biophys res commun 2003; 312:
1118–1122.
91 hug c, wang j, ahmad ns et al. t-cadherin is a receptor for hexameric and high-molecular-weight forms of
 xxxg78xxx /adiponectin. pnas 2004, 0403382101.
92 ouchi n, kihara s, funahashi t et al. reciprocal
association of  xxxg520xxx  with adiponectin in
blood stream and adipose tissue. circulation 2003; 107:
671–674.
93 chandran m, phillips sa, ciaraldi t, henry rr.
adiponectin: more than just another fat cell hormone?
diabetes care 2003; 26: 2442–2450.
94 iwashima y, katsuya t, ishikawa k et al.
hypoadiponectinemia is an independent risk factor
for hypertension. hypertension 2004; 43: 1318–1323.
95 ryo m, nakamura t, kihara s et al. adiponectin as a
biomarker of the metabolic syndrome. circ j 2004; 68:
975–981.
96 schulze mb, rimm eb, shai i, rifai n, hu fb.
relationship between adiponectin and glycemic control,
blood lipids, and inflammatory markers in men with
type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 2004; 27: 1680–1687.
97 shimabukuro m, higa n, asahi t et al.
hypoadiponectinemia is closely linked to endothelial
dysfunction in man. j clin endocrinol metab 2003; 88:
3236–3240.
98 ohashi k, ouchi n, kihara s et al. adiponectin i164t
mutation is associated with the metabolic syndrome
and coronary artery disease. j am coll cardiol 2004;
43: 1195–1200.
99 ouchi n, kihara s, funahashi t, matsuzawa y,
walsh k. obesity, adiponectin and vascular inflammatory disease. curr opin lipidol 2003; 14: 561–566.
100 okamoto y, kihara s, ouchi n et al. adiponectin
reduces atherosclerosis in  xxxg177xxx -deficient
mice. circulation 2002; 106: 2767–2770.
101 targher g, bertolini l, scala l et al. decreased plasma
adiponectin concentrations are closely associated with

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

279

ra

adiponectin

102

103

104

105

106

107

280

nonalcoholic hepatic steatosis in obese individuals.
clin endocrinol (oxf) 2004; 61: 700–703.
okamoto y, arita y, nishida m et al. an adipocytederived plasma protein, adiponectin, adheres to injured
vascular walls. horm metab res 2000; 32: 47–50.
ouchi n, kihara s, arita y et al. novel modulator for
endothelial adhesion molecules: adipocyte-derived plasma
protein adiponectin. circulation 1999; 100: 2473–2476.
ouchi n, kihara s, arita y et al. adiponectin, an
adipocyte-derived plasma protein, inhibits endothelial
 xxxg1559xxx  signaling through a camp-dependent pathway. circulation 2000; 102: 1296–1301.
ouchi n, kihara s, arita y et al. adipocyte-derived
plasma protein, adiponectin, suppresses lipid accumulation and class a scavenger receptor expression in
human monocyte-derived macrophages. circulation
2001; 103: 1057–1063.
yokota t, oritani k, takahashi i et al. adiponectin, a
new member of the family of soluble defense collagens,
negatively regulates the growth of myelomonocytic
progenitors and the functions of macrophages. blood
2000; 96: 1723–1732.
brakenhielm e, veitonmaki n, cao r et al. adiponectininduced antiangiogenesis and antitumor activity involve

diabetes, obesity and metabolism, 8, 2006, 264–280

j. p. whitehead et al.

108

109

110

111

112

113

caspase-mediated endothelial cell apoptosis. proc natl
acad sci usa 2004; 101: 2476–2481.
matsuda m, shimomura i, sata m et al. role of adiponectin in preventing vascular stenosis. the missing
link of adipo-vascular axis. j biol chem 2002; 277:
37487–37491.
hui jm, hodge a, farrell gc et al. beyond insulin
resistance in nash. tnf-alpha or adiponectin?
hepatology 2004; 40: 46–54.
chitturi s, abeygunasekera s, farrell gc et al. nash
and insulin resistance: insulin hypersecretion and specific association with the insulin resistance syndrome.
hepatology 2002; 35: 373–379.
shibata r, ouchi n, ito m et al. adiponectin-med
modulation hypertrophic signals heart. nat med 2004;
10: 1384–1389.
yamauchi t, kamon j, waki h et al. globular adiponectin protected ob/ob mice from diabetes and apoedeficient mice from atherosclerosis. j biol chem 2003;
278: 2461–2468.
moller de, berger jp. role of ppars in the regulation of
obesity-related insulin sensitivity and inflammation.
int j obes relat metab disord 2003; 27 (suppl. 3):
s17–s21.

#

2005 blackwell publishing ltd

