 xxxg2424xxx  inhibits preretinal neovascularization and
enhances physiological vascular regrowth in oir
as assessed by a new method of quantification
eyal banin,1,2,3 michael i. dorrell,1,3 edith aguilar,1 matthew r. ritter,1
christopher m. aderman,1 alexandra c. h. smith,1 jeffrey friedlander,1 and
martin friedlander1
purpose. a carboxyl-terminal fragment of tryptophan trna
synthetase ( xxxg2424xxx ) has demonstrated potent angiostatic activity during retinal developmental neovascularization in vivo.
the effects of  xxxg2424xxx  on pathologic neovascularization were
tested and compared with a potent vegf antagonist using the
mouse model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (oir).
methods. c57bl/6j mice were transiently exposed to hyperoxic conditions (75% o2) between postnatal day 7 (p7) and
p12 and then returned to room air. retinas were isolated,
blood vessels stained with isolectin griffonia simplicifolia,
images of retinal whole-mounts acquired, and the area of vascular obliteration and extent of preretinal neovascularization
quantified. this method was compared to the commonly used
method of oir quantification in which the number of pre–
inner limiting membrane (ilm) nuclei is counted in serial
sections of whole eyes. to assess the angiostatic activity of
 xxxg2424xxx , mice were injected intravitreally at p12 with either
 xxxg2424xxx , a vegf aptamer, or vehicle (pbs) alone, and the
effects on area of obliteration and on preretinal neovascular
tuft formation were assessed.
results. using a modified method of quantification in the
mouse oir model based on images of isolectin-stained retinal
wholemounts, we were able to assess reliably and consistently
both vascular obliteration and preretinal neovascular tuft formation in the same specimen.  xxxg2424xxx  demonstrated potent
angiostatic activity, reducing the appearance of pathologic
neovascular tufts by up to 90%. surprisingly,  xxxg2424xxx  also
enhanced physiological revascularization of the obliterated retinal vasculature, reducing these areas by up to 60% compared
with pbs-injected eyes. in contrast, the vegf antagonist, while

from the 1department of cell biology, the scripps research
institute, la jolla, california; and the 2department of ophthalmology,
hadassah-hebrew university medical center, jerusalem, israel.
3
contributed equally to the work and therefore should be considered equivalent authors.
supported by grants ey11254 and ey014174 from the national
eye institute, the robert mealey program for the study of macular
degenerations, the v. kann rasmussen foundation, the mactel foundation, and the kovner family fund (mf). mr was supported by a
national research service award from the national institutes of
health.
submitted for publication august 18, 2005; revised october 18
and november 29, 2005, and january 9, 2006; accepted march 7, 2006.
disclosure: e. banin, none; m.i. dorrell, none; e. aguilar,
none; m.r. ritter, none; c.m. aderman, none; a.c.h. smith, none;
j. friedlander, none; m. friedlander, none
the publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page
charge payment. this article must therefore be marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 u.s.c. §1734 solely to indicate this fact.
corresponding author: martin friedlander, the scripps research
institute, 10550 n. torrey pines road, mb216, la jolla, ca 92037;
friedlan@scripps.edu.
investigative ophthalmology & visual science, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5
copyright © association for research in vision and ophthalmology

similarly reducing preretinal neovascular tuft formation, did
not enhance revascularization of the obliterated areas.
conclusions. use of a rapid, quantifiable method to assess the
effect of  xxxg2424xxx  on retinal angiogenesis in the oir model
demonstrates the importance of a quantification system that
permits simultaneous analysis of a drug’s effect on vascular
obliteration as well as on preretinal neovascularization. the
results obtained using this method suggest enhanced clinical
value for compounds such as  xxxg2424xxx  that not only inhibit
pathologic neovascularization, but also facilitate physiological
revascularization of ischemic tissue. (invest ophthalmol vis
sci. 2006;47:2125–2134) doi:10.1167/iovs.05-1096

v

ascular diseases of the retina, including diabetic retinopathy, exudative age-related macular degeneration, retinopathy of prematurity, and vascular occlusions, are major causes
of vision loss. this group of diseases is the focus of intense
research aimed at identifying novel treatments that will help
prevent or reduce pathologic ocular neovascularization. over
the past decade, several angiostatic compounds have been
identified and tested in preclinical models.1,2 some of these
compounds have been applied clinically in recent years, with
varying efficacy.3,4 whereas several demonstrate an effect on
reducing the extent of neovascularization or a reduction in
morbidity, complete inhibition of angiogenesis and/or cure of
the underlying disease has not yet been achieved. to enhance
the clinical efficacy of angiostatic therapy, it may be necessary
to combine angiostatic drugs and/or use molecules with both
angiostatic and trophic activities. indeed, several compounds
have been reported to exhibit trophic effects beyond their
angiostatic activity5,6 and this  xxxd2082xxx  may have clinical
utility.
testing potential angiostatic treatments has been greatly
facilitated by the development of models of oxygen-induced
retinopathy (oir) in several animal species, including the kitten, the beagle puppy, the rat, and the mouse.7 these models
mirror the events that occur during retinopathy of prematurity
(rop), a condition involving pathologic neovascularization
that can affect premature infants.8 –10 over the past decade, the
mouse model of oir as described by smith et al.11 has become
the most commonly used model for studying abnormal angiogenesis associated with oxygen-induced retinopathies. the vascular changes observed in this model are highly consistent,
reproducible, and quantifiable, and the use of this model has
recently been extended to the study of the effects of many
potential therapeutic agents on ischemic vasculopathies.
in this study, we present a technique that allows same-eye
quantification of several aspects of the neovascular processes
occurring in oir, including obliteration and intraretinal revascularization and pathologic preretinal neovascular formations
(tufts). isolectin griffonia simplicifolia (isolectin gs) staining,
fluorescence microscopy and widely available computer image
analysis programs can be used to quantify the retinopathy
2125

2126

banin et al.

efficiently and consistently in wholemount retinal preparations
from mice with oir. this method was found to be highly
reliable and consistent and correlated well with the current,
standard method of quantification, which is based on the
counting of pre–inner limiting membrane (ilm) nuclei in retinal cross-sections.11
wholemount quantification was subsequently used to analyze the angiostatic activity of  xxxg2424xxx , a carboxyl-terminal
fragment of tryptophanyl trna synthetase, on pathologic neovascularization associated with oir. angiostatic activity of t2trprs has been demonstrated in various in vitro models,12–14
as well as a developmental model of retinal neovascularization.15–17 the quantification method described in this study
has shown  xxxg2424xxx  to have potent angiostatic activity in the
oir model, inhibiting formation of neovascular tufts (pre-ilm
correlates) by more than 90%. surprisingly, revascularization of
the obliterated superficial retinal vasculature was accelerated,
indicating a novel activity of  xxxg2424xxx , and demonstrating the
importance of a quantification method that incorporates measures of both vascular obliteration and pathologic neovascularization observed in the oir model.

materials

and

methods

oir model
all animal studies adhered to the arvo statement for the use of
animals in ophthalmic and vision research. oir was induced according to the protocol described by smith et al.11 briefly, postnatal day
(p)7 pups and their mothers were transferred from room air to 75%
oxygen for 5 days and then returned to room air.

retinal wholemount preparation
and immunohistochemistry
for fitc-dextran angiography, animals were anesthetized, and approximately 300 ␮l of high-molecular-mass (2 ⫻ 106 da) fitc-dextran
(concentration 50 mg/ml; sigma-aldrich, st. louis, mo) was injected
into the left ventricle and allowed to circulate for approximately 2
minutes before the animals were euthanatized and the eyes enucleated. retinas were dissected and prepared for immunohistochemical
analysis as previously described.18 briefly, they were blocked with 20%
fbs and 20% normal goat serum (ngs) in pbs for 1 hour, incubated
with the appropriate primary antibody and isolectin gs (1:150 dilution;
invitrogen, carlsbad, ca) overnight in blocking buffer, and visualized
using fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies (1:200 dilution, 2
.5-hour incubation). because isolectin gs will stain not only vascular
endothelial cells but also activated murine macrophages, polyclonal
antibodies specific for the endothelial marker  xxxg1724xxx  (platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule [pecam]; 1:100 dilution; bd biosciences,
san diego, ca) or against the macrophage marker f4/80 (1:150; caltag
laboratories, burlingame, ca) were used to characterize further the
isolectin gs-positive cells.

imaging and quantification
images were taken using a 4⫻ objective lens with a detector resolution
of 512 ⫻ 512 pixels. focusing just above the inner limiting membrane
of the retina using confocal microscopy (radiance 2100; bio-rad,
hercules, ca), the prelaminar neovascular tufts were prominent and
readily distinguished from the underlying superficial vascular plexus.
four overlapping images (each representing one retinal quadrant)
were acquired from each retina. no image manipulation was performed in terms of background, intensity, or color curves, and the
resultant images were used “as is. ” with image analysis software
(photoshop 6.0; adobe systems, mountain view, ca), each individual
image was converted to 2 ⫻ 2 in., with 300 pixels/in. resolution. then,
whole retina montages were created by using retinal landmarks such as
the optic disc and major vessels to align the images of the four

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5
quadrants. subsequent quantification was performed on these montages, ensuring that size and resolution parameters were identical for
each retina and that overlapping areas from each individual image used
to create the montages were quantified only once.
quantifications were performed by “masked” individuals to prevent bias. to measure areas of vascular obliteration, the freehand
selection tool of the software (photoshop; adobe systems) was used.
during analysis, care was taken not to include areas in which a
dissection or mounting artifact was present. the borders of the avascular areas were traced, and the total area of obliteration in pixels was
computed. measurement of the areas of neovascular tufts was also
performed in the wholemount configuration, based on the higher
intensity of isolectin staining and the characteristic appearance of the
tufts. the neovascular tufts were specifically selected by hand with the
“magic wand ” tool in the software (photoshop; adobe systems). the
total area (in pixels) was then determined and a conversion factor,
based on image-acquisition (4⫻ magnification lens), montage assembly
parameters, and resolution (300 pixels/in.) was applied to generate
absolute areas in square micrometers (for our parameters, the conversion factor was calculated to be 27.8 ␮m2/pixel).

retinal cross-sections and pre-ilm
nuclei counting
in a subset of eyes, after quantification in the wholemount configuration, the retinas were removed from the slides, postfixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (pfa), embedded in paraffin, and serially sectioned in
their entirety for pre-ilm nuclei counting, as described in smith et al.11
standard hematoxylin and eosin (h&e) staining was performed, and all
nuclei present on the vitreous side of the ilm were counted in every
fourth section across the retina. this method was used to include the
entire retina for correlation with the wholemount analysis where all
tufts across the retina are also quantified. the average number of nuclei
per section was computed.

comparison of the wholemount quantification
method with standard quantification methods
mice were injected subcutaneously with 10 mg/kg per day of a specific
inos inhibitor (inos inhibitor 51; ge healthcare) from p12 to p17.
this compound has been shown to be specific for inos and has
previously demonstrated angiostatic activity (personal communication,
lois smith, md, phd, harvard medical school, july 2004). on p17,
fellow eyes were enucleated and processed for quantification by either
wholemount quantification as described earlier (left eye), or by counting pre-ilm nuclei in h&e-processed sections (right eye). for counting
of pre-ilm nuclei, whole eyes were embedded in paraffin, crosssectioned, and stained with h&e. prelaminar nuclei were counted
according to the standard protocol described by smith et al.11 in a
sample of centrally located cross sections on both sides of the optic
nerve.

preparation and intravitreal injection of
angiostatic compounds
 xxxg2424xxx  was made as a recombinant compound. purified product was
stored in 50% glycerol at ⫺20°c. before injection, an aliquot of t2trprs was dialyzed overnight into sterile 1⫻ pbs. protein concentration was determined by the bradford assay (bio-rad) with bsa (sigmaaldrich) as a standard. the vegf antagonist was synthesized as a
40-kda peg-conjugated aptamer (transgenomic inc., boulder, co)
based on published information.19,20 this compound has been shown
to inhibit the activity of vegf. after synthesis and purification, the
compound was determined to be pure by reversed-phase liquid chromatography. the vegf antagonist was stored as a lyophilized powder
in a desiccator at ⫺20°c and was reconstituted in rnase-free pbs
immediately before injection. all masses and concentrations refer to
the active vegf antagonist, as analyzed by spectrophotometric analysis
using 260/280 nm wavelengths, rather than the total peg-conjugated

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

quantifying effects of  xxxg2424xxx  in oxygen-induced retinopathy

2127

figure 1. wholemounts of retinas
at different stages of progression
through the oir model. the vasculature was visualized by dextran perfusion (a-c) or by staining with isolectin-gs (d–f). (a, d) p9 retinas
showed marked regression of the
central vascular network after exposure to 75% oxygen at p7. (b, e) p18
retinas showed partial revascularization from the periphery inward after
return to normoxic conditions at
p12, accompanied by the formation
of pathologic neovascular tufts (e).
(c, f) revascularization of the retina
is largely complete by p22, and the
areas of neovascular tufts have
mostly resolved.

compound.  xxxg2424xxx , the vegf antagonist or pbs alone were injected
intravitreally at a volume of 0.5 ␮l with a syringe (hamilton, reno, nv)
and a 33-gauge needle, as previously described.17,18 intravitreal injections were performed at p12 (on return to normoxia) for the single
injection experiments, or at p13 and p16 for the double injection
experiments.

results
the normal process of postnatal retinal vascular development
in the mouse is well characterized18,21 and includes centripetal
growth of superficial vessels emerging from the optic disc at
birth and reaching the far periphery approximately 9 to 11
days later. during the second and third weeks after birth,
vessels sprout from this superficial network and form the deep
and intermediate vascular plexuses. the developmental vascularization process is accompanied by waves of remodeling and
pruning and is largely completed by p21 to p23. in c57bl6/j
mice, exposure to high levels of oxygen significantly alters this
orderly sequence of events.11 after exposure to 75% oxygen
between p7 and p12, large areas of the vascular network
regress in the center of the retina, leaving only the major
vessels and practically no capillary network. this can be seen
in both dextran-perfused (figs. 1a, 1b) and isolectin-stained
(figs. 1d, 1e) wholemount preparations. the peripheral retina
still showed evidence of a vascular network, but, in general,
the deep vascular plexuses had completely failed to form. on
return to normoxia at p12, a relative state of ischemia in the
poorly vascularized retina prompted the excessive regrowth of
superficial vessels, leading to abnormal sprouting at the interface between retina and vitreous (pre-ilm vascular tufts). it is
important to note that after perfusion of the retinal vessels with
a fluorescent dye (in this case, dextran fitc), the areas of
vascular obliteration were clearly delineated, but the tufts
could not be easily identified. staining with isolectin-gs allowed visualization of both processes (compare fig. 1b to 1e).

quantifying areas of vascular obliteration and
rate of retinal revascularization
to quantify the extent of vascular obliteration and rate of
retinal revascularization, we imaged dextran-injected or isolectin-stained retinal wholemount preparations by fluorescent mi-

croscopy at low magnification. areas of obliteration (yellow) as
well as the total retinal areas (blue line) were measured (figs.
2a, 2b). because the border between vascular and avascular
retina was usually well defined in these preparations (fig. 2c),
interobserver variability was very low (fig. 2g). isolectin-positive cells were often observed in oir retinas, particularly in
regions of obliteration (fig. 2c). isolectin is known to stain
microglia and activated macrophages, and the involvement of
such cells in oxygen-induced vascular obliteration has been
shown.22 retinal growth apparently continued during hyperoxia, with the total retinal area increasing by approximately
20% between p8 and p13. after this time, the rate of change
became negligible (fig. 2d, top). obliteration occurred rapidly
after exposure to hyperoxia at p7 (fig. 2d, bottom) and occupied approximately 30% to 35% of the total retinal area between p8 and p12. revascularization after return to room air
occurred at a slower rate, with extensive neovascularization
beginning around p16, 4 days after return to normoxia. the
process was symmetrical, as demonstrated by the high degree
of correlation between fellow eyes of the same animal (fig.
2f). this provides support for the use of fellow eyes as the
control in future studies based on this model.

quantifying the extent of
abnormal neovascularization
between p15 and p22, abnormal vascular growth occurred at
the interface between the retina and vitreous, with most preretinal neovascular tufts forming at the border between the
vascularized peripheral and obliterated central regions of the
retina. these misdirected vascular elements are commonly
quantified in h&e-stained, paraffin-embedded cross sections by
counting nuclei of cells protruding into the vitreous side of the
inner limiting membrane (pre-ilm nuclei). however, these
areas are also clearly seen in isolectin gs-stained wholemount
images as collections of cells overlying the superficial vascular
network (figs. 1e, 3a). the area of these strongly staining
isolectin gs-positive regions was readily measurable with either intensity-threshold software or image-analysis software
selection (fig 3b, neovascular areas marked in red). note
that these areas of proliferation are only partially perfused
(fig. 3c), precluding angiography as a tool to visualize and
quantify the tufts adequately. cell-specific markers showed

2128

banin et al.

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

figure 2. time course of vascular
obliteration and retinal revascularization at different stages of the mouse
oir model. (a) a representative retinal wholemount of a p17 retina is
shown and, in (b), the areas of vascular obliteration (yellow) and total
retina area (blue line) are marked,
demonstrating the ability to identify
and measure these areas with imageanalysis software. (c) a higher-magnification image demonstrates that
the avascular borders can be easily
identified using isolectin gs to stain
retinal vessels. (d) changes in total
retinal area and the extent of obliteration throughout oir progression
(each point represents mean ⫾ sd).
(e, f) correlation between fellow
eyes of the same animal was high for
both total retinal area (e) and the
area of vascular obliteration (f) at
different time points throughout the
progression of oir. these processes
were largely symmetrical, particularly for area of obliteration, as indicated by linear regression parameters. each point represents a pair of
retinas (left eye versus right eye)
from a single mouse. (g) the degree
of interobserver variability was low
between four masked observers
quantifying vascular obliteration in
six different eyes. hatched bar:
mean area ⫾ sd for each eye.

that most of the isolectin gs-positive cells within the tufts
expressed the endothelial marker  xxxg1724xxx , confirming their
vascular identity (fig. 3d). of note, cells of macrophage
lineage were also present in the neovascular tufts, as shown
by f4/80 immunostaining (fig. 3e), supporting recent evidence that has suggested a role for macrophages during the
progression of pathologic neovascularization and the formation of neovascular tufts in the oir model.23 between p16
and p20, approximately 12% to 16% of the total retinal area
was covered by neovascular tufts, peaking at p17 (figs. 3f,
3g). in the wake of the retinal revascularization that was
concomitantly proceeding, these neovascular tuft areas also
eventually resolved. the relatively large, protruding groups
of cells seen earlier (figs. 3a–e) were pruned (fig. 3f) and
ultimately disappeared between p22 and p25 (fig. 1f).
although the correlation of tuft formation between fellow eyes was less than that seen for vascular obliteration, it
remained a largely symmetrical process (fig. 3h). interobserver variability was again low, regardless of the time point

studied and the extent of apparent tuft formation (fig. 3i),
attesting to the relative consistency and clarity of this quantification method. finally, to examine whether the neovascular areas measured in whole mounts correlate with preilm nuclei counting in cross sections, several previously
quantified wholemounted retinas were paraffin embedded
and cross-sectioned, and the pre-ilm nuclei were counted
across the whole retina (fig. 2j). it is evident that these two
methods of quantification are generally in agreement (i.e.,
an eye with a larger tuft area tends to also have a higher
nuclei count and vice versa).

correlation with the established method of
quantifying preretinal nv
the utility of the new quantification technique was further
assessed and compared with the current method of pre-ilm
nuclei counting by examining the effect of an inhibitor of
inos (fig. 4). this agent (or control saline) was delivered

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

quantifying effects of  xxxg2424xxx  in oxygen-induced retinopathy

2129

figure 3. appearance, composition,
and quantification of preretinal neovascular tufts in oir. (a) confocal
images focused slightly above the superficial vascular layer assist in identifying areas of abnormal preretinal
neovascular tufts in a p18 eye stained
with isolectin gs. (b) the tufts were
easily identified (red) and quantified
with commercially available imageanalysis software. (c) neovascular
tufts were only partially perfused, as
shown after systemic infusion of dextran-fitc. (d) the identified tufts
were endothelial in origin, as demonstrated by colocalization with  xxxg1724xxx .
(e) cells of macrophage lineage expressing f4/80 were also a major
component of tufts. (f) resolving areas of neovascularization in a p22
isolectin-stained retina demonstrate
that tufts were diminishing, but the
retinal vasculature was still not normal. (g) time course of neovascular
tuft formation and regression (each
bar represents mean retinal tuft
area ⫾ sd. a total of 84 retinas were
quantified: between p15 and p19,
n ⱖ 10 retinas at each time point;
p20 to p22, n ⱖ 6; p25, n ⫽ 4). (h)
although less symmetrical than the
areas of obliteration between fellow
eyes, the areas of neovascular tufts
were relatively symmetrical from eye
to eye. (i) the degree of interobserver variability between four
masked observers quantifying neovascular tuft formation in four different eyes (hatched bar: mean area ⫾
sd for each eye). (j) quantification
of abnormal neovascularization by
tuft area in p17 wholemounts compared to subsequent counting of preilm nuclei in cross sections obtained
from the same retinas. the results
were normalized to the average for
each method among the six eyes,
demonstrating that similar trends
were observed regardless of the
method of quantification used.

from p12 to p17 by once-daily subcutaneous injections, and
at p17, fellow eyes were enucleated and processed for
quantification by either wholemount quantification (left
eye) or by counting of pre-ilm nuclei in h&e processed
sections (right eye). when quantified from wholemounts,
the neovascular tuft area was found to be reduced by 30%
(center bars), similar to the magnitude of effect observed
when pre-ilm nuclei were counted in cross sections (36%,
fig. 4b, right). thus, the observed effects of an angiostatic
compound are in general agreement, using either the standard quantification methods or wholemount analysis.

effect of  xxxg2424xxx  on neovascular tuft formation
in the oir model
 xxxg2424xxx  is a proteolytic, carboxyl-terminal fragment of  xxxg2425xxx 
that has demonstrated potent angiostatic potential in several
models of angiogenesis, including an in vitro shear stress
model12 and the neonatal mouse retinal angiogenesis model.17
the mouse oir model was used to test the activity of  xxxg2424xxx 
on pathologic neovascularization by using the described
method of quantification. when injected intravitreally at p12,
immediately after the mice were returned from hyperoxia (75%

2130

banin et al.

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

figure 4. comparison of the wholemount quantification method with
standard quantification methods (a)
wholemount preparations and cross
sections of p17 retinas from a control
animal (top row) and an inos inhibitor-treated animal (bottom row).
the area of obliteration (left, yellow)
and neovascular tuft formation (middle, red) were quantified by wholemount analysis. arrows, right: examples of pre-ilm nuclei. the accepted
method of quantifying abnormal neovascularization in the mouse oir
model relies on counting such cells.
(b) subcutaneous injection of an
inos inhibitor reduced the area of
vascular obliteration at p17 by 28%
compared with controls (left). area
of pre-neovascular tufts quantified
from wholemounts was reduced by
30%. data are the mean ⫾ sem. control: n ⫽ 10; treated: n ⫽ 12. counting of pre-ilm nuclei in cross-sections from a separate group of
animals showed a similar magnitude
of effect, 36% (mean ⫾ sem). control: n ⫽ 55; treated: n ⫽ 13.

o2) to normoxia,  xxxg2424xxx  markedly reduced the area of neovascular tuft formation at p17 in a dose-dependent manner (fig.
5a). although the full-length tryptophan trna synthetase (fltrprs) also demonstrated some activity at the highest dose, the
observed levels of inhibition were significantly lower than
equivalent injections of  xxxg2424xxx . as the fl- xxxg2425xxx  has been
found to have no angiostatic activity in other models of angiogenesis,15,17 it is possible that the observed activity resulted
from natural cleavage of the fl- xxxg2425xxx  to a product similar to
 xxxg2424xxx  after in vivo injection.
the obliterated areas were also quantified in control and
 xxxg2424xxx -treated retinas, to analyze the effects on physiological
revascularization after oxygen-induced obliteration (fig. 5b).
although  xxxg2424xxx  potently inhibited neovascular tuft formation, revascularization of the normal superficial and deep retinal vascular plexuses was not inhibited. in fact, t2-trprsinjected retinas consistently showed significantly enhanced
revascularization compared with the pbs controls, even at
lower doses. in  xxxg2424xxx -injected retinas, the obliterated areas
at p17 were consistently reduced between 40% and 60% compared to the obliterated areas in p17 pbs control-injected
retinas (fig. 5b), suggesting a novel dual activity for  xxxg2424xxx 
in promoting physiological revascularization while simultaneously inhibiting pathologic neovascular tuft formation. even
at p22, when the neovascular tufts have naturally regressed and
the retina is healing, the neovessels, formed by physiological
revascularization in control-injected oir retinas, still appear
severely abnormal, characterized by their tortuosity and a few

remaining neovascular tufts (fig. 5e). in contrast, at p17, the
vascular morphology of 1.25 ␮g/eye  xxxg2424xxx -treated retinas
appears nearly normal (figs. 5c–e). retinas injected with fltrprs also demonstrated significant enhancement of the revascularization process, but only at the higher doses. this finding
again suggests either a lower level of activity for fl- xxxg2425xxx , or in
vivo proteolytic cleavage to the active  xxxg2424xxx  form.
the activity of  xxxg2424xxx  in the oir model was directly
compared with that of a vegf antagonist that has demonstrated potent inhibition of oir-induced neovascular tuft formation. dosage studies were performed with this vegf antagonist to determine the optimal concentration. at the optimal
concentrations, 2 ␮g (215 picomoles) per eye of the vegf
antagonist and 1.25 ␮g (26 picomoles) per eye of  xxxg2424xxx ,
both angiostatic molecules were found to be potent inhibitors
of neovascular tuft formation. eyes injected with  xxxg2424xxx 
exhibited a slight, but significant reduction in the neovascular
tuft areas compared with the vegf antagonist–treated retinas
(fig. 6). thus, even after injection of molar concentrations
10-fold below the vegf antagonist,  xxxg2424xxx  exhibited highly
competitive inhibitory activity on neovascular tuft formation in
the oir model. unlike  xxxg2424xxx , the vegf antagonist did not
enhance revascularization of the superficial plexus. although
the vegf antagonist did not prevent physiological revascularization (these retinas eventually fully revascularized), the revascularization was somewhat delayed compared with control
vehicle (pbs)–injected retinas and was substantially delayed
compared with those injected with  xxxg2424xxx  (fig. 6).

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

quantifying effects of  xxxg2424xxx  in oxygen-induced retinopathy

2131

neovascularization after hyperoxia-induced obliteration. to
this extent, two separate lower-dose injections of either t2trprs (0.25 ␮g; [5.2 picomoles] per injection) or the vegf
antagonist (0.5 ␮g [53.9 picomoles] per injection) were performed at p13 and p16, and the resultant retinal vasculatures
were analyzed at p19. again, both compounds significantly
inhibited neovascular tuft formation. the revascularization process was again significantly enhanced in  xxxg2424xxx -treated retinas, whereas the delay in the revascularization process was
even more apparent at p19 after treatment with the vegf
antagonist, despite the use of lower doses (figs. 6b–d).

discussion

figure 5. (a) injection of  xxxg2424xxx  at p12 inhibited neovascular tuft
formation in a dose-dependent manner and (b) also promoted faster
retinal revascularization as demonstrated by a reduction in the area of
obliteration. fl- xxxg2425xxx  had similar activities, but only at higher doses. a
representative image of a p17 retina that was treated with 1.25 ␮g/eye
of  xxxg2424xxx  (c) showed significant reduction in neovascular tufts (red)
and obliterated areas (yellow) compared with a control, pbs-injected
retina (d). (e) the vasculature in oir retinas treated with  xxxg2424xxx 
looked relatively normal (top) and lacked the characteristic tortuosity
that was characteristic of revascularized regions in control oir retinas,
even at a much later stage (bottom).

because of the observed differences in the effects of t2trprs and the vegf antagonist on the revascularization process, we wanted to assess the longer-term effects on retinal

the mouse model of oir has been valuable for the study of
ischemic vasculopathies and antiangiogenic agents.7 we have
used the oir model and modified the described method of
quantifying the associated neovascular processes to fully assess
the angiostatic activity of  xxxg2424xxx  in a model of pathologic
angiogenesis. we have demonstrated a strong, dose-dependent
angiostatic effect of  xxxg2424xxx  on pathologic neovascularization
in the oir model. injection of 1.25 ␮g/eye  xxxg2424xxx  resulted
in nearly complete inhibition of neovascular tuft formation.
after two lower-dose injections,  xxxg2424xxx  inhibited pathologic
neovascularization and reduced tuft formation by more than
75%. these observed effects were comparable, if not superior
to, the observed effects after injection of a vegf antagonist,
another potent inhibitor of pathologic neovascularization in
the oir model, despite the injection of approximately 10-fold
higher molar concentrations of the vegf antagonist. unlike
the vegf antagonist,  xxxg2424xxx  also enhanced physiological
revascularization after oxygen-induced obliteration. although
the areas of obliteration were comparable at p12, when the
retinas were removed from hyperoxia and injections were
performed, the obliterated areas in  xxxg2424xxx  treated retinas at
p17 were consistently reduced between 40% to 60% compared
with control-treated retinas. in addition, injection of  xxxg2424xxx 
led to faster and more complete retinal healing, and a resultant
vasculature that anatomically more closely resembled normal
retinal vasculature.
although this accelerated retinal revascularization effect of
 xxxg2424xxx  that accompanied its potent angiostatic activity was
surprising, such dual properties (angiostasis of “pathologic”
neovascularization and facilitation of “physiological” revascularization), while unusual, are not without precedent. angiogenesis is a complex process regulated by an intricate balance
of stimulators and inhibitors.24 multiple signaling pathways
converge to regulate the growth of new blood vessels during
both physiological and pathologic neovascularization, and
some factors have demonstrated seemingly conflicting, environmentally dependent roles in this complex process. for
example, extracellular matrix (ecm) remodeling by matrix
metalloproteinases (mmps) promotes cell migration, a critical
event in the formation of new vessels.25 mmp-mediated ecm
remodeling can also promote angiogenesis by releasing matrixbound growth factors that enhance endothelial migration and
growth.26 in contrast, certain ecm molecules released by mmp
degradation, such as  xxxg2278xxx  and -2, and proteolytic
fragments of matrix molecules created by mmp-dependent
ecm cleavages, such as endostatin, can exert antiangiogenic
effects by inhibiting endothelial cell proliferation, migration,
and tube formation.5,27,28  xxxg2424xxx , a fragment of a naturally
occurring, larger “parent” molecule, may also exert contextdependent roles during angiogenesis. it is angiostatic, as demonstrated by potent angiostatic properties in several in vivo
models of angiogenesis. however, in appropriate situations
such as the regrowth of the normal, anatomic retinal vascula-

2132

banin et al.

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

figure 6. comparison of the effects of  xxxg2424xxx  with a vegf antagonist. (a) both  xxxg2424xxx  and the vegf antagonist were potent inhibitors of
neovascular tuft formation, but only  xxxg2424xxx  reduced the areas of obliteration compared with control pbs injections. (b) at p19, after two
injections, the areas of obliteration were significantly larger in the vegf-treated retinas, indicating that the vegf antagonist may slow the
revascularization process. (c, d) representative images of p19 retinas after double injection with either  xxxg2424xxx  (c) or the vegf antagonist (d)
demonstrate the differences in tuft areas (red) and obliteration areas (yellow).

ture,  xxxg2424xxx  may also participate in the growth and stabilization of normal vasculature. the fact that  xxxg2424xxx  enhances
revascularization in the oir model, although it potently inhibits deep vascular formation during normal vascular development, suggests that the circumstances of vascular growth under each condition may be vastly different. although both
processes proceed by angiogenesis, normal vascular development is highly controlled and occurs under moderate levels of
hypoxia,18,29 whereas retinal revascularization after oxygeninduced obliteration occurs in a highly hypoxic environment.30,31 this is associated with rapid and often uncontrolled
(as evidenced by the concomitant formation of preretinal neovascular tufts) neovascularization in the oir model. experiments investigating the different properties of  xxxg2424xxx  in
relationship to different contextual angiogenic situations are
currently ongoing.
a possible explanation for the apparent paradoxical effects
of  xxxg2424xxx  (promoting more rapid revascularization of obliterated areas while concomitantly inhibiting preretinal neovascular tuft formation) could be that the latter effect actually
stems from the former. in other words,  xxxg2424xxx  may primarily
function to enhance revascularization of the retina, thus lessening the mass of ischemic tissue and reducing the hypoxic
drive, resulting in a reduction of pathologic preretinal tuft
formation. this explanation, however, seems unlikely, given
that previous studies in our laboratory and others have demonstrated potent angiostatic activity for  xxxg2424xxx  in other in
vivo models of neovascularization.15,17 the apparent  xxxd2082xxx  of  xxxg2424xxx  is likely to be more complex and may indeed
reflect different microenvironment-dependent activities.

further data supporting the concept of a context-dependent dual activity of  xxxg2424xxx  is the differential effects with
respect to dose. enhanced revascularization was observed at
low doses that had little or no effect on pathologic tuft formation (fig. 5). at higher doses, inhibition of tuft formation
became apparent. as the dose continue to increase, the effect
on tuft formation reached its maximum, whereas enhancement
of revascularization plateaus and even began to decrease. similar dose-dependent dual activities have been reported for
other compounds. for example, in a laser-induced model of
choroidal neovascularization (cnv), pigment epithelial derived factor (pedf) was shown to decrease cnv at low doses
(90 ␮g/ml administered subcutaneously via a miniosmotic
pump), while at higher doses (360 ␮g/ml), pedf significantly
increased cnv.32 plasminogen activator inhibitor (pai)-1 also
has a bell-shaped efficacy curve with proangiogenic properties
at physiological (lower) doses and antiangiogenic activity at
higher doses.33,34 however, it should be noted that although
the dual activities of  xxxg2424xxx  appear to be somewhat dose
dependent, in the oir model both properties occur concomitantly. similar simultaneous dual activities have also been reported for inhibitors of  xxxg2296xxx -␣. in a recent
study by gardiner et al.,6 intraperitoneal injection of the cytokine inhibitor semapimob was shown to promote vascular
recovery in a model of oir, accelerating physiological revascularization, while concomitantly inhibiting neovascular tuft
formation. the mechanism of this dual function for  xxxg2296xxx  is
not yet known.
in contrast, treatment with other antiangiogenic compounds (e.g., vegf antagonists that inhibit all vegf isoforms)

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

quantifying effects of  xxxg2424xxx  in oxygen-induced retinopathy

may reduce pathologic tufts, but may also prolong vaso-obliteration in ischemic retinas.23,35 this could lead to long-term
vascular abnormalities because the hypoxic drive that initiates
pathologic neovascularization may persist. vegf is known to
be critical for the normal development of the retinal vasculature. thus, it is not surprising that the inhibition of vegf may
delay revascularization of the superficial plexus. also, vegf
activity is known to be necessary for the maintenance of the
normal adult retinal vasculature. the loss of vegf activity
below a critical threshold is associated with pericyte loss,
which can result in subsequent vascular degeneration often
associated with diabetic retinopathy.36 in addition, a critical
level of vegf activity is required for normal development and
maintenance of retinal neurons.37 thus, as the angiostatic
properties of  xxxd328xxx  therapies are tested in clinical settings,
the long-term affects of vegf inhibition on superficial revascularization, retinal morphology, and retinal function should
be considered and experimentally examined. these studies
should be performed with a method of quantification that
allows whole retina analysis of obliteration as well as pathologic tuft formation in the same eye, such as the method
presented herein.
our data also suggest that vegf is not the sole mediator of
oir-associated pathologic neovascularization.  xxxg2424xxx ,
which does not directly block vegf or its receptors,14,15,17 has
potent angiostatic effects on long-term pathologic neovascularization. thus, even in the oir model, in which  xxxg1608xxx  has
been shown to be a critical mediator of pathologic neovascularization,23,38 other factors are likely to make critical contributions as well.23,39,40
advances in our understanding of angiogenesis have led to
the development of medical therapies to inhibit pathologic
neovascularization and to movement away from thermal lasermediated vaso-obliteration. although elimination of abnormal
vessels is desirable to avoid vision-threatening complications,
such as macular edema, traction retinal detachments, and vitreous hemorrhage, inhibition of neovasculature could also lead
to exacerbation of the underlying ischemia that initiates the
vascular proliferation to begin with. in this regard, it is important to think about vascular reconstruction and/or maturation
to relieve hypoxia-driven neovascularization, perhaps by the
development of compounds that may both inhibit abnormal
vessel development and promote physiological revascularization.41 such modified gene products with multiple static–trophic functions may provide an alternative to pure angiostatic
therapy, an activity that may have unwanted local and systemic
side effects in patients with ischemic and/or age-related retinopathies.42 fragments of trna synthetases appear to have
such dual properties, and the use of quantifiable imaging techniques to evaluate their effect on ocular tissue, such as those
discussed herein, should facilitate the development and assessment of such drugs.

acknowledgments
the authors thank members of the friedlander laboratory for many
helpful and insightful discussions; paul glidden of angiosyn for providing recombinant  xxxg2424xxx ; lois smith and members of her laboratory for generously providing technical assistance with regard to the
inos experiments and helping us correlate the different methods of
oir quantification.

references
1. aiello lp, pierce ea, foley ed, et al. suppression of retinal neovascularization in vivo by inhibition of vascular endothelial growth
factor (vegf) using soluble vegf-receptor chimeric proteins. proc
natl acad sci usa. 1995;92:10457–10461.

2133

2. cao y. antiangiogenic cancer therapy. semin cancer biol. 2004;
14:139 –145.
3. longo r, sarmiento r, fanelli m, capaccetti b, gattuso d, gasparini g. anti-angiogenic therapy: rationale, challenges and clinical
studies. angiogenesis. 2002;5:237–256.
4. gragoudas es, adamis ap, cunningham et, jr., feinsod m, guyer
dr. pegaptanib for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
n engl j med. 2004;351:2805–2816.
5. sottile j. regulation of angiogenesis by extracellular matrix. biochim biophys acta. 2004;1654:13–22.
6. gardiner ta, gibson ds, de gooyer te, de la cruz vf, mcdonald
dm, stitt aw. inhibition of  xxxg2296xxx  improves
physiological angiogenesis and reduces pathological neovascularization in ischemic retinopathy. am j pathol. 2005;166:637– 644.
7. madan a, penn js. animal models of oxygen-induced retinopathy.
front biosci. 2003;8: xxxd1030xxx  –  xxxd1043xxx .
8. smith le. pathogenesis of retinopathy of prematurity. acta paediatr suppl. 2002;91:26 –28.
9. ashton n. oxygen and the growth and development of retinal
vessels: in vivo and in vitro studies. the xx francis i. proctor
lecture. am j ophthalmol. 1966;62:412– 435.
10. hellstrom a, perruzzi c, ju m, et al. low  xxxg1144xxx  suppresses vegfsurvival signaling in retinal endothelial cells: direct correlation
with clinical retinopathy of prematurity. proc natl acad sci usa.
2001;98:5804 –5808.
11. smith le, wesolowski e, mclellan a, et al. oxygen-induced retinopathy in the mouse. invest ophthalmol vis sci. 1994;35:101–
111.
12. tzima e, reader js, irani-tehrani m, ewalt kl, schwartz ma,
schimmel p. biologically active fragment of a human trna synthetase inhibits fluid shear stress-activated responses of endothelial
cells. proc natl acad sci usa. 2003;100:14903–14907.
13. yu y, liu y, shen n, et al. crystal structure of human tryptophanyltrna synthetase catalytic fragment: insights into substrate recognition, trna binding, and angiogenesis activity. j biol chem.
2004;279:8378 – 8388.
14. tzima e, reader js, irani-tehrani m, ewalt kl, schwartz ma,
schimmel pv. e-cadherin links trna synthetase cytokine to antiangiogenic function. j biol chem. 2005;280:2405–2408.
15. wakasugi k, slike bm, hood j, et al. a human aminoacyl-trna
synthetase as a regulator of angiogenesis. proc natl acad sci usa.
2002;99:173–177.
16. otani a, kinder k, ewalt k, otero fj, schimmel p, friedlander m.
bone marrow-derived stem cells target retinal astrocytes and can
promote or inhibit retinal angiogenesis. nat med. 2002;8:1004 –
1010.
17. otani a, slike bm, dorrell mi, et al. a fragment of human  xxxg2425xxx  as
a potent antagonist of ocular angiogenesis. proc natl acad sci
usa. 2002;99:178 –183.
18. dorrell mi, aguilar e, friedlander m. retinal vascular development
is mediated by endothelial filopodia, a preexisting astrocytic template and specific r-cadherin adhesion. invest ophthalmol vis sci.
2002;43:3500 –3510.
19. bridonneau p, bunch s, tengler r, et al. purification of a highly
modified rna-aptamer: effect of complete denaturation during
chromatography on product recovery and specific activity. j chromatogr b biomed sci appl. 1999;726:237–247.
20. eyetechstudygroup. preclinical and phase 1a clinical evaluation of
an  xxxd328xxx  pegylated aptamer (eye001) for the treatment of
exudative age-related macular degeneration. retina. 2002;22:143–
152.
21. fruttiger m. development of the mouse retinal vasculature: angiogenesis versus vasculogenesis. invest ophthalmol vis sci. 2002;
43:522–527.
22. ishida s, yamashiro k, usui t, et al. leukocytes mediate retinal
vascular remodeling during development and vaso-obliteration in
disease. nat med. 2003;9:781–788.
23. ishida s, usui t, yamashiro k, et al. vegf164-mediated inflammation is required for pathological, but not physiological, ischemiainduced retinal neovascularization. j exp med. 2003;198:483– 489.
24. folkman j, d’amore pa. blood vessel formation: what is its molecular basis? cell. 1996;87:1153–1155.

2134

banin et al.

25. stetler-stevenson wg, yu ae. proteases in invasion: matrix metalloproteinases. semin cancer biol. 2001;11:143–152.
26. visse r, nagase h. matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors
of metalloproteinases: structure, function, and biochemistry. circ
res. 2003;92:827– 839.
27. raza sl, cornelius la. matrix metalloproteinases: pro- and antiangiogenic activities. j investig dermatol symp proc. 2000;5:47–
54.
28. sang qx. complex role of matrix metalloproteinases in angiogenesis. cell res. 1998;8:171–177.
29. yi x, mai lc, uyama m, yew dt. time-course expression of
 xxxg2413xxx  as related to the development
of the retinochoroidal vasculature in rats. exp brain res. 1998;
118:155–160.
30. smith le, shen w, perruzzi c, et al. regulation of  xxxg2413xxx -dependent retinal neovascularization by insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor. nat med. 1999;5:1390 –1395.
31. werdich xq, mccollum gw, rajaratnam vs, penn js. variable
oxygen and retinal vegf levels: correlation with incidence and
severity of pathology in a rat model of oxygen-induced retinopathy. exp eye res. 2004;79:623– 630.
32. apte rs, barreiro ra, duh e, volpert o, ferguson ta. stimulation
of neovascularization by the anti-angiogenic factor pedf. invest
ophthalmol vis sci. 2004;45:4491– 4497.
33. devy l, blacher s, grignet-debrus c, et al. the pro- or antiangiogenic effect of  xxxg2058xxx  is dose dependent. faseb j. 2002;16:147–154.
34. lambert v, munaut c, carmeliet p, et al. dose-dependent modulation of choroidal neovascularization by plasminogen activator

iovs, may 2006, vol. 47, no. 5

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

inhibitor type i: implications for clinical trials. invest ophthalmol
vis sci. 2003;44:2791–2797.
mcleod ds, taomoto m, cao j, zhu z, witte l, lutty ga. localization of vegf receptor-2 ( xxxg1274xxx / xxxg1274xxx ) and effects of blocking it in
oxygen-induced retinopathy. invest ophthalmol vis sci. 2002;43:
474 – 482.
darland dc, massingham lj, smith sr, piek e, saint-geniez m,
d’amore pa. pericyte production of cell-associated vegf is differentiation-dependent and is associated with endothelial survival.
dev biol. 2003;264:275–288.
robinson gs, ju m, shih sc, et al. nonvascular role for vegf:
 xxxg800xxx , 2 activity is critical for neural retinal development.
faseb j. 2001;15:1215–1217.
ozaki h, seo ms, ozaki k, et al. blockade of vascular endothelial
cell growth factor receptor signaling is sufficient to completely
prevent retinal neovascularization. am j pathol. 2000;156:697–
707.
smith le, kopchick jj, chen w, et al. essential role of growth
hormone in ischemia-induced retinal neovascularization. science.
1997;276:1706 –1709.
gardiner ta, gibson ds, de gooyer te, de la cruz vf, mcdonald
dm, stitt aw. inhibition of  xxxg2296xxx -␣ improves
physiological angiogenesis and reduces pathological neovascularization in ischemic retinopathy. am j pathol. 2005;166:637– 644.
otani a, friedlander m. retinal vascular regeneration. semin ophthalmol. 2005;20:43–50.
friedlander m. stem cells and retinal diseases. in: ryan sjh, schachat ap, wilkinson p, ed. retina. 4th ed. vol. 1, part 1, section 1.
new york: elsevier publishers; 2005:23–32.

