autoimmunity, 1991, vol. 10, pp. 319-331
reprints available directly from the publisher
photocopying permitted by license only

0 199 1 harwood academic publishers gmbh
printed in the united kingdom

review
the microsomallperoxidase antigen: modulation
of its expression in thyroid cells
luca chiovato and aldo pinchera
istituto di endocrinologia, university of pisa, viale del tirrenn 64,54018, tirrenia, pisa, italy

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

(received january 2 9 , 1 9 9 1 ; in final form june 1 1 , 1 9 9 1 )

evidence has accumulated in the last few years that the expression of the microsomal/peroxidase antigen
(m/tpo-ag) in thyroid cells is induced by tsh, through pathways which involve intracellular camp
accumulation and protein synthesis. these data have been found true in any thyroid system studied so far,
both in terms of immunologic and enzymatic activity of tpo. tsh and camp also increase the levels of the
specific mrna for tpo in thyroid cells from different species. whether this phenomenon is due to a direct
transcriptional regulation of the tpo gene, as shown in dog thyroid cells, or to posttranscriptional effects, as
it would appear in frtl-5 cells, remains to be clarified by future experiments. thyroid stimulating antibody
(tsab) of graves’ disease also stimulates the expression of m/tpo-ag. this finding gives further support to
the relevance of tsab in the pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism and explains the well known observation that
the “microsomal” antigen is particularly abundant in glands of graves’ patients. the modulation of m/tpoag surface expression by tsh can explain the decrease of circulating anti-mab observed during l-thyroxine
therapy in hypothyroid patients with hashimoto’s thyroiditis. other agents, such as  xxxd2594xxx  and sodium
iodide, which influence thyroid cell function, do not directly interfere with the expression of m/tpo-ag.
cytokines, such as  xxxd2373xxx , interleukin-i, and interleukin-6 have been shown to inhibit the tshinduced increase of tpo mrna, but further investigations are required to elucidate the exact role of cytokines in the regulation of m/tpo-ag expression.

key words: microsomal/peroxidase antigen, thyroid stimulating antibody (tsab). modulation of
m/tpo-ag by tsh and tsab.

(tpo) will be also discussed. these investigations
provided clear evidence that the expression of the
microsomal/peroxidase antigen (m/tpo-ag) in thyroid cells is dependent on tsh stimulation, through
pathways which involve camp production and protein synthesis. evidence was also provided that thyroid stimulating antibody (tsab) of graves’ disease
reproduces the effect of tsh in inducing m/tpo-ag
in thyroid cells.

introduction
humoral and cellular immune responses are both
involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders
of the thyroid gland, as detailed in other reviews on
this topic”: several antigen-antibody systems have
been identified, which involve different constituents
and products of the thyroid gland: thyroglobulin (tg);
the so-called microsomal (m) antigen, the second
antigen of the colloid; and antigen(s) related to the
 xxxd3368xxx  (tsh) receptor4. antibodies reacting with
thyroxine and triiodothyronine have also been
detected in some cases’. in this review, attention will
be focused on recent studies concerning the mechanisms responsible for the expression of the “microsomal” antigen (m-ag) on the surface and in the cytoplasm of thyroid cells. findings on the nature of
m-ag and its identification with  xxxg2320xxx 
address correspondence and requests for reprints to: dr. luca
chiovato. lstituto di endocrinologia, university of pisa, viale del
tirreno 64,56018, tirrenia, pisa, italy.

m-ag as a thyroid membrane
autoantigen
the presence of a thyroid specific autoantigen distinct
from tg was described over 30 years ago’.’. autoantibodies reacting with m-ag (anti-mab) were identified in sera of patients with hashimoto’s thyroiditis
and graves’ disease by complement
immunofluorescence (ifl) on unfixed thyroid sections’
and complement-dependent cytotoxicity on trypsinized thyroid cells’”,”.in the past years several other

319

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

320

l. chiovato a n d a. pinchera

techniques have been developed for the measurement
of anti-mab, including passive hemagglutinationi2,
r a d i o i m m u n o a ~ s a y s ’ ~and
- ’ ~elisa16.
preliminary morphological and biochemical evidencex suggested that m-ag was an insoluble intracytoplasmic lipoprotein associated with the smooth
endoplasmic reticulum and possibly located in the
vesicles transporting newly synthesized thyroglobulin
towards the apical pole of the follicular cells”. autoantibodies reacting with thyroid cell surface antigens
were also detected in early studies using mixed hemadsorption” or ifl on human viable thyroid cells in
suspension“). the corresponding autoantigens were
found to be located on the plasma membrane, as the
tsh-receptor recognized by tsab, yet they were
immunologically distinct from it2”. since in the classical view of thyroid autoimmunity m-ag was regarded
as a typically intracytoplasmic component, the precise
relationship between surface reacting antibodies and
anti-mab remained to be elucidated. in the early 80s
this concept was challenged by studies carried out in
this and other laboratories using a radioimmunoassay”.” and an indirect ifl technique23 on viable
human thyroid cells in primary culture. these investigations provided evidence that m-ag is expressed
both in the cytoplasm and on the surface of thyroid
cells. it was also shown that cell surface m-ag was
involved in the complement mediated cytotoxicity
produced by anti-mab on nontrypsinized thyroid
cells”. these observations were further strengthened
by the demonstration that m-ag is expressed on the
apical-microvillar pole of human thyroid follicular
cell^'^, where it might be bound in vivo by antimab’. this selective localization of m-ag at the apical pole was confirmed by subsequent immunoelectron microscopic s t ~ d i e s ~ ‘ , ~the
’ . unifying term of
microsomal-microvillar antigen was therefore proposed to identify the structure recognized both in the
cytoplasm and on the cell surface by anti-mab”.
interestingly, the expression on the cell surface of
cytoplasmic “microsomal” autoantigens is by no
means specific of the thyroid gland, since it has also
been observed in gastric parietal cells’x and adrenocortical cells’” cultured in vitrw.
the demonstration that m-ag is expressed on the
cell surface has important pathogenetic implications,
providing clues to understand the availability of this
autoantigen to the immune system. further relevance
for the surface expression of m-ag derived from the
observation of hanafusa et a1..70that hla class i1
antigens (dr) are abnormally expressed on the surface of thyroid cells in glands obtained from patients
with hashimoto’s thyroiditis or graves’ disease.
these findings have been recently confirmed by
immunocytochemical experiments performed on open
follicles and cryostat sections of thyroid tissue
obtained from graves’ glands”. in some follicles

hla-dr immunoreactivity was equally expressed at
both apical and basolateral domains of the cell surface, indicating that hla molecules and tpo may be
present in the same (apical) site of the plasma membrane. class i1 antigens, which are consistently undetectable in normal thyroids, are implicated in antigen
presentation to t lymphocytes. the finding that hladr and m-ag can be simultaneously expressed on
thyroid cells led to the hypothesis that follicular cells
might directly “present” their surface autoantigens to
the immune system3*, thus initiating and/or maintaining the autoimmune reaction. this hypothesis
received support from experiments showing that
hla-dr+ human thyroid cells may actually behave
as antigen-presenting cells”. furthermore, hla-dr+
thyroid cells from graves’ glands were shown to
induce proliferation of autologous t cells cloned
either from lymphocytes infiltrating the thyroid34, or
from peripheral t cells3’. the question of whether the
abnormal expression of hla-dr on thyroid cells can
be regarded as the first trigger of autoimmune reactions, or that it is the consequence of locally produced
lymphokines (mainly  xxxd2373xxx ) from infiltrating lymphocytes”, is still a matter of dicussion.
moreover, when considering the pathogenetic mechanisms involved in thyroid autoimmune disorders, we
face the intriguing problem that, in intact polarized
follicles, m-ag is confined to the apical border of thyroid cells where it is sequestered from circulating
lymphocytes. several hypotheses have been proposed
to explain how autoantigens at the luminal surface of
thyroid cells may be exposed to allow recognition by
the immune system. primary tissue injury, due to still
unidentified viruses or to cytotoxic immune mechanisms, could result in the breakdown of follicular structures. appearance of m-ag on the basal membrane, as
a consequence of inverted thyroid cell polarity, was
obtained in human thyroid follicles cultured in suspension24, but so far this phenomenon was never
observed in viva. emperipolesis of lymphocytes
between thyroid follicular cells could also occur3‘, and
i t would be relevant to an understanding of how m-ag
may be exposed to the immune system. whatever
sequence may be envisaged to explain the initiation of
thyroid autoimmunity, there is little doubt that, once
expressed on the surface of follicular cells, hla-dr
contributes together with thyroid autoantigens, such
as m-ag, to the perpetuation of the immune reaction
directed against the thyroid gland.
nature o f m-ag and its identification
with  xxxg2320xxx 
despite intensive investigation, the nature of the
microsomal antigen remained essentially unknown
over almost 3 decades. successful solubilization of

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

expression of m/tpo antigen

this antigen’7 provided the basis for its subsequent
biochemical characterization as a glycoprotein with a
molecular weight of about 100-1 10 kda”x-4’.subsequent studies initiated by the group of carayon4’
clearly showed that the so called “microsomal”
antigen is  xxxg2320xxx  (tpo), the enzyme
involved in the iodination of tyrosine residues within
tg molecules4’. in the thyroid, tpo, which is a membrane bound protein, is localized both in the cytoplasm and on the apical cell surface of follicular cells,
but it appears that the oxidation reactions catalyzed by
tpo occur mainly at the apical surface. as recently
reviewed by furmaniak and rees smith44in this journal, there are several lines of evidence proving the
identity of m-ag and tpo. affinity chromatography
using pure tpo coupled to sepharose specifically
absorbs anti-mab4’. autoimmune sera containing
anti-mab immunoprecipitate highly purified tpo,
bind to tubes or plates coated with tpo and inhibit the
binding of monoclonal anti-tpo antibodies to
tp04’.4s.46.as a consequence, there is a good correlation between anti-mab and anti-tpo antibodies
detected in sera from patients with hashimoto’s thyroiditis and graves’ d i ~ e a s e ~ ” ‘ ~analysis
.
by sdspage shows that purified tpo has the same molecular weight ( 1 10 kda) as m-ag40,42.4s.
the final proof
that tpo is m-ag derived from the successful identification of the complete nucleotide sequence of the
gene coding for the
(figure 1). indeed,
comparison of sequences of complementary dna
(cdna) constructed independently for tpo and
human “microsomal” antigen demonstrated that the 2
cdnas coded for the same p r ~ t e i n ” ~ . ’ ~ .
the subcellular localization of tpo in rat and
human thyroid follicular cells has been extensively
studied using electron microscopic cytochemical and
immunogold techniques”. in agreement with previous

32 1

data regarding m- xxxd94xxx ’-’7, these studies showed that
tpo activity is largely present in intracellular compartments, being mainly located on the nuclear envelope and in exocytotic vesicles, which contain thyroglobulin. tpo is also present at the apical cell surface
where it is co-transported together with thyroglobu]ins’ . quantitative evaluation by an immunogold
method showed that 90% of apical tpo is associated
with microvilli, being organized in microdomains.
available evidence indicates that tpo is not internalized by macropinocytosis and that micropinocytosis is
probably the predominant internalization pathway”.
regulation by tsh o f m/tpo-ag
expression in thyroid cells
it was a common observation of early in vitro
that human thyroid cells gradually lose cell
surface m-ag during the first week in culture. this
phenomenon had been already reported for surface
autoantigens identified by mixed hemadsorptions6,
and closely parallels the progressive loss of intracytoplasmic “microsomal” antigen in cells maintained
under the same condition^^^. however, the mechanisms leading to the expression of m/tpo-ag on the
membrane of follicular cells were largely unknown
until it was shown that m-ag is also present on the
surface of a peculiar strain of differentiated rat thyroid
cells (frtl-s), and that in this experimental model its
expression is modulated by tshsx.
studies in frtl-s cells

frtl-s cells are a peculiar strain of differentiated rat
thyroid cells grown in continuous culture”. these
cells have a tsh-responsive adenylate cyclase sys-

from its cdna sequence. arrows point
to the end of putative signal peptides.
the transmembrane segmenl is boxed.
putative n-glycosylation sites in tpo
~ l ~ ~ 6 ~ ~ p p u ~ v ~ c ~ ~ ~ ~ s ~ ~ t
are underlined. the peptide encoded by
of mar is
the c2 autoantigenic
- region
overlined. (courtesy of doctors f.
libert, m. ludgate. g. vassart.)

5*--.
aut-ti‘bic
d o l l cz
~-5
n 1 4 f f i r o h c l f f i ~ f c c l p r l b t p m u i t a i ~ i l f v m k i l d l y i ( h p o n i d v * i e * l * b n f w ~ t c p l f a c l l g k ~ ~ d ~ ~ n s ~ ~ a o ~ l 6 ~ s l’r9h
srviclrn

139r----

-%------*

79(~--ffii-uil

~

~

t c l 1 7 ( v r m a ~ f ~ v c k w s d i e s c o s l ~ l e a ~ t f w d d k c g i p e ~ ~ d i v ~ k e s g ~ v l v y s c ~ 8
~ t ~7 ~

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

322

l. chiovato a n d a. pinchera

ternh"-(", are dependent on tsh for their growth", and tigate whether tsh could be responsible for the
maintain the functional characteristics of iodide expression of m/tpo-ag in primary cultures of
uptakeh4 and thyroglobulin synthesis" for indefinite human thyroid cells prepared from graves' and nonperiods in culture. frtl-5 cells are also responsive to toxic goiters and maintained in the same medium used
tsab of graves' disease, in terms of both adenylate for frtl-5 cells.
cyclase activation and stimulation of cell growthho,h'.hh. preliminary studies were devoted to ascertain the
a further advantage of this experimental model is that specificity of the ifl technique for recognition of
frtl-5 cells are grown in a well-defined medium m/tpo-ag in human thyroid cells. preabsorption
(coon's modified f- 12) which contains low amounts experiments, using purified human tpo and control
of adult calf serum ( 5 % ) and a six-hormone mixture tissue, led to the same results found with frtl-5
including insulin (1.6 pm), cortisol (10 nm), trans- cells. furthermore, by means of a double ifl proferrin (62.5 nm), i-glycyl-histidyl-lysine (25 nm), cedure, using a monoclonal anti-tpo antibody and
human sera containing anti-mab, tpo and m-ag
somatostatin (6.25 nm) and tsh (300 pu/ml).
using an indirect immunofluorescence (ifl) tech- were simultaneously identified in the cytoplasm and
nique" and autoimmune sera containing high titers of on the surface of human thyroid cells cultured in
anti-mab, m-ag was detected on the surface and in medium containing tsh'". the distribution and the
the cytoplasm of frtl-5 cells cultured in medium pattern of fluorescence obtained with the monoclonal
containing tsh. indeed, a staining of frtl-5 cells by anti-tpo antibody was indistinguishable from that
ifl was obtained with all sera containing anti-mab, found using human sera containing anti-mab and the
but not with control sera. moreover, a rough corre- same cells were stained by the two antibodies. morelation between the degree of positivity by ifl and over, in this double ifl technique it was necessary to
anti-mab titer in serum was found, in agreement with incubate thyroid cells with the monoclonal anti-tpo
data previously reported using human t h y r o ~ y t e s ' ~ . antibody as a first step, since preincubation with
experiments were also performed to ascertain whether human anti-mab abolished the subsequent binding of
the m-ag of frtl-s cells could be identified with the monoclonal antibody. these results confirmed that
tpo, as shown by experiments performed with human the antigen recognized by anti-mab in human thyroid
thyroid tissue4'.4s'jy. for this purpose human tpo was cells was tpo.
when human thyroid cells were maintained in
purified by affinity chromatography according to the
method described by czarnocka et u/?, taking advan- medium containing tsh, m/tpo-ag could be identtage of a specific monoclonal antibody. the purified ified by ifl in the cytoplasm and on the surface of
preparation of tpo accounted for most if not all the most thyrocytes for at least 30 days of culture. as preantigenic material recognized by anti-mab4"". pre- viously shown in frtl-5 cells, after some days of
absorption experiments showed that, similarly to solu- culture without tsh, m/tpo-ag disappeared from
bilized human thyroid microsornes, purified human the surface and the cytoplasm of human thyroid cells
tpo completely abolished the binding of anti-mab to derived from either nontoxic or graves' goiters'".
frtl-5 cells. no inhibition was obtained by pre- however, the time of tsh deprivation required for
absorption with microsomes from control tissues or
human tg". these data indicated that the antigen
recognized by anti-mab in frtl-5 cells was indeed
0 = htc graves' g o i t e r
tpo.
0
a
after tsh withdrawal from the culture medium, the
= htc nontoxic g o i t e r
t
m/tpo-ag present on the surface of frtl-s cells
= frtl-5 c e l l s
l
was reduced by 30%, after 1 day and to an undetect8
60
n
able amount after 3
a similar pattern was
c
observed for the cytoplasmic antigen. readdition of
0
tsh (250 pu/ml) to the culture medium of frtl-5
.-w$
cells lacking m/tpo-ag was followed by the
a
0
reappearance of surface and cytoplasmic m/tpo-ag
c
which was already detectable at 24 hr and maximal at
48 hrsx.hx . these data demonstrated that the expression
m
-2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
of mltpo-ag in frtl-5 cells was related to their
functional status and was modulated by tsh.
days a f t e r t s h w i t h d r a w a l
i f

stirdies in human thyroid cells
the above results, which were obtained in a well
defined in t ~ i t r othyroid system, prompted us to inves-

figure 2 time of disappearance of m/tpo-ag from the surface of
frtl-5 cells and human thyroid cells (htc) derived from graves'
or nontoxic soiters. the percentage of cells retaining the surface
antigen. as detected by ifi. t i t different times after t s h withdrawal.
is \hewn on the ordinate. at least 200 cells were observed/point.

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

expression of m/tpo antigen

(b)

figure 3 indirect ifl performed with a serum containing high
levels of anti-mab on human thyroid cells cultured without tsh for
12 days (a) and then challenged with the hormone (3oopu/mi) for
72 hr (b). a strong dotted fluorescence is visible on the surface of
cells recultured with tsh.

the disappearance of m/tpo-ag was shorter in
frtl-5 cells than in human thyroid cells. longer periods of tsh starvation were also required for the disappearance of m/tpo-ag in primary cultures from
graves' goiters with respect to cells derived from
nontoxic goiters (figure 2). at variance with the
frtl-5 cell system, a limited percentage (i-5%) of
human thyroid cells from some graves' goiters
retained their positivity despite prolonged deprivation
of tsh (30 day^)^". the latter phenomenon can be
explained by the presence in the original goiter of
autonomous follicles already independent from tsh
control in vivn7'.
reexposure to tsh (0.1-100 mu/ml) of thyroid
cells with undetectable m/tpo-ag led to the
reappearance of this antigen (figure 3). the effect of
tsh was dose and time-dependent in the range of
24-72 hr. the minimal concentration of tsh able to

323

restore m/tpo-ag was greater in human thyroid cells
than in frtl-5 cells and varied in primary cultures
obtained from different goiter^^^,^^. while 100% of
frtl-5 cells recovered m/tpo-ag after tsh readdition, the maximal percentage of human thyroid
cells recovering their positivity for this antigen ranged
from 30% to 70% in different primary cultures"'. failure to recover m/tpo-ag in all cells can be attributed
to a progressive reduction of tsh receptors in cultured thyrocytes, as suggested by lissitzky et a1." and
bidey et d7'.in agreement with this hypothesis,  xxxd1742xxx  (see below) was able to recruit a number of
m/tpo-ag positive cells (up to 80%) greater than that
obtained with any dose of tsh. since primary cultures prepared from human thyroid glands also contain a variable amount of nonepithelial cells, it is not
surprising that m/tpo-ag could not be recovered i n
100% of monolayer cells.
the above results, indicating that the expression of
m/tpo-ag in rat and human thyroid cells is induced
by tsh, are in agreement with studies showing that in
cultures of
sheep", and pig" thyroid cell tpo
activity is tsh-dependent. similar results were
obtained in experiments of in vilw manipulation of rat
 xxxg2320xxx  activity7'. furthermore, the half
life of  xxxg2320xxx  activity in hypophysectomized
is compatible with the time course of induction of m/tpo-ag in frtl-5 cells and its loss after
removal of tsh from the culture medium. finally,
using electron microscopic immunocytochemistry it
has been shown that in thyroids from l-thyroxine
treated rats (i.e. with suppressed tsh) exocytic vesicles appear that, despite containing tg, are deprived
of tpo activity3'.
other studies indicate that tsh is also necessary
for the rapid transfer of intracellular m/tpo-ag to the
apical plasma membrane. indeed, an increased amount
of peroxidase activity along the apical plasma membrane has been shown by autoradiography in tshinjected rats'", and by a cytochemical method upon in
t'itim tsh stimulation of guinea-pig thyroid'". it
appears quite possible that this phenomenon is related
to a rapid transfer of intracellular tpo to the apical
plasma membrane by exocytosis.
involvement o f camp in the
tsh-dependent modulation of m/tpo-ag
tsh action on thyroid cells is mediated by campdependent and camp-independent pathways".". to
investigate whether the induction of m/tpo-ag by
tsh was camp-mediated, several agents, known to
increase intracellular camp, were tested for their
ability to mimic the effect of tshhx7"
(table 1). two
stimulators of the adenylate cyclase-camp system in
several tissuesx'.'', i.e. cholera toxin and  xxxd1742xxx ,

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

324

l. chiovato and a. pinchera

were both able to induce m/tpo-ag. furthermore, in although the precise postreceptor mechanisms
the majority of primary cultures of human thyroid involved after activation of the  xxxg1145xxx  tyrocells, the percentage of m/tpo-ag-positive cells sine kinase have not been identifiedx8. experiments
recruited after addition of a high dose of  xxxd1742xxx  was were also performed in human thyroid cells using epigreater (70-80%) than that obtained with the highest dermal growth factor (egf). egf, which activates its
concentration of tsh.  xxxd2388xxx  egf protein  xxxg2198xxx  receptor, stimulates
( xxxd2388xxx ), which increases the intracellular camp con- growth and inhibits some functional activities of thytent by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, was also effect- roid cells, i.e. iodide uptake, efflux and organification,
moreive in the induction of m/tpo-ag. indeed,  xxxd2388xxx  both in the presence and the absence of tsh89,90
amplified the effect of a low dose of tsh and, when over, egf was found to reduce the accumulation of
added alone to cell cultures, it was able to reproduce camp in tsh-stimulated thyroid cells". none of
the effect of the hormone after a longer lag period. in these growth factors, which activate intracellular pathagreement with the above results, the camp analog, ways independent of camp, was effective in inducing
8-bromo-camp, also induced m/tpo-ag. similar fin- the expression of m/tpo-ag6x.7"(table i), although
dings were obtained in frtl-5 cells and in human used at concentrations able to stimulate growth in
frtl-5 and human thyroid cells.
thyroid ~ e l l s ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .
similar findings, showing that egf and tpa even
thus, these findings suggested that camp is one of
the intracellular signals by which tsh modulates the inhibit the enzymatic activity of tpo induced by
expression of m/tpo-ag. however, the above results tsh, have been reported in pig thyroid follicles main~ ~ .our knowledge the
did not exclude that camp-independent pathways, tained in suspension ~ u 1 t u r - e to
activated by tsh or other factors, could also be direct effect on m/tpo-ag expression of the ip3
involved in the expression of this autoantigen. in par- branch of the ca++-phosphatidylinositolpathway has
ticular, the regulation of thyroid cells by tsh not been studied so far.
these results give strong support to the concept that
involves a second major intracellular signalling system: the ca"-phosphatidylinositol cascade. in this the adenylate cyclase-camp system is the intracellupathway phospholipase c hydrolyzes phosphatidyl- lar pathway involved in the expression of m/tpo-ag
inositol 4 3 phosphate generating two signal mol- in thyroid cells. the above findings, obtained by meaecules: myo-inositol 1,4,5 phosphate (ip3) and diacyl- suring immunological m/tpo-ag, are in agreement
glycerol (dag). ip3 is responsible for the increase of with the observation that in primary cultures of dog
intracellular ca++, and the subsequent activation of thyroid cells the enzymatic activity of tpo is modugaff- and ca++-calmodulin-dependentphosphorylase lated by tsh through camp^^. they are also in keepkinase and phosphodiesterase. in the other branch of ing with the current concepts on hormonal regulation
this pathway dag activates thyroid protein kinase c. of iodination in the thyroidx2.
to explore the possibility that the ca"-phosphatidylinositol cascade could be involved in the expression of
m/tpo-ag, frtl-5 cells were challenged with regulation of the m/tpo-ag gene
tetradecanoyl-phorbol- 13-acetate (tpa) which stimu- expression
lates cell growth in thyroid cellsx5.x6
by mimicking the
action of dag on protein kinase c"z.x7.an alternative the requirement for new protein synthesis of the
pathway promoting frtl-5 cell growth is stimulated tsh-induced expression of m/tpo-ag was demonby  xxxg1144xxx , and it is also independent of camp, strated in ifl experiments by the blocking effect of
cycloheximide, an inhibitor of protein synthesis at the
polyribosome l e ~ e l ~  xxxd1800xxx -d,
~~~".
a selective
table 1 induction of m/tpo-ag in frtl-5 cells or human thyroid
inhibitor
of
dna
transcription,
was
also
able
to precells previously deprived of tsh for 7-15 days 48 hr after addition
to cultures of tsh. cholera toxin,  xxxd1742xxx ,  xxxd2388xxx , 8-br-camp, vent the tsh-induced reappearance of m/tpo-ag on
tsab-igg, nai, or  xxxg1144xxx .
the surface of frtl-5 cellshx. with regard to these
experiments it is worth noting that, although some cell
addition
frtl-5 l ells
human rhvroid c ellr
death (10-20% of the total number), occurred during
+++*
+
tsh (0.25 mu/ml)
the incubation with protein synthesis inhibitors, the
tsh ( i00 mu/ml)
+++
++
viability of cells remaining attached to coverslips and
++
+
cholera toxin (10 pm)
used for ifl staining was almost 100%. taken
 xxxd1742xxx  (so p m )
+++
++t
+
+
 xxxd2388xxx  (0.5 mm)
together the above results provided indirect evidence
f
+
x-br-camp (0.5 mm)
that messenger rna (mrna) formation and subtsab-igg (2 mg/ml)
+++
++
sequent protein synthesis are necessary for the tshnai(i0mm)
induced expression of m/tpo-ag.
 xxxg1144xxx  (100 ng/ml)
the availability of  xxxg2320xxx  cdna'"'
led
to the demonstration that its mrna accumulates i n

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

expression of mrpo antigen

the cytoplasm of dog thyroid cells after tsh stimulation". in the same culture system, it was shown by
in v i m run-on transcription experiments that the
effect of tsh occurs at the level of the transcription
of the gene, and that it is mediated by camp'*.'^. as
recently reviewed by corvilain et a/.'*, the regulation
of tpo gene in dog thyroid cells appears to correspond to the model of group i camp-regulated
genes": ( 1 ) it is rapidly (within 1 hr) activated by
camp, tsh", or  xxxd1742xxx "'; (2) it is insensitive to
cycloheximide, suggesting a direct effect independent
from the synthesis of transcription factor(s)"'; (3) the
control by tsh does not require insulin stimulation,
the latter hormone being without effect by itselp2; (4)
a sequence close to the canonical camp responsive
element has been demonstrated in the p r ~ m o t e r ' ~ .
similar results, indicating that the regulation of
tpo-gene expression is tsh-dependent and campmediated, have been obtained in human thyroid cells
in primary culture", and in sheep thyroid cells". at
variance with the dog model, the induction of tpo
mrna by tsh in human thyroid cells is blocked by
cycloheximide, suggesting the need for the synthesis
of transcription factor(s)". in the same cell system,
insulin and  xxxg1144xxx  do not increase tpo mrnay6,while
tpa even decreases the basal levels of this mrnayx.
evidence that tsh regulates the levels of tpo
mrna was also obtained in frtl-5 cells'"-'"'. the
effect of the hormone on tpo mrna is dose- and
time-dependent, it is camp mediated and is not
blocked by cycloheximideyy~'"~j.
insulin and  xxxg1144xxx  have
only a small effect on tpo mrna levels by comparison to tsh'o".l(ll, while tpa antagonizes the action of
tshi("l. however, data in frtl-5 cells importantly
differ from those in dog thyroid cells in that tsh,
while raising steady state levels of cytoplasmic tpo
mrna, apparently does not increase the transcription
rate of its gene in run-on assays on isolated
nuclei". 100. indeed, nuclei prepared from tshdeprived or tsh-stimulated frtl-5 cells generated
similar quantities of labeled tpo mrna transcripts".
the absence of a tsh effect on tpo gene expression
in frtl-5 cells was demonstrated despite a simultaneously measurable effect on thyroglobulin gene
expression, and despite the use of a homologous
probe""'. similar experiments performed on nuclei isolated from dog thyroid cells in primary culture led to
different results, indicating that the expression of the
gene coding for tpo is stimulated by tsh and  xxxd1742xxx ". although a true species difference is possible
to explain the discrepancy between frtl-5 cells and
dog thyroid cells, i t is also plausible that technical differences between dog primary and the continuous rat
culture system influenced the results. in this regard,
conditions necessary to pretreat thyroid cells to
achieve a basal state, such as low or no serum and no
tsh for 3-5 days, could also play a role by differ-

325

ently affecting tsh-related functions in primary cultures with respect to continuous culture systems. in
any case, this discrepancy appears to be a real system
difference which will require future resolution. conflicting results have also been obtained in transfection
experiments in which the functional activity of the
promoter for human tpo gene was explored. indeed,
evidence for a camp-mediated transcriptional regulation of the human tpo gene by tsh was reported
by abramowicz et ul.'"', while no effect on the tpo
promoter activity by tsh and camp was found by
foti et ~ 1 . ' "the
~ discrepancy aside, it may be important to understand the mechanism by which tsh could
enhance the cytoplasmic levels of tpo mrna in
frtl-5 cells without affecting the transcription of the
correspondent gene. a tentative explanation of these
findings is that tsh increases tpo mrna by a nontranscriptional mechanism". the steady state level of
a specific mrna in a cell represents a balance
between the production rate and the degradation of
this mrna. therefore, it has been suggested that tsh
could reduce the degradation rate of tpo mrna in
frtl-5 cells, similarly to that found for regulation of
specific mrnas by other hormones such as estrog e n ~ ' and
" ~ glucocorticoids'".
in general, data on the regulation of the t p o gene
are in good agreement with studies showing that tsh
and camp increase tpo measured immunologically
in frtl-5 and human thyroid cells. however, two
inconsistencies, both observed in frtl-5 cells,
deserve discussion:  xxxg1144xxx  did not induce m/tpo-ag,
as detected by ifl, and  xxxd1800xxx -d blocked the
expression of m/tpo-ag produced by tsh. the latter
finding suggested a transcriptional control of m/tpoag expression. in this regard, it is relevant to note
that, even in dog thyroid cell primary cultures,
changes of tpo enzyme activity correlate only in part
with tpo mrna levels". this implies that other fdctors beside tpo mrna must be taken into account
when considering the full expression of bioactive and
immunoreactive tpo. these could include changes in
the stability or in the turnover rate of the tpo protein
itself, and the need for factor(s) involved in the transfer of intracellular tpo to the apical plasma membrane by exocytosis.
stimulation o f m/tpo-ag expression
by tsab
as predicted by experiments with adenylate cyclase
stimulators, the addition of tsab igg ( 2 mg/ml) to
frtl-5 cells or human thyroid cells lacking m/tpoag after tsh deprivation, induced the reappearance
of this autoantigen on the cell surface"". in the same
experimental conditions this igg produced a 5-10
fold increase of intracellular camp. these obser-

326

l. chiovato and a. pinchera
60

vations also suggested that tsab bound in vivo to follicular cells could explain the delayed disappearance
of m/tpo-ag observed in primary cultures from
graves' glands with respect to those derived from
nontoxic goiters.
the finding that tsab stimulates the expression of
mltpo-ag gives further support to the relevance of
this autoantibody in the pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism, and explains why m-ag is so abundant in
thyroid glands of graves' d i ~ e a s e ' " ~ .

50
40

= tsh ( 1 mu/ml) ( 7 2 h)

= tsh

+  xxxd2594xxx 

(72 h)

30
20

10

0

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

effects of other agents affecting
thyroid cell function on the
expression of m/tpo-ag
 xxxd2594xxx  (mmi), a drug blocking the enzymatic
activity of  xxxg2320xxx , could be considered a
putative inhibitor of m/tpo-ag expression following
the well known observation that circulating anti-mab
decreases in thyrotoxic graves' patients treated with
mmi io8, i09. mmi inhibits peroxidase activity, iodination and the autoregulatory action of iodide in
frtl-5 thyroid cells""-"*. mmi also enhances tshincreased thyroglobulin mrna levelst0', suggesting
that thyroglobulin gene expression is inhibited by the
iodide autoregulatory system i n frtl-5 cells. however, when added together with tsh, this drug is
unable to block either the expression of immunologically detected m/tpo-ag7' (figure 4), or to affect
tpo mrna levels""'.
clinical observations have suggested an association
between iodide intake and the occurrence of autoimmune thyroiditis in man"'. this association has
also been demonstrated in experimental models of
thyroiditis in genetically susceptible hick en''^ and
rats"' on high iodine diet. the possibility that iodide
could directly influence the expression of m/tpo-ag
was checked in human thyroid cells, but nai p e r se
was unable to induce m/tpo-ag in the absence of
tsh7".
recently, attention has been focused on the role of
cytokines, not only for their activity in triggering
and/or maintaining thyroid autoimmune reactions, but
also for their possible interaction with thyroid function'. this concept derives from several in vitro
experiments, but the in vivo relevance of these observations remains to be established. among the various
cytokines,  xxxd2373xxx  (gamma-ifn) was found
to produce a decrease of several tsh-dependent functions, such as the release of thyroid hormones and tg
secretion in human thyroid cellstth,or cell growth in
frtl-5 cell^"^."^. a similar inhibition of the above
functions was observed when agents increasing intracellular camp or dibutyryl-camp were used as
stimulators, suggesting that the blocking activity of
gamma-ifn is exerted at a site distal to camp forrna-

figure 4 percentage of thyroid cells positive for surface mdpoag found in parallel cultures obtained from a graves' goiter which
were maintained for 12 days in medium deprived of tsh (sh
medium), and then challenged with tsh alone (10 mu/ml), tsh
plus  xxxd2594xxx  (2 mm) or tsh plus cycloheximide (10 pm).

tionllh,117
. therefore, gamma-ifn inhibits several
tsh-dependent differentiated functions of thyroid
cells, but, surprisingly, it enhances both basal and
tsh-stimulated radioiodine ~ p t a k e " ~ ~interleukin
"~.
1
(il-i) is a cytokine produced by monocytes and has
pleiomorphic and widespread biological actions12".
the effects on thyroid cells of 1l-1 have been recently
evaluated, but the results obtained are rather conflicting 1.121-123 . an inhibitory activity of pharmacological
doses of il-1 has been reported on tsh-dependent
camp accumulation, tg secretion and radioiodine
uptake in human thyroid cells. however, lower concentrations of this cytokine apparently have a stimulating effect on t g secretion and camp accumulation.
differences in culture conditions and in the sensitivity
of target cells may account for some of these discrepancies, since recombinant il-i beta was found either
to inhibit or to stimulate the camp response to tsh
in normal or graves' thyroid cells, respectively"'.
more recently, yamashita ef u i . ' ? ~ provided evidence
that il-i inhibits tsh-stimulated tg gene expression
in cultured human thyroid cells. further experiments,
performed using a cdna probe for tpo, indicated
that both gamma-ifn'25and il-1"' are able to inhibit
the tsh-stimulated tpo mrna production in human
thyrocytes. this effect of cytokines is probably
mediated through an inhibition of the camp pathway.
the effect on thyroid cell function of  xxxg1181xxx 
(il-6), a cytokine with a marked activity on the induction of differentiation of b lymphocytes"", was also
studied. il-6 has been reported to inhibit tshinduced tpo gene expression1" and camp production in human thyroid cells'2x, while no effect on
camp generation was found in frtl-5 cells'".
the above findings indicate that the role of cytokines in the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmune diseaes may be more complex than expected only a few
years ago. moreover, it has been suggested that thyroid cells might not only be the target of il-1 and il-

expression o f m/tpo antigen

a

120,

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

321

b

oj

oj
i

0

1

i

i

12
24
months of therapy

6

1

4

1

36

48

0

1

1

1

24
12
6
months of t h e r a p y

i

1

36

48

figure 5 changes of anti-mab serum levels in hypothyroid patients with hashimoto’s thyroiditis treated with suppressive doses of lthyroxine (panel a), and in euthyroid patients with hashimoto’s thyroiditis (panel b) submitted to the same treatment. results are expressed
as percentage of the pretreatment anti-mab level. (from chiovato rt u/.’~”,
with the permission of the publisher.)

6, but could also produce these cytokines. therefore, a
dr+ thyroid cell producing il-1 and il-6 might be
considered a fully functioning antigen-presenting cell,
able to trigger autoimmune reactions without the
involvement of macrophages. this point still remains
to be solved’29,and, among other investigations, studies on the immunological expression of m/tpo-ag on
thyrocytes challenged with cytokines will be necessary to corroborate or reject this hypothesis.
clinical relevance o f the tsh-induced
expression o f m/tpo-ag
the simultaneous expression of m/tpo-ag and hladr on follicular cells has been proposed as a trigger
of thyroid autoimmunity”, and may be responsible for
the perpetuation of the autoimmune process directed
against the thyroid gland. indirect evidence supporting the key role played by the surface expression of
m/tpo-ag derives from a clinical study on the
changes of circulating anti-mab in patients with
euthyroid or hypothyroid hashimoto’s thyroiditis

after the initiation of l-thyroxine therapy’”. a significant reduction of anti-mab levels was found only in
hypothyroid hashimoto’s thyroiditis, whereas no significant change was detected in euthyroid patients,
whether treated or untreated (figure 5). moreover, the
decrease of circulating anti-mab appeared to be correlated with the reduction of serum tsh concentrations produced by l-thyroxine treatment. taking
into account the observation that the expression of
m/tpo-ag is stimulated by tsh, it can be inferred
that the reduction of circulating tsh under l-thyroxine could hamper the presentation of this autoantigen
to the immune system, thus blocking the stimulus to
further antibody production. this interpretation
acquires particular relevance in view of other findings
indicating that tsh enhances the expression of hladr produced by gamma-ifn i n human thyroid cells.
in this study’”, optimal concentrations of gamma-ifn
(100-1000 u/mi) induced hla-dr in the majority of
thyroid cells in primary culture. tsh, added in
conjunction with a suboptimal concentration of
gamma-ifn (10 u/ml), markedly enhanced the
expression of hla-dr, the effect of the two stimu-

328

l. chiovato and a pinchera

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

lators being synergistic. the latter phenomenon could
also explain the simultaneous expression of tpo and
hla-dr on thyroid cell; i.e. suboptimal concentrations of gamma-ifn should not affect tpo
expression.

3. volpe r. autoimmune thyroid disease. a perspectivc. mo/
biol m6.d 1986: 3: 287-326
4. pinchera a , fenri gf. vitti p, chiovato l, bartalena l. macchia e, mariotti s . significance of thyroid autoantibodies i l l
autoimmune thyroid disease. in: walfish pc. wall jr, volpe
r, eds. a j ~ l o i n j ~ i u i i i l ! urid
.
the 7’h!.i-cjin‘. toronto: academic

press, 19x5; 139-151
5. staeheli v. vallotton mr. burger a. detection of human antithyroxine and antitriiodothyronine antibodies in different thymerub 1975: 41: 669-675
roid conditions. .i cliri entloc~t~inol
conclusions
6 . trotter wr. belyavin g. wadham a. precipitating and complement-fixing antibodies in haqhimoto’s disease. proc, ko?
evidence has accumulated in the last few years that
so(, men‘ 1957: 50: 96 1-968
the expression of m/tpo-ag in thyroid cells is
7 . belyavin g, trotter wr. investigations of thyroid antigens
reacting with hashimoto sera. evidence for a n antigen other
induced by tsh, through pathways which involve
than thyroglobulin. lunwr 1959; i: 648-652
intracellular camp accumulation and protein syn8. roitt im, ling n r , doniach d. couchman kg. the cytoplasthesis. these data have been found true in any thyroid
mic autoantigcn of the human thyroid. i. immunological ant1
system studied so far, in terms of both immunologic
biochemical characteristics. inintunolo,qy 1964; 7: 375-393
and enzymatic activity of tpo. tsh and camp also
9 . holhorow ej, brown pc, roitt im, doniach d. cytoplasmic
localiration of “complement fixing” autoantigen in human
increase the levels of the specific mrna for tpo in
thyroid epithelium. bv.1 e.\-p purhol 1959: 40: 583-588
thyroid cells from different species. whether this
10. forbes ij, roitt im, doniach d. solomon il. the thyroid
phenomenon is due to a direct transcriptional regui
1962; 41: 996-1006
cytotoxic autoantibody. .i c / i ~/ni~esr
lation of the tpo gene, as shown in dog thyroid cells,
i i. pulvertaft rjv, doniach d, roitt im. hudson rw. cytotoxic
effects of hashinioto serum on human thyroid cell in tissue
or to posttranscriptional effects, as it would appear in
19.59;
~ 2: 214-216
culture. l u j ~ w
frtl-5 cells, remains to be clarified by future experi?.fujita k , yaniada n. sanba t. yudo t. tsuchiya m.
iments. thyroid stimulating antibody of graves’ disshimabukuro k , ltoh k. saito m. haemagglutination test utilease also stimulates the expression of m/tpo-ag.
i h g the microsomal antigen from thyroid epithelial cell\,
this finding gives further support to the relevance of
clir~p ~ r (h j ~ j j1970;
)
18: 2 13-2 i7
13. mori t. kriss jp. measurement by competitive binding
tsab i n the pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism and
radioassay of serum anti-microsomal and anti-thyroglobuliii
explains the well known observation that the “microantibodies in graves’ disease and other thyroid disorders. .i
somal” antigen is particularly abundant in glands from
cliir eridoc./-irro/metub i97 i : 33: 688-698
graves’ patients. the modulation of m/tpo-ag sur14. mariotti s, pinchera a. vitti p. chiovato l, marcocci c,
llrbano c cr u / . comparison of radio
face expression by tsh can explain the decrease of
ation methods for anti-thyroid microsonial antihodics. c/r,i
circulating anti-mab observed during l-thyroxine
e.v/l /j?inlj4jjo/ 1978; 34: 118-125
therapy in hypothyroid patients with hashimoto’s thy1s mariotti s. russova a. pisani s, pinchera a. a new solid
roiditis. other agents, such as  xxxd2594xxx  and
phase imiiiunoradiometric assay for antithyroid inicrosomal
sodium iodide, which influence thyroid cell function,
merub 19x3; 56: 467-473
antibody. .i c / j uendoc~r~rrol
i6 schurdt c w , mclnchlan sm. miitheson j, rces smith b. an
did not directly interfere with the expression of
eniymc-linked imniunoassay for thyroid microsoinal antim/tpo-a&. cytokines, such as gamma-ifn, 1l-i, and
bodies. ./ rtjjj?l/~jio/mf’//j/m/.y 19x2: 55: 155-168
1l-6 have been found to inhibit the tsh-induced
17 ekholm r. engstroni g . ericson le. melander a. exocyto\is
increase of tpo mrna, but further investigations are
of protein into the thyroid follicle lumen: an carly effect ol
tsh. ejj(/o(’j’;jjf,/o,~!
1975; 97: 337-346
required to elucidate their exact role in the regulation
i x jonswn j. fagraeu\ a . biberlfeld g . the mixed haemodsorpof m/tpo-ag expression.
tion test a s ;in aid to the diagiiosi\ o f thyi-old autoiiiiiiiune d i s ease. c / ~ e.\/j
j j / ~ j w j j ~ j j1968:
o/
3: 287-303
1’) f i i g ~ ~ a.
t ~ jon.;wn
s
j . distribution o f ;intigens over the b u r fnce of thyroid c e l l s examined by immunofluorc~ccnt test.
a~.l;tiom.ledgenictit.s
/ / i j j l f j f f f ( j / o . v1979:
x
18: 4 i 3 4 16
2 0 fagraeu\ a, j o n s m n j. el knbir dj. whnt is the antihod)
this work was \upported by grants iron1 the corisiglio narionnle
hpecilicity o f lats’! .i c / ~ jejj j ~ o ( , j . jmortrh
i i ( j / lcl70: 31 :
dellc ricerclie. progciio finalii/ato medicina prcventiva e riabi1it;i145117
tivii.
sottoprogetto i i (meccanisnii di invecchiamento: grant
21 pinchera a. fena gf. b x u l c n n l. chiovato l. marcocci c.
83.0?463.56) and the mini\tero pubblica istruiione, roine. italy.
tocc;ifondi r. ( ’ f ( i / . thyroid cell-stii-kice nnd thyroid stiniul;iting antibotlic\ i n patients with thyroid autoimmune disortier\.
in: stochigt jr. nagatahi s. cds. 7 ‘ l f ~ r o ikrz.\cwrr./r
d
\’///. canhcrra: australian academy 01‘ science. ioxo, 707-708
r f e w i r (‘cs
73
-fenli gf. bartalena l,. chiovato l, mnrcocci c. kotelln  xxxd113xxx .
zoneirati r. er u / . studies oii thyroid c c l l s u r f x e i i n t i y n \
i . mariotti s. pinchera a. kole of the immune systein in the conusing cultured human c e l l \ . c ’ / ~ j je \ p i j j j h j j j j j10x2:
~ j ~ 17:
 xxxd3105xxx  of thyroid function. i n : creer ma, ed. the 7’/tyro!tl g / u j j ( / .
336-343
new-york: raven prei;s, 1990: 147-2 19
’ 3 k h o u r y el. hainmoiitl 1.. h o t t n / i o gf. doniach d. pic\eiice
2 . davies tf. martin a. graves p. human autoiiiiiiiuiie thyroid
o f organ \pecific niicro\oiiial atito:iintigcn on the \uriace of
d i s c a s : cellular and molecular aspcctr. b r r ~ / / i . w ‘ cclin e / i ~ j ( p
i i u i i i i i n thyroid cells i n culiurc: itli iiivoiveiiiciit i n complenlctu
j.itjo/ m ~ ~ t t r h1o9/8 ~2:
; y i 1-939
illedllitcd cytotoxlcit). c’/jjj e \ / ) /rjjtjjjljjo/ 1‘18 1: 45: 3 16-328

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

expression of mdpo antigen
24. hanafusa t, pujol-borrell r, chiovato l, doniach d,
bottazzo gf. in vitro and in vivo reversal of thyroid epithelial
polarity: its relevance for autoimmune thyroid disease. clin
e.g, in7munol. 1984; 57: 639-646
25. khoury el, bottazzo gf, roitt im. the thyroid microsomal
antibody revisited: its paradoxical binding in vivo to the apical
surface of the follicular epithelium. j exp med 1984; 159:
577-59 1
26. nilsson m, molne j , karlsson fa, ericson le, immunoeleciron microscopic studies on the cell surface location of the
 xxxg2320xxx . mol cell endocrind 1987; 53:
177-186
27. alqier c, ruf j, athouel-haon am, carayon p. immunocytochemical study of localization and traffic of thyroid
peroxidase/microsomai antigen. autoimmunity 1989; 3:
113-123
28. masala c, smurra g, di prima ma, amendolea ma,
celestino d, salsano e. gastric parietal cell antibodies: demonstration by immunofluorescence of their reactivity with the
surface of the gastric parietal cells. clin exp immunol 1980;
41: 271-280
29. khoury el, hammond l, bottazzo gf, doniach d. surfacereactive antibodies to human adrenal cells in addison’s disease. clin e.ip immunol 1981; 45: 48-55
30. hanafusa t, pujol-borrell r. chiovato l, russell rcg,
doniach d, botiazzo gf. aberrant expression of hla-dr
antigen on thyrocytes in graves’ disease: relevance for autoimmunity. luncet 1983; 2: 1 i 1 1-1 114
31. ericson le. johanson v, molne j . nilsson m. ofverholm t.
intracellular transport and cell surface expression of  xxxg2320xxx . in: carayon p, rut j. eds. thyropeiddase and
thyroid autoinimunity. london: john libbey eurotext, 1990;
107-1 i4
32. bottazzo gf, pujol-borrell r, hanafusa t, feldmann m.
hypothcsis: role of aberrant hla-dr expression and antigen
presentation in the induction of endocrine autoimmunity. lan(‘rt 1983; 2: 1 i 15-1 i 1 8
3 3 . londei m, lamb jr, bottazzo gf. feldmann m. epithelial
cells expressing aberrant mhc class i1 determinants can present antigen to cloned human t cells. nutwe 1984; 312:
639-64 i
34. londei m, bottazzo gf, feldmann m. human t cell clones
from autoimmune thyroid glands: specific recognition of autologous thyroid cells. scir/7r,e 1985; 228: 85-88
35. davies tf. piccinini la. intrathyroidal mhc class i1 antigen
expression and thyroid autoimmunity. clin endocririol mrtuhol. 1987: 16: 247-268
36. weetman ap, mcgregor am. autoimmune thyroid disease:
development in our understanding. enclocr kc.r, 1984: 5:
309-3.55
37. mariotti s, pinchera a. marcocci c. vitti p. urbano c,
chiovato l, rr ul. solubilization of human thyroid microsomal
antigen. .i clir7 e,7docrir7ol m m h 1979: 48: 207-2 i ?
38. banga jp. price g , hammond l, roitt im. structural features
of the autoantigens involved in thyroid autoimmune disease:
the thyroid microsomal/microvillar antigcn. mol inrn~unol
19x5: 22: 629-642
39. kajita y. morgan d, parkcs ab, rees smith b. labelling and
immunoprecipitation of  xxxg2320xxx . febs
lert 1985; 187: 334-338
40, hamada n , portmann l, de groot lj. charactcrization and
isolation of  xxxg2320xxx . j cli,7 ini~est 1987;
79: 8 19-825
41. nakajima y, howells rd, pegg c. davies jones e, rees
smith b. structure-activity analysis of microsoma1
antigen/ xxxg2320xxx . mol cell endnc~rinol 1987; 53:
15-23
42. ciarnocka b, rul j , ferrand m, carayon p, lissitzky s. purification of the human  xxxg2320xxx  and its identification

329

as the microsomal antigen involved in autoimmune thyroid
diseases. febs lett 1985; 190: 147-153
43. de groot lj, niepomniszcze h. biosynthesis of thyroid hormone: basic and clinical aspects. metuholism 1977; 26:
665-1 18
44. furmaniak j , rees smith b. the structure of thyroid autoantigens. autoimmunity 1990; 7: 63-80
45. kotani t, umeki k, matsunga s, kato e, ohtaki s. detection
of autoantibodies to thyroid peroxidarc in thyroid autoimmune
diseases by micro-elisa and irnmunoblotting. j clrn endocv
rind metah 1986; 62: 928-y33
46. kohno y, hiyama y, shimojo n, niimi h, nakajima h,
hosoya t. autoantibodies to  xxxg2320xxx  in patients
with chronic thyroiditis: effect of antibody binding on enzymc
activities. clin exp imniunol 1986; 65: 534-541
47. portman l, hamada n, heinrich g, de groot lj. anti-thyroid
peroxidase antibody in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease: possible identity with anti-microsomal antibody. j clin
endocrinolmetah 1985: 6: 1001-1003
48. czarnocka b, ruf j, ferrand m, lissitzky s, carayon p. interaction of highly purified thyroid peroxidasc with anti-microsoma1 antibodies in autoimmune thyroid diseases. j endoc,rinolini~est1986; 9: 135-138
49. mariotti s. anelli s. ruf j, bechi r, clarnocka b. lombardi
a, cardyon p, pincherd a. comparison of serum thyroid microsomal and  xxxg2320xxx  autoantibodies in thyroid diseases. .i clin endocrinol metah 1987; 65: 987-993
5 0 . magnusson rp, chazenbalk gd, gestautus j , seto p. filetti s.
degroot lj, et a / . molecular cloning of the complementary
deoxyribonucleic acid for human  xxxg2320xxx . m o l
et7docrinol 1987; 1: 856-861
5 i . kimura s, kotani t, mcbride ow, umeki k, hirai k. nakayama t. et a/. human  xxxg2320xxx : complete cdna and
protein sequence, chromosome mapping and identification of
!wo alternatively-spliced mrnas. pt.nc nut/ acud sci usa
1987; 84: 5555-5559
52. libert f, rue1 j , ludgate m, swillens s, alexander n,
vassart g. et a / . complete nucleotide sequence of the human
 xxxg2320xxx -microsomal antigen cdna. n u c l a(.ir/.sr e s
1987; 15: 6735
53. seto p, hirayu h, magnusson rp. bestautus j , portmann l,
degroot lj, et a/. isolation of a complementary dna clone
for  xxxg2320xxx . homology with gene for  xxxg2320xxx . .i cliti i n i ~ w1987; 80: 1205-1208
54. libert f, rue1 j, ludgatc m, swillens s, alexander n.
vassart g, er ul. thyroid peroxidasc, an autoantigen with a
mosaic structure made of nuclear and mitochondria1 gene
modules. embo.1 1987; 6: 4193-4196
55. ring p, johanson v. inimunoelectron-microscopic demonstration of thyroglobulin and thyroid hormones in thc rat thyroid gland. j hisrochen7 cytocheni 1987; 35: 1095- 1 104
56. kite jh, jr. rose nr. kano k , witebsky e. cytotoxicity of
human thyroid autoantibodies. anti n y ai.uri sci 1965: 124:
626-643
57. nicol ag, swanson beck j . persistence of an organ-specific
antigen in organ and tissue cultures of hyperplastic human
thyroid gland. nurure 1966: 210: 1227-1229
58. chiovato l, villi p. lombardi a, kohn ld. pincherd a.
expression of the microsomal antigen on the surface of continuously cultured rat thyroid cells is modulated by  xxxd3368xxx ..i clin eiidoc./.i/7olmrruh 1985; 61: 12-16
59. ambesi-impiombato fs, parks lam, coons hg. culture of
hormone dependent epithelial cell’, from rat thyroids. p i m
n u t / acud s(,i usa 1980; 77: 3455-3459
60. vitti p, valente wa, ambesi-inipiombato fs, fenzi gf.
pinchcra a, kohn ld. graves’ igg stimulation of continuously cultured rat thyroid cells: a sen\iiive and potentially useful clinical assay. j eudoci.inol i n w s t 1982; 5 : 179-182
61. vitti p. rotella cm, valentc wa, cohen j. aloy sm,
laccetti p, (’i a / . characteriiation of the optiinal stimulatory

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

330

l. chiovato and a. pinchera

effects of graves' monoclonal and serum immunoglobulin g
on  xxxd1773xxx  production in frtl-5 thyroid cells: a potential clinical assay. j clin endowino/ meruh
1983; 57: 782-79 1
62. bidey sp, chiovato l, day a, turmaine m. could rp,
ekins rp. evaluation of the rat thyroid cell strain frtl-5 as
an in vitro bioassay system for  xxxd3368xxx . j endocrinol
1984; 101: 269-276
63. valente wa. vitti p, kohn ld. brandi ml, rotella cm,
toccafondi r, e t a / . the relationship of growth and adenylate
cyclase activity in cultured thyroid cells: separate bioeffects of
 xxxd3368xxx . endnc.rino/ogy 1983; 112: 71-79
64. weiss sj, philp nj, grollman ef. iodide transport in a continuous line of cultured cells from rat thyroid. endocrinology
1984: 114: 1090-1098
65. fontana s, tramontano d, ambesi-impiombato fs, rossi g.
thyroglobulin production by rat thyroid cells in culture: a
study at the level of single cells. endoc~inolugy1982; 110:
1790- i795
6 6 . valente wa, vitti p, rotella cm, vaughan mm, aloy s m ,
grollman ef, ambesi-impiombato fs, kohn ld. antibodies
that promote thyroid growth. a distinct population of thyroidstimulating autoantibodies. n engl j med 1983; 309:
1028-1 034
67. rut' j. czarnocka b, de micco c, dutoit c, ferrand m.
carayon p.  xxxg2320xxx  is the organ-specific "microsomal" autoantigen involved in thyroid autoimmunity. ac,tu
ent/oc,rinol 1987; 115 (281 suppl): 49-56
68. chiovato l, vitti p, lombardi a, ceccarelli p. cucchi p,
marcocci c , carayon p, pinchera a. studies on the mechanism responsible for  xxxd3368xxx -induced expression of
microsomal/peroxidase antigen in frtl-5 cells. e n d o u i n olo,yy 1988; 123: 1140-1 146
69. pinchera a, mariotti s , chiovato l, vitti p. lopez g .
lombardi a, anelli s. bechi r, carayon p. cellular localization of the microsonial antigen and the  xxxg2320xxx 
antigen. actu endor,rinol 1987; 281 (suppl): 57-62
70. chiovato l, vitti p, cucchi p, mammoli c, carayon p.
pinchera a. the expression of the microsomal/peroxidase
antigen in human thyroid cells is  xxxd3368xxx -dependent. clin
e.rp immunol 1989; 76: 47-53
71. studer h. growth control and follicular cell neoplasia. in:
medeiros-neto g , gaitan e, eds. frontiers in thyroidolo<qy.
vol i,new york: plenum press, 19x6; i 3 1-1 3 7
72. lissitzky s, fayet g , verrier b.  xxxd3368xxx 
binding to cultured thyroid cells. febs lett 1973; 29: 20-24
73. bidey sp, marshall nj, ekins rp. characterization of the  xxxd1773xxx  response to  xxxd3368xxx  in monolayer cultures of
normal human thyroid cells. a(,tu endoc.rinol 198 i; 98:
370-376
74. magnusson rp. rapoport b. modulation of differentiated
function in cultured thyroid cells:  xxxd3368xxx  control of  xxxg2320xxx  activity. endoc.rinolo,qy 1985; 116:
1493- i500
75. pratt-carlin c. eggo mc, burrow gn. identification and
regulation of  xxxg2320xxx : use of specific antiserum. 111:
medeiros-nero g, gaitan e. eds. frontiers i n thyrot/olo,yy.
vol i . new york: plenum press, 1986; 569-573
76. kasai k, ohmori t, koimmi n, hosoya t, hiraiwa m,
enloto t, et ul. regulation of thyroid peroxidasc activity by
 xxxd3368xxx ,  xxxg681xxx  and phorhol ester in porcine thyroid follicles cultured in suspension. life s(,r 1989; 45:
14s 1-1459

77. nagataki s, uchiniura h, masuyaina y, nakao k.  xxxd3368xxx 
and thyroidal peroxidate activity. errc/oc.rinr,/o,y?. 1973: 92:
363-37 i
78. nagawka a, hidaka h. quantitative modulation of thyroid
iodide peroxidase hy  xxxd3368xxx . bioc,hcnr
bio/jhj< k c s c/)nln7ufl 1980; 96: 1143-1 149
79. otvcrholm t, bjorkman u . ericson le. effects of tsh on

iodination in rat thyroid follicles studied by autoradiography.
mol cell endocrinol 1985; 40: 1-7
80. perrild h, loveridge n, reader scj, robertson wr. acute
stimulation of thyroidal nad+ kinase. nadph reoxidation
and peroxidase activities by physiological concentrations of
 xxxd3368xxx  acting in vitro: a quantitative
cytochemical study. endocrinology 198x; 123: 2499-2505
81. carayon p, amr s. mechanisms of thyroid regulation. in: de
groot lj, ed. endoc,rinology. vol i. philadelphia: wb saunders co., 1989; 530-540
82. corvilain b, gerard c, raspe e, lefort a, mockel j, van
sande j., e t a / . hormonal regulation of iodination. in: carayon
p, rut' j , eds. thyroperoxiduse und thyr-oici autoimmunity.
london: john libbey eurotext, 1990; 3 3 d 1
83. moss j, vaughan m. activation of adenylate cyclase by choleragen. ann rev b i o c h m 1979; 48: 58 1-588
84. seamon kb, padgett w , daly jw.  xxxd1742xxx : a unique diterpene activator of adenylate-cyclase in membranes and intact
cells. proc, nor/ acud sci usa 198 i ; 78: 3363-3367
85. bachrach lk, eggo mc, mak ww, burrow gn. phorhol
esters stimulate growth and inhibit differentiation in cultured
thyroid cells. endocrinology 1985; 116: 1603-1609
86. eggo mc, bachrach lk, burrow gn. role of non-tsh factors in thyroid cell growth. actu endoerinof 1987; 115 (suppl
28 1 ): 23 1-237
87. nishizuka y. turnover of inositol phospholipids and signal
transduction. scienc,e 1984; 225: 1365-1 370
88. traniontano d, cushing gw. moses ac, ingbar sh. insulinlike growth factor 1 stimulates the growth of rat thyroid cells
in culture and synergizes the stimulation of dna synthesis
induced by tsh and graves' igg. endoc~.inology1986; 119:
940-942
89. roger pp. dumont je.  xxxg681xxx  controls the
proliferation and the expression of differentiation in canine
thyroid cells in primary culture. f e e s l e t t 1982; 144:
209-2 1 i
90. westermark k, karlsson fa, westermark b. epidermal
growth factor modulates thyroid growth and function in culture. endocrinology 1983; 112: 1680-1686
91. chazenbalk g, magnusson rp, rapoport b.  xxxd3368xxx 
stimulation of cultured thyroid cells increases steady state
levels of messenger ribonucleic acid for  xxxg2320xxx .
m o l e/ldo('riilo/ 1987: 1: 9 13-9 17
92. gerard c m , lefort a, libert f. christophe d. duinont je.
g . transcriptional regulation of the thproperoxidasc
 xxxd3368xxx  and  xxxd1742xxx . mol coil er/t/oc~rino/1988;
60: 239-242
93. gerard cm, lcfort a, christophe d, libert f, van sande j.
dumont je, et ul. control of  xxxg2320xxx  and thyroglohulin transcription by camp: evidence for distinct regulatory
mechanisms. mol encloc~r~inol1989; 12: 2 i 10-2 1 ix
94. roesler wj, vanderbank g r , hanson rw.  xxxd1773xxx  and
the induction of eukaryotic gene transcription. .i biol chcni
1988: 263: 9063-9066
95. ahraniowicz mj. christophe d. v
rt g. regulation o f the
t p o gene transcription. in: carayon p, ruf j , eds. t l r y ~ o p
cro.\irluse r r n d tlryroid auroimmunity. london: john lihhep
eurotext, 1990: 11-15
96. nagayama y. yamashita s, hirayu h. l r u m i m. uga t,
lshikawa n. or ( i / . regulation of  xxxg2320xxx  and thyroglobulin gene expression by  xxxd3368xxx  in cultured human
thyroid cells. .i c l i ~endoc,ritrol
i
mr,ttrh 1980; 68: 1 155-1 i59
97. pratt ma, eggo mc. bachrach l.k. carayon p. burrow gn.
regulation of'  xxxg2320xxx , thyroglobulin and iodide
levels in sheep thyroid cell\ by tsh. tunmi- promoters and cpidermal growth faclor. biochin7ic~1989: 71: 227-235
98. collison ks, banga jp. barnett ps, kung aw, mcgregor
am. activation of the thyioid pcroxidase gene in human thyroid cells: effect of  xxxd3368xxx . forakolin and  xxxd2925xxx . ./
mo/elldo['f'/flo/ 1989; 3: 1-5

autoimmunity downloaded from informahealthcare.com by mcmaster university on 11/05/14
for personal use only.

expression o f mltpo antigen
99. damantc g, chazenbalk g, russo d, rapoport b, foti d,
filetti s .  xxxd3368xxx  regulation of  xxxg2320xxx  messenger ribonucleic acid levels in cultured rat thyroid cells: evidence for the involvement of a nontranscriptional mechanism.
endo~~rinol0,qy
1989; 124: 2889-2894
100. lsomki 0 , kohn ld, k w a k ca, kimura s .  xxxg2320xxx : rat cdna sequence, chromosomal localization in mouse,
and regulation of gene expression by comparison to thyroglobulin in rat frtl-5 cells. molendoc,rinol 1989; 3: 1681-1692
1 0 1 . zarrilli r, formisano s . di jeso b. hormonal regulation of
 xxxg2320xxx  in normal and transformed rat thyroid cells.
mol endocrinol 1990; 4: 39-45
rt g , christophe d. thyroid peroxi102. abramowicz mj, v
dase gene promoter confers tsh responsiveness to heterologous reporter genes in transfection experiments. biochem
biophys rrs coniniun 1990; 166: 1257-1 264
103. foti d, gestautus j , rapoport b. studies on the functional
activity of the promoter for the human  xxxg2320xxx 
gene. biochem biophys res conimun 1990; 168: 28 1-287
104. brock ml, shapiro dj. estrogen stabilizes vitellogenin
mrna against cytoplasmic degradation. cell 1983; 34:
207-2 12
105. jungmann ra, kelley dc, miles mf. milkowski dm. cyclic
amp regulation of lactate dehydrogenase. j b i d . c‘hem 1983;
258: 5 3 12-53 i8
106. chiovato l, vitti p, cupini c. ceccarelli p, lombardi a,
pinchera a. thyroid-stimulating antibody (tsab) mimics
tsh in its ability to stimulate the expression of the microsoma1 antigen on the surface of continuously cultured rat thyroid
cells. in: medeiros-neto g, gaitan e, eds. frontiers i n thyrodology. vol 2 . new york: plenum publishing corporation,
1986; 1465-1468
107. doniach d. roitt im. thyroid autoallergic disease. in: gel1
pgh, coombs rra. lachmann pj, eds. clinicul aspects of
lninirrnolngy. oxford: blackwell. 1976; 1355-1386
108. macgregor am, petersen m m , mclachlan sm. rooke p,
smith br, hall r.  xxxd435xxx  and the autoimmune response
in graves’ disease. n en,ql j mrd 1980; 303: 302-307
109. marcocci c. chiovato l , mariotti s , pinchera a. changes of
circulating thyroid autoantibody levels during and after therapy with  xxxd2594xxx  in patients with graves’ disease. .i
errdoc,rinol iinvst 1982; 5: 13-19
110. grollman ef, smolar a, ommaya a, tombaccini d,
santisteban p. iodide suppression of iodide uptake in frtl-5
thyroid cells. endocr~inolngy1986: 118: 2477-2482
i i i . saji m, isoiaki 0 , tsushima t, arai m, mijakawa m,
ohba y. rt ul. the inhibitory effect of iodide on growth of rat
thyroid (frtl-5) cells. acta endoc,ririol 1988; 119: 145-1.51
112. taniguchi s , yoshida a, mashiba h. direct effect of  xxxd2594xxx  on rat thyroidal cell growth induced by  xxxd3368xxx  and
insulin like growth factor- i . eiic/oc,rino/o,qy 1989: 123:
’2046-205 1
113. safran m, paul tl, roti e, braverman le. environmental
factors affecting autoimmune thyroid disease. clin endocririol
mptuho/ 1987; 16: 327-342
114. bagchi n. brown tr. urdinavia e, sundick rs. induction of
autoimmune thyroiditis in chicken by dietary iodine. s c i r r i c ~ ~
19x5: 230: 325-327
iis. allen em. appel mc. braverman le. the effect of iodide
ingestion on the development of spontaneous lymphocytic thyroiditis in the diabetes-prone bb/w rat. eiidoc,ririolr),~y1986:
118: 1977-1981

116. nagayama

33 i

y, izumi m, ashizawa k, kiriyama t ,
yokoama n, morita s , et u l . inhibitory effect of interferongamma on the response of human thyrocytes to  xxxd3368xxx 
(tsh) stimulation: relationship between the response to tsh
and the expression of dr antigen. .i cliu endocriiiol metub
1987; 64: 949-953
17. misaki t , tramontano d. ingbar sh. effects of rat gammaand non-gamma-interferons on the expression of ia antigen,
growth and differentiated functions of frtl-5 cells. etidocrinology 1988; 123: 2849-2857
18. zakarija m, mckenzie jm. influence of cytokines on growth
and differentiated function of frtl-5 cells. e n d o c r i n n l o , ~ j ~
1989; 125: 1260-1265
19. weetman ap. recombinant  xxxd2373xxx  stimulates iodine uptake and cyclic a m p production by the frtl-5 thyroid
cell line. febs lett 1987; 221: 91-97
120. dinarello ca. mier jw. current concepts. lymphokines. n
engl j med 1987; 317: 940-945
i2 1 , krogh-rasmussen a, bech k, feldt-rasmussen u, poulsen s ,
siersbaek-nielson k, friis t , et ul. the influence of interleukin-i on the function of in vitro cultured human thyroid
cells in monolayers. actu endocrinol 1987; 115 (suppl. 281):
93-95
122. deuss u, buscema m, bottazzo gf. rehabilitation of cytokines in thyroid autoimmunity: are they only exerting negative
effects? in: nagataki s . torizuka k. eds. the thyroid 1988.
amsterdam: elsevier science publisher, 1988, 43-50
123. kawabe y, eguchi k, shimomura c. mine m, otsubo t. ueki
y, et ul. interleukin-i production and action in thyroid tissue.
j clin endocrinol metuh 1989; 68: 1174-1 i83
124. yamashita s , kimura h, ashizawa k, et ul. interleukin-i
inhibits  xxxd3368xxx -induced human thyroglobulin gene
expression. j endocrinol 1989; 122: 177-183
125. ashizawa k, yamashita s , nagayama y, kimura h,
hirayu h, izumi m, et ul.  xxxg1141xxx  inhibits  xxxd3368xxx -induced thyroidal peroxidase gene expression in cultured human thyrocytes. j clin endoc~rinolmetuh 1989; 69:
475477
126. ashizawa k, yamashita s , tobinaga t , nagayama y ,
kimura h, hirayu h, er a / . inhibition of human  xxxg2320xxx  gene expression by interleukin i . actu e t i d ~ r i i i < ~ l
1989; 121: 465-469
127. yamashita s , nagayama y, hirayu h. interleukin-6 inhibits
 xxxg2320xxx  gene expression. endocrino/o,qy 1989: 122
(suppi):t-63
128. kayser l, krogh rasmussen a, beck k, p i ul. influence of
interleukin-6 (il-6) on in vitro cultured thyrocytes. enr/oc,i.i/z0l0,qy 1989; 122 (suppi.):t-30
129. mantovani a. dejana ee. cytokines a\ communication signals between leukocytes and endothelial cells. ininrirrrol toduy
1989; 10: 370-375
130. chiovato l. marcocci c , mariotti s, mori a, pinchera a.
l-thyroxine therapy induces a fall of thyroid microsomal and
thyroglobulin antibodies in idiopathic myxedema and in hypothyroid, but not in euthyroid hashimoto’s thyroiditis. j endoc,, . ~ i i o / / r r l . c ~ s f1986; 9: 299-306
131. todd 1. pujol-borrell r. hamniond lj. mcnally jm,
feldmann m, bottazzo gf. enhancement o f thyrocyte hla
class i1 expression by  xxxd3368xxx . clin e i [ j
lniniuriol 1987; 69: 524-53 i

