jaro

jaro 7: 211–217 (2006)
doi: 10.1007/s10162-006-0035-x

journal of the association for research in otolaryngology

deletion of  xxxg2100xxx , the  xxxg2100xxx ,
causes selective inner hair cell loss and an auditory
neuropathy phenotype
m. c. liberman,1,2 e. tartaglini,3 j. c. fleming,3

and

e. j. neufeld3

1

eaton-peabody laboratory, massachusetts eye and ear infirmary, 243 charles street, boston, ma 02114, usa

2

department of otology and laryngology, harvard medical school, boston, ma 02114, usa
division of hematology, children’s hospital, boston, ma, usa

3

received: 21 february 2006; accepted: 24 march 2006; online publication: 27 april 2006

abstract

introduction

mutations in the gene coding for the high-affinity
thiamine transporter  xxxg2100xxx  underlie the clinical
syndrome known as thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia ( xxxg2100xxx ) characterized by anemia, diabetes, and sensorineural hearing loss. to create a
mouse model of this disease, a mutant line was created with targeted disruption of the gene. cochlear
function is normal in these mutants when maintained on a high-thiamine diet. when challenged
with a low-thiamine diet,  xxxg2100xxx -null mice showed
40–60 db threshold elevations by auditory brainstem
response (abr), but only 10–20 db elevation by
otoacoustic emission (oae) measures. wild-type
mice retain normal hearing on either diet. cochlear
histological analysis showed a pattern uncommon for
sensorineural hearing loss: selective loss of inner hair
cells after 1–2 weeks on low thiamine and significantly greater inner than outer hair cell loss after longer
low-thiamine challenges. such a pattern is consistent
with the observed discrepancy between abr and
oae threshold shifts. the possible role of thiamine
transport in other reported cases of selective inner
hair cell loss is considered.
keywords: sensorineural hearing loss, thiamine
responsive megaloblastic anemia

thiamine pyrophosphate, also known as vitamin b1,
is a coenzyme required for several key steps in
intermediary metabolism, including the oxidative
decarboxylation of pyruvate and a-ketoglutarate.
most cells require these enzymes for energy production via the krebs cycle. although plentiful in foods,
there is little synthesis by intestinal microorganisms,
thus symptoms (e.g., beriberi) appear rapidly after
dietary deprivation.
thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia
( xxxg2100xxx ) syndrome is an early-onset, autosomal
recessive disorder also characterized by diabetes and
sensorineural hearing loss. the gene responsible
( xxxg2100xxx ) encodes a high-affinity thiamine transporter (diaz et al. 1999; fleming et al. 1999; labay et
al. 1999). within the cochlea, this high-affinity
transporter is expressed in inner hair cells (ihc)
(fleming et al. 2001).
to further study the disease, a mouse line was
created with targeted disruption of the  xxxg2100xxx 
gene (fleming et al. 2003). we describe the auditory
phenotype of this mouse line, as seen via auditory
brainstem responses (abrs) and by measurement of
distortion product otoacoustic emissions (dpoaes),
as well as the cochlear phenotype as seen via plasticembedded sections through the temporal bone. the
functional measures suggest an auditory neuropathy
phenotype, i.e., one in which cochlear neural
responses, as seen by abr, are significantly more
reduced than the reduction in cochlear amplifier
function, as seen in the dpoaes. this functional

correspondence to: m. c. liberman & eaton-peabody laboratory,
massachusetts eye and ear infirmary & 243 charles street, boston,
ma 02114, usa. telephone: (1)617-5733745; fax: (1)617-7204408;
email: charles_liberman@meei.harvard.edu

211

212

liberman

et al.:

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

fig. 1. threshold shifts for wild-type and
transporter-null mice placed, at age 45 days,
on a low-thiamine diet for 11, 19, or 26 days, as
indicated in the key. until age 45 days, all
animals in this cohort were maintained on a
normal diet. threshold shift for both groups is
defined with reference to the average thresholds
for wild-type ears.

phenotype is associated with a histological pattern of
selective ihc loss, an extremely rare type of sensorineural histopathology.

methods
animals and groups
all animals were maintained on a normal diet (22
mg/kg thiamine) until they were õ45 days of age.
next, a subset of wild-type and homozygous mutants
were put on a low-thiamine diet (2 mg/kg). after 12–
38 days, dpoaes and tone pip evoked abrs were
recorded, and cochleas were harvested for histopathological analysis. in total, data were obtained from 22
transporter-null and 11 wild-type animals with roughly equal numbers of males and females from each
genotype.

gene deletion
the targeting vector was electroporated into male 129
es cells, injected into c57bl/6 blastocysts. chimeras
were backcrossed to129s6/svevtac females, thus
male transgenic offspring were pure 129s6/svevtac.
for further details, see (fleming et al. 2003).

abrs
mice were anesthetized with xylazine (20 mg/kg, i.p.)
and ketamine (100 mg/kg, i.p.). needle electrodes
were inserted at vertex and pinna. abrs were evoked
with 5-ms tone pips (0.5-ms rise–fall with a cos2 onset
envelope, delivered at 35 per second). the response
was amplified, filtered, and averaged with an a–d
board in a labview-driven data acquisition system.
sound level was raised in 5-db steps from 10 db
below threshold up to 90 db sound pressure level
(spl). thresholds were determined by visual inspection of the stacked waveforms.

dpoaes
the dpoae at  xxxg2127xxx  _ f2 was recorded in response to
primary tones: f1 and f2, with f2/f1 = 1.2 and the level
of f2  xxxd1891xxx  db below the level of f1. ear-canal sound
pressure was amplified and digitally sampled at 4 ms.
fast-fourier transforms were computed from averaged sound pressure waveforms, and the dpoae and
surrounding noise floor were extracted. iso-response
contours were interpolated from plots of amplitude
vs. sound level, performed in 5-db steps of f1 level.
bthreshold^ is defined as the f2 level required to
produce a dpoae at 0 db spl.

histological preparation
animals were perfused intracardially with 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1.5% paraformaldehyde in phosphate
buffer. temporal bones were extracted, and round and
oval windows opened for intralabyrinthine perfusion of
fixative. cochleas were then osmicated (1% oso4 in
dh2o), decalcified (0.1 m edta with 0.4% glutaradehyde), dehydrated in ethanols and propylene oxide,
embedded in araldite resins, and sectioned at 40 2m
on a historange with a carbide steel knife. sections
were mounted on slides and coverslipped.
fig. 2. latencies for abr wave 1 are unchanged in transporternull mice, even when thresholds are elevated by 30–40 db. data are
for 22.6-khz tone pips from the cohort of animals shown in figure 1:
for transporter nulls, data are from measures after 11 days on low
thiamine; for wild-types, data are from both 11 and 26 days on low
thiamine.

cytocochleograms
each cochlear spiral was reconstructed in 3d, using
neurolucida software, and distance from the base

liberman

et al.:

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

213

fig. 3. transporter-null mice maintained on a
diet with normal thiamine levels showed no
threshold shifts. (a) abr data from transporternull animals plotted as threshold shifts; (b) abr
data replotted as absolute thresholds and compared to the wild-type data from figure 1. abr
data from transporter-nulls are from mice maintained on a normal diet until 106 days of age.

computed for each section through the duct. a
cytocochleogram was prepared, using high-power
nomarski optics, based on the assessment of all
present and absent hair cells in all sections. cochlear
location was converted to frequency according to a
cochlear map for mouse (muller et al. 2005).

results
mice were placed on a low-thiamine diet (2 vs. 22 mg/
kg in normal chow) for 11, 19, or 26 days. by 11 days,
cochlear neural output was significantly reduced in
transporter-null mice, as seen in the threshold shifts
for auditory brainstem responses (abrs), especially
for frequencies g 22 khz (fig. 1). there was little
further threshold shift after 19 or 26 days on low
thiamine. wild-type mice on the same low-thiamine
diet showed no threshold elevation, even after 26 days
(fig. 1). shifts in distortion product otoacoustic
emissions (dpoae) thresholds were also larger in
transporter-null mice than in wild-types (fig. 1).
however, in the transporter-null mice the dpoae
shifts were smaller than the shifts in abr thresholds
(p = 0.003, f = 86.634, for group differences by two-way
anova). compare, for example, the abr threshold
shifts of õ50 db at 11.3 and 16 khz in the transporter
null mice after 26 days on low-thiamine to the dpoae
shifts measured at the same time, which were only
10–20 db. this mismatch between abr and dpoae
threshold shifts suggests that a significant component of the cochlear dysfunction in the null mice
arises at, or bdownstream^ of, the inner hair cell (e.g.,
liberman et al. 1997).
to assess effects on the auditory nerve fibers per se,
we measured wave 1 latencies from the abrs in
figure 1. when latencies are plotted in db re abr
threshold, there are no significant differences between wild-type and transporter-null animals at 11
days after thiamine restriction, a time when abr
thresholds are already elevated by as much as 40 db
(fig. 2).
when another group of transporter-null and wildtype mice were placed on a low-thiamine diet with 3

mg/kg thiamine (rather then 2 mg/kg used for first
cohort) no significant threshold differences were
observed, by either abr or dpoae measures, even
after 70 days on the diet (data not shown). similarly,
when a third group of transporter-null mice was
maintained on a diet with normal thiamine levels,
no threshold shifts were seen (fig. 3; differences
between wild-type and transporter-null thresholds
were not significant: p = 0.5, f = 0.505, two-way
anova).
a final cohort of wild-type and transporter null
animals was placed on 2 mg/kg thiamine at age 45
days and then returned to a normal thiamine diet after
19 days, to see if the threshold shifts could be
brescued.^ as shown in figure 4, the initial threshold
shift in the transporter null animals seen after 19
days on low thiamine was, on average, 20 db at the
lower frequencies. there was a slight improvement in
average thresholds over the next 5 weeks; however,
thresholds did not return to normal levels. variability
was high in this group, because one of the null
animals showed minimal threshold shift at 19 days
(differences between binitial^ and brescued^ thresholds were not significant: p = 0.089, f = 6.193, two-way
anova).
cochleas were plastic-embedded to allow the highresolution evaluation of all cochlear structures at the

fig. 4. partial recovery in a rescue experiment in which transporter-null mice were maintained on a low-thiamine diet for 19 days
(initial shift), and then switched back to normal diet for 35 days. for
the first 45 days of life, these animals were on normal thiamine.
data points show mean for four transporter-null animals (error bars
are sems).

214

liberman

et al.:

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

fig. 5. when transporter-null mice were maintained on a low-thiamine diet until abr thresholds
began to shift, their cochleas showed selective loss
of inner hair cells. (a, c) place-matched images
from the upper basal turn of a transporter-null and a
wild-type mouse, respectively, each of which was
placed on a low-thiamine diet for 26 days, beginning at 45 days of age. (b, d) contain higher-power
views of the inner hair cell areas from (a) and (c),
respectively: black arrows in (d) show the nucleus
and stereocilia bundle of the normal inner hair cell;
white arrows point to the nuclei of the supporting
cells in the inner hair cell area that remain in both
ears.

light microscopic level. the most striking histopathology in the transporter-null mice maintained on low
thiamine was selective loss of inner hair cells (fig. 5).
the overall architecture of the organ of corti
remained remarkably normal; thus inspection with
low-power objectives might fail to reveal the pathology. in the high-power view (insets), the nucleus and
stereocilia of a normal inner hair cell are clearly
visible in the wild-type (filled arrows) and clearly
absent in the transporter null ear. supporting cells in
the inner hair cell area are present in both cases
(unfilled arrows point to their nuclei). there was no
sign of spiral ganglion cell loss, nor was there an
obvious loss of peripheral axons in the osseous spiral
lamina; however, the longest postdiet-onset survival
was only 36 days. the stria vascularis, spiral ligament,
and spiral limbus all looked normal in transporternull mice.
cytocochleograms prepared from mice in the
cohort in figure 1 reveal a regular progression of
hair cell loss with increasing duration of dietary
thiamine restriction (fig. 6). hair cell loss is minimal
in wild-type animals (fig. 6a) and in transporter null
mice sacrificed after 11 days on low thiamine (fig.
6b), although abr shifts were visible at this time in
the latter group. by 19 days on low thiamine, the
transporter-null mice show loss restricted to the
inner hair cells in the apical half of the cochlea
(fig. 6c). by 26 days, inner hair cell loss was virtually
complete throughout a large midcochlear region;
however, the basal 1/3 of the cochlea showed no cell
loss (fig. 6d). in the animals maintained on the diet
for 36 days, inner hair cell loss had spread slightly
toward the basal cochlear extreme; however, there
was more extensive loss of outer hair cells (ohc) as
well (fig. 6e).
the time progression of hair cell loss is explicitly
plotted in figure 7, in which the fractional survival of

inner or outer hair cells is averaged over the apical 2/
3 of the cochlea. the data suggest that loss of inner
hair cells dramatically increases in transporter-null
mice between 19 and 26 days after the onset of lowthiamine diet, and that ohc loss progresses at a
significantly slower rate.

discussion
auditory phenotype in the  xxxg2100xxx -null mouse
our results show that the high-affinity thiamine
transporter coded for by the  xxxg2100xxx  gene is
necessary for cochlear function, but only when
thiamine intake is restricted. in transporter-null
mice, cochlear threshold shifts appeared within 11
days after thiamine was reduced to 2 mg/kg (normal
mouse chow has 22 mg/kg thiamine). no threshold
shifts were measurable up to 60 days after restriction
of dietary thiamine to 3 mg/kg. lower thiamine
doses resulted in premature death, consistent with
the observation that the high-affinity thiamine transporter is widely expressed throughout the body,
including erythrocytes, liver, kidney, and brain
(fleming et al. 2001). no threshold shifts were seen
in wild-type mice maintained on this extremely low
thiamine diet, suggesting that thiamine deficiency in
the general population is not likely to be associated
with an increased risk of sensorineural hearing loss.
in the cochlea, this high-affinity thiamine transporter is expressed more strongly in inner hair cells
than in outer hair cells (fleming et al. 2001). the
present results suggest that it is most critical for inner
hair cell function, given that inner hair cell loss
appeared earlier and was always more severe than
outer hair cell loss. the enhanced vulnerability of
inner hair cells suggests that the other thiamine

liberman

et al.:

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

215

transporter,  xxxg2101xxx  (which remains present in
these  xxxg2100xxx -null mice), may also be expressed in
outer hair cells. the fact that this remarkably
selective hair cell loss can be externally triggered
simply by changing the dietary thiamine intake
makes it potentially useful in a number of experimental models, e.g., transplantation-based approaches to attempting to repopulate the damaged inner ear.
reasons for the enhanced vulnerability of apical inner
hair cells in the transporter-null animals are unclear,
but longitudinal gradients in the expression pattern of
 xxxg2100xxx  have not been investigated.
oishi et al. (2002) recently studied an independently derived mouse line with targeted deletion of
the same  xxxg2100xxx  gene. the published abr data are
not inconsistent with the present results; the abr
threshold shifts they report are comparable (40–60
db) to those reported here; however, the dpoaes
were not evaluated. surprisingly, the previous study
reported no consistent histopathological change.
reasons for this discrepancy are not obvious, as the
gene targeting strategies in the two lines were similar.
the degree of inner hair cell loss clearly depends on
the duration and magnitude of thiamine deprivation.
thus, on a different diet regimen, ihc dysfunction
might be sufficient to raise abr thresholds without
the frank cell loss seen here. although the animals in
the other study were maintained on a lower level of
thiamine (0 mg/kg) it is not clear how long the lowthiamine challenge lasted. although the animals
were tested at 14–16 weeks of age, the challenge
must have been shorter because these authors stated
that transporter null mice died after 3–4 weeks on a
zero-thiamine diet (as has been the experience with
our mouse line). it is also possible that inner hair cell
loss occurred but was undetected in the previous
study, either because evaluation was limited to the
basal turn, where the loss is less complete, or simply

fig. 6. patterns of hair cell loss in representative mice from the
cohort in figure 1: i.e., animals maintained on a low-thiamine diet
for variable periods (see header to each panel). (a) data from a wildtype ear, (b–e) data from four transporter-null ears. hair cell survival
is plotted as a fraction: a value of 1.0 means that all hair cells were
present. data in each case are averaged over bins corresponding to
5% of total cochlear length. cochlear position is translated into
frequency according to a map for the mouse cochlea (muller et al.
2005). symbol key in (a) applies to all panels.

fig. 7. loss of inner and outer hair cells in wild-type and
transporter null ears, as a function of days on low-thiamine diet.
all animals were placed on the diet at 45 days of age after initial
maintenance on a normal diet. each point represents data from a
different ear, averaged across all cochlear locations. outer hair cell
values represent average of data from the first-row cells only.

216

liberman

et al.:

because selective inner hair cell loss is such a rare
occurrence coupled with the fact that the normal
architecture of the organ of corti is perfectly maintained despite the loss of inner hair cells. thus the
general tissue degradation and organ of corti
collapse that accompanies paraffin embedding, as
used in the previous study, might have obscured the
selective loss of inner hair cells clearly seen in plasticembedded material. indeed, a recent preliminary
report reanalyzing the cochlear phenotype in this
independently generated transporter null mouse
now describes selective ihc loss after low-thiamine
challenge (bertram et al. 2006).

causes of selective inner hair cell loss: a common
mechanism?
the selective loss of inner hair cells (figs. 5 and 6)
and the 20- to 30-db mismatch between abr and
dpoae threshold shifts (fig. 1) suggest that disruption of the  xxxg2100xxx  gene may underlie some forms
of bauditory neuropathy,^ a clinical diagnosis characterized by persistence of measurable oaes in
cases with profound reduction in abrs (starr et al.
1996). although dpoaes were slightly reduced in
our transporter-null mice (fig. 1), dpoae shifts
should exactly match abr shifts when hearing loss
arises from pure ohc dysfunction, as in a mutant
mouse with targeted deletion of prestin, a key
component of the outer hair cell molecular motor
(liberman et al. 2002). it is not clear whether
hearing loss in patients with thiamine-responsive
megaloblastic anemia ( xxxg2100xxx ), the heritable disease
arising from mutations in the  xxxg2100xxx  gene deleted
in our mice, would be characterized as an auditory
neuropathy; appropriate clinical data have not been
published.
selective loss of inner hair cells is an extremely
rare type of cochlear histopathology (schuknecht
1974). in most cases of sensorineural hearing loss,
whether due to noise (liberman and kiang 1978),
ototoxic drugs (huizing and de groot 1987), or
genetic anomalies, the loss of inner hair cells is
associated with significant, or complete, loss of outer
hair cells; in other words, outer hair cells tend to be
the most vulnerable elements in the inner ear. in
animal studies, one exception to this rule is the
selective inner hair cell loss seen in the chinchilla
after systemic administration of carboplatin, a chemotherapeutic drug (takeno et al. 1994). in other
species (e.g., guinea pig), carboplatin causes loss of
both inner and outer hair cells (taudy et al. 1992).
reasons for the unique response of the chinchilla
cochlea to carboplatin remain unclear. however, it
is interesting to consider a possible link to the

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

thiamine-deprivation sensitivity of inner hair cells observed here. case studies of platinum-based chemotherapy have described neurological symptoms, e.g.,
wernicke’s encephalopathy, characteristic of thiamine deficiency that can be reversed by thiamine
supplementation (kondo et al. 1996). an ameliorative
effect of thiamine supplementation on platinuminduced hearing loss has not been investigated;
however, other sulfur-containing compounds (e.g.,
methionine) can decrease the ototoxicity of carboplatin (lockwood et al. 2000), presumably by formation
of platinum–sulfur adducts that inactivate the platinum agents. given that thiamine is a sulfur-containing compound, carboplatin’s effects on inner hair
cells may arise via interference with thiamine transport, either by thiamine binding or direct interaction
with the high-affinity thiamine transporter studied
here. to explain the differential platinum sensitivity
of inner vs. outer hair cells in different mammalian
species, one would have to postulate different distributions of the two thiamine transport systems
( xxxg2100xxx  and  xxxg2101xxx ) in the two hair cell classes.
in human temporal bones, a pattern of selective
inner hair cell loss has also been reported, but only
in two studies (amatuzzi et al. 2001; slack et al.
1986); together, they suggest correlations with both
premature birth and anemia. the more extensive of
these studies evaluated patterns of cochlear histopathology in 30 ears from 15 patients who died after a
stay in the neonatal intensive care unit. of these 15
patients, eight showed no hair cell loss, two showed
selective outer hair cell loss, two showed combined
inner and outer hair cell loss, and three showed a
bilateral pattern of selective inner hair cell loss
similar to that seen here (amatuzzi et al. 2001). the
three patients with selective inner hair cell loss were
all premature infants (30–32 weeks gestational age at
birth), and only one other infant in the study was as
premature. correspondingly, all three of these innerhair-cell-affected patients also suffered from anemia,
and only one of the remaining 12 shared this
condition. the possible association between selective
inner hair cell loss and premature birth is strengthened by a recent preliminary report suggesting a
significantly increased risk of auditory neuropathy in
babies born at or before 28 weeks gestation (iwamoto
et al. 2006). recalling that human diseases associated
with mutations in the  xxxg2100xxx  gene include hearing
loss and anemia suggests that a way to link the
human results with the present results is to hypothesize that (1) the high-affinity thiamine transporter is
not adequately expressed in a premature infant at
õ30 weeks gestational age, and (2) that this late
expression elicits the same selective thiamine deprivation in inner hair cells as seen with absence of the
transporter gene (as studied here).

liberman

et al.:

loss of thiamine transporter causes selective inner hair cell loss

acknowledgments
this research was supported by grants (ro1 dc 04820 and
p30 dc05209) from the nidcd.

references
amatuzzi mg, northrop c, liberman mc, thornton a, halpin c,
herrmann b, pinto le, saenz a, carranza a, eavey rd. selective
inner hair cell loss in premature infants and cochlea pathological patterns from neonatal intensive care unit autopsies. arch.
otolaryngol. head neck surg. 127:629–636, 2001.
bertram s, hoidis s, smolders jwt, gelb b, oishi k, mueller m.
critical role of thiamine transporter  xxxg2100xxx  in auditory
function and hair cell survival. association for research in
otolarynoglogy abstracts xxixth midwinter meeting: 300,
2006.
diaz ga, banikazemi m, oishi k, desnick rj, gelb bd. mutations in
a new gene encoding a thiamine transporter cause thiamineresponsive megaloblastic anaemia syndrome. nat. genet.
22:309–312, 1999.
fleming jc, tartaglini e, steinkamp mp, schorderet df, cohen n,
neufeld ej. the gene mutated in thiamine-responsive anaemia
with diabetes and deafness ( xxxg2100xxx ) encodes a functional
thiamine transporter. nat. genet. 22:305–308, 1999.
fleming jc, steinkamp mp, kawatsuji r, tartaglini e, pinkus jl,
pinkus gs, fleming md, neufeld ej. characterization of a
murine high-affinity thiamine transporter,  xxxg2100xxx . mol. genet.
metab. 74:273–280, 2001.
fleming jc, tartaglini e, kawatsuji r, yao d, fujiwara y, bednarski
jj, fleming md, neufeld ej. male infertility and thiaminedependent erythroid hypoplasia in mice lacking thiamine
transporter  xxxg2100xxx . mol. genet. metab. 80:234–241, 2003.
huizing eh, de groot jc. human cochlear pathology in aminoglycoside ototoxicity—a review. acta otolaryngol. suppl
436:117–125, 1987.
iwamoto l, xoinis k, weirather y, mavoon h, shaha s. extremely
low gestation infants are at high risk for auditory neuropathy.
association for research in otolaryngology abstracts xxixth
midwinter meeting: 72, 2006.

217

kondo k, fujiwara m, murase m, kodera y, akiyama s, ito k, takagi
h. severe acute metabolic acidosis and wernicke’s encephalopathy following chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin: case report and review of the literature. jpn. j. clin. oncol.
26:234–236, 1996.
labay v, raz t, baron d, mandel h, williams h, barrett t, szargel
r, mcdonald l, shalata a, nosaka k, gregory s, cohen n.
mutations in  xxxg2100xxx  cause thiamine-responsive megaloblastic
anaemia associated with diabetes mellitus and deafness. nat.
genet. 22:300–304, 1999.
liberman mc, kiang nys. acoustic trauma in cats, cochlear pathology
and auditory-nerve activity. acta otolaryngol. 358:5–63, 1978.
liberman mc, chesney cp, kujawa sg. effects of selective inner hair
cell loss on dpoae and cap in carboplatin-treated chinchillas.
audit. neurosci. 3:255–268, 1997.
liberman mc, gao j, he dz, wu x, jia s, zuo j. prestin is required
for electromotility of the outer hair cell and for the cochlear
amplifier. nature 419:300–304, 2002.
lockwood ds, ding dl, wang j, salvi rj.  xxxd660xxx  attenuates
inner hair cell loss in carboplatin-treated chinchillas. audiol.
neuro-otol. 5:263–266, 2000.
muller m, von hunerbein k, hoidis s, smolders jw. a physiological
place-frequency map of the cochlea in the cba/j mouse. hear.
res. 202:63–73, 2005.
oishi k, hofmann s, diaz ga, brown t, manwani d, ng l, young r,
vlassara h, ioannou ya, forrest d, gelb bd. targeted
disruption of  xxxg2100xxx , the gene encoding the high-affinity
thiamin transporter  xxxg2100xxx , causes diabetes mellitus, sensorineural deafness and megaloblastosis in mice. hum. mol. genet.
11:2951–2960, 2002.
schuknecht hf. pathology of the ear. harvard university press,
cambridge, 1974.
slack rw, wright a, michaels l, frohlich sa. inner hair cell loss
and intracochlear clot in the preterm infant. clin. otolaryngol.
allied sci. 11:443–446, 1986.
starr a, picton tw, sininger y, hood lj, berlin ci. auditory
neuropathy. brain 119(pt 3):741–753, 1996.
takeno s, harrison rv, ibrahim d, wake m, mount rj. cochlear
function after selective inner hair cell degeneration induced by
carboplatin. hear. res. 75:93–102, 1994.
taudy m, syka, popelar, ulehlova. carboplatin and cisplatin
ototoxicity in guinea pigs. audiology 31:293–299, 1992.

