downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

genetic and pharmacological evidence
that a  xxxd3417xxx  cannot be the
rxr-activating ligand in mouse
epidermis keratinocytes
cécile calléja,1,4 nadia messaddeq,1,4 benoit chapellier,1 haiyuan yang,1 wojciech krezel,1
mei li,1 daniel metzger,1 bénédicte mascrez,1 kiminori ohta,2 hiroyuki kagechika,3
yasuyuki endo,2 manuel mark,1 norbert b. ghyselinck,1,4 and pierre chambon1,4,5
1
institut de génétique et de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire (igbmc), institut clinique de la souris (ics),
cnrs/inserm/ulp, collège de france, 67404 illkirch cedex, cu de strasbourg, france; 2faculty of pharmaceutical
sciences, tohoku pharmaceutical university, komatsushima, aoba-ku, sendai 981-8558, japan; 3school of biomedical
science, tokyo medical and dental university, kanda-surugadai, chiyoda-ku, tokyo 101-0062, japan

using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we demonstrate that both rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers involved
in repression events, as well as ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers involved in activation events, are
cell-autonomously required in suprabasal keratinocytes for the generation of lamellar granules (lg), the
organelles instrumental to the formation of the skin permeability barrier. in activating ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣
heterodimers, rxr␣ is transcriptionally active as its af-2 activation function is required and can be inhibited
by an rxr-selective antagonist. within repressing rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers, induction of the transcriptional
activity of rxr␣ is subordinated to the addition of an agonistic ligand for rar␥. thus, the ligand that
possibly binds and activates rxr␣ heterodimerized with ppar␤(␦) cannot be a  xxxd3417xxx , as it would also
bind rar␥ and relieve the rar␥-mediated repression, thereby yielding abnormal lgs. our data also
demonstrate for the first time that subordination of rxr transcriptional activity to that of its rar partner
plays a crucial role in vivo, because it allows rxrs to act concomitantly, within the same cell, as
heterodimerization partners for repression, as well as for activation events in which they are transcriptionally
active.
[keywords: conditional somatic mutagenesis; rar␥; ppar␤ (␦); skin permeability barrier; transcriptional
subordination; ichthyosis]
supplemental material is available at http://www.genesdev.org.
received october 4, 2005; revised version accepted march 13, 2006.

the physiological effects of  xxxd2071xxx  (ra) are mediated by members of two families of nuclear receptors
(nrs), the rar␣, rar␤, and rar␥ isotypes, and the
rxr␣, rxr␤, and rxr␥ isotypes. rars bind both alltrans and  xxxd114xxx , whereas only the  xxxd114xxx  stereoisomer binds to rxrs. as rar/rxr heterodimers, these
receptors control the transcription of ra-target genes
through binding to ra-response elements (rares)
(chambon 1996). transcriptional corepressor complexes
associated with histone deacetylase activity are recruited to rares by unliganded or retinoid antagonistbound rar/rxr heterodimers, resulting in chromatin
condensation and transcriptional silencing. upon binding of retinoid agonists, corepressors are released, and
4

these authors contributed equally to this work.
corresponding author.
e-mail chambon@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr; fax 33-388-653-203.
article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.368706.

5

recruitment of coactivator complexes exhibiting histone
transacetylase activity results in chromatin decondensation and transcription of ra-target genes (perissi and
rosenfeld 2005). rxrs also heterodimerize with several
additional nrs, including peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (ppars) (laudet and gronemeyer 2002).
all rar and rxr genes have been knocked out in the
mouse. this genetic approach allowed us to demonstrate
that during prenatal development: (1) the ra signal is
transduced by rar/rxr heterodimers. (2) in these heterodimers, functional redundancies may exist both
within the rars and the rxr partners. (3) within
rxr␣/rar(␣, ␤, or ␥) heterodimers, the ligand-dependent transcriptional activation function (af-2) of rxr is
often required to mediate the pleiotropic effects of ra on
morphogenesis and organogenesis (mark et al. 2006).
the keratinocytes of the epidermis of both humans
and mice contain predominantly rar␥ and rxr␣, while
rar␣ and rxr␤ are expressed at a much lower level,

genes & development 20:1525–1538 © 2006 by cold spring harbor laboratory press issn 0890-9369/06; www.genesdev.org

1525

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

and rar␤ and rxr␥ are undetectable (fisher et al. 1994;
chapellier et al. 2002b). phenotypic analysis of transgenic mice expressing dominant-negative (dn) rar␣
(that lacks the af-2 transactivating function) either in
suprabasal (imakado et al. 1995; attar et al. 1997) or in
basal (saitou et al. 1995) epidermis keratinocytes, respectively, led to the proposal that retinoid signaling could be
involved in the formation of the epidermal permeability
barrier, and in the maturation of the epidermis during
development. however, the abnormalities exhibited by
these transgenic models may not reflect the actual physiological roles of ra signaling in epidermal homeostasis
for at least two reasons: (1) the overexpression of
dnrar␣ that heterodimerizes with rxrs may impair
other nuclear receptor signaling pathways that require
rxrs as heterodimerization partners; and (2) a dnrar␣
tightly associated with a corepressor complex may artifactually interact with dna sites or proteins not involved in the retinoid signaling pathway (andersen and
rosenfeld 1995). in this respect, it has been recently reported that dnrars transgenes expressed in basal keratinocytes may impact on epidermal development
through a noncanonical pathway that is independent of
receptor–dna interactions, and most probably involves
down-regulation of p63 (chen and lohnes 2004).
the selective ablation of rars and rxrs in mouse
epidermis keratinocytes, using cell-type-specific temporally controlled somatic mutagenesis (metzger et al.
2003), showed that (1) epidermis differentiation in
rar␥-null mice that also selectively lack rar␣ in keratinocytes appears essentially normal at the histological level (chapellier et al. 2002b), in keeping with the
normal histological appearance of the epidermis of adult
transgenic mice expressing a dnrxr␣ (feng et al. 1997)
or a dnrar␣ in suprabasal cells (xiao et al. 1999); and (2)
all three rars are dispensable in adult mouse epidermis
for the homeostasic renewal of keratinocytes. this led us
to conclude that ra was unlikely to be required for the
self-renewal of adult epidermal keratinocytes. that rar␥
could nevertheless exert some postnatal function in skin
epidermis was suggested by the glossy appearance of
rar␥-null newborns, which was also observed in newborn
pups lacking rxr␣ in epidermal keratinocytes (li et al.
2001; chen and lohnes 2004; our unpublished data).
the present study was initially aimed at elucidating
the origin of this glossiness. unexpectedly, this led to
the discovery that unliganded rar␥ heterodimerized
with rxr␣, as well as ppar␤(␦) heterodimerized with
rxr␣, are cell-autonomously required in transcriptional
repression and activation events, respectively, both of
which being instrumental to the formation of small keratinocyte organelles, the lamellar granules (lg), that are
involved in the elaboration of the skin permeability barrier.
results
vesicles without lamellae are formed instead of
lamellar granules in rar␥-null epidermis
the normal mouse epidermis is a four-cell-layer stratified epithelium (see fig. 1e). the innermost basal layer

1526

genes & development

figure 1. (a,b) living wild-type (wt) and rar␥−/− newborns.
note the dull and glossy appearance of wild-type and rar␥−/−
newborns, respectively. (c,d) corneodesmosome (cd) alterations in rar␥−/− newborns. stem views of squames. insets
show tem views of cd. (e,f) corneodesmosin (cdsn) distribution revealed by ihc (yellow, false color). in rar␥−/−, some
granular keratinocytes contain cdsn (arrows), whereas others
display less or no cdsn (arrowheads). the section in e is
slightly tangential when compared with f, resulting in an oval
appearance of nuclei. (g) northern blot of total rna (25 µg)
from esophagus (lanes 1,2), tongue (lanes 3,4), and back skin
(lanes 5,6). note that two cdsn rna species are detected in
skin. the blot was also hybridized with a ␤-actin probe. (h)
newborn external appearance. the skin surface appears dull in
controls (rar␥l2/l2), rxr␣af2o, and ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) mutants,
but glossy in rar␥ep−/−(c) and rxr␣␤ep−/−(c) mutants. (b) basal
layer; (c) cornified layer; (cd) corneodesmosome; (d) dermis;
(g) granular layer; (s) spinous layer. bar in f represents 15 µm in
c and d and 50 µm in e and f.

(b) comprises the mitotically active cells that, upon cell
cycle withdrawal, lose adhesion to the basement membrane and start their migration toward the skin surface.
in the intermediate spinous (s) and granular (g) suprabasal (sb) layers, the cells complete their differentiation program, leading to keratinization. the outermost
cornified layer or stratum corneum (c) is composed of
highly differentiated, stacked, densely packed, flattened
cells (corneocytes) that have lost their nuclei.
rar␥−/− newborns were easily identified among their
wild-type littermates by the glossy appearance of their
skin (fig. 1a,b). however, their epidermis appeared histologically normal (fig. 1f; data not shown). cell proliferation and apoptosis, as assessed by brdu incorporation
and in situ detection of dna fragmentation, respectively, were unaltered, and expression of specific markers for basal or suprabasal keratinocytes also appeared

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

normal (data not shown). to investigate the origin of
skin glossiness in rar␥−/− newborns, the surface of exfoliated squames from dorsal skin was examined by
scanning transmission electron microscopy (stem). on
wild-type squames, numerous electron-dense plaques,
corresponding to desmosome-derived structures called
corneodesmosomes (cds), were observed (fig. 1c). using transmission electron microscopy (tem), cds appeared as regularly spaced, large plaques (fig. 1c, inset).
in contrast, rar␥−/− exfoliated squames displayed a
smooth surface (fig. 1d), suggesting that cds were small
or lacking. tem showed that cds were actually scarce
and small in size (fig. 1d, inset).
corneodesmosin (cdsn), a protein synthesized into
granular keratinocytes, is associated with desmosomes
to form cds (montézin et al. 1997). in wild-type new-

born epidermis, cdsn was easily detected in granular
keratinocytes, along the entire skin surface (fig. 1e). in
rar␥−/− newborns, cdsn was less abundant and unevenly distributed (fig. 1f). however, cdsn transcripts
were not reduced (fig. 1g). cdsn being normally packaged into small organelles called lamellar granules (lg)
(ishida-yamamoto et al. 2004), we examined the epidermis ultrastructure. numerous cytoplasmic lg were
seen in wild-type newborn granular keratinocytes (fig.
2a). they contained lipids and proteins packaged as
stacks of parallel lamellae (fig. 2a, inset) that were extruded at the apical pole of granular cells (fig. 2f,
bracket), and processed into lipid-rich multilamellar
sheets (madison 2003) to fill most of the space between
cds and along the granular keratinocyte–corneocyte interface (figs. 2h [inset], 4a [below]). granular keratino-

figure 2. (a–i) ultrastructure of granular keratinocytes in wild-type (wt) and rar␥−/− newborns. (a,b) in wild type, numerous lgs
(large arrows) with conspicuous internal lamellar structures (inset) are present, while vesicles that lack (inset, asterisk) or display
disorganized lamellae (thin arrows) are observed in rar␥−/−. (c–e) detection of acid lipase activity at birth. the arrowhead in c points
to a lg containing the electron-dense “dotted” lipase reaction product. incubation without substrate was used as a negative control
in e; the large arrow points to a lg. (f,g) junction between the outermost granular and the first cornified layer. large arrows point
to wild-type lgs that fuse with the granular keratinocyte membrane to release their lamellar content at the cell surface (bracket). thin
arrows point to vesicle aggregates in rar␥−/−. (h,i) large cds connect wild-type corneocytes together, and lipid-rich multilamellar
sheets fill the space between corneocytes (inset). smaller cds and aggregates of vesicles are present between the corneocytes (thin
arrows) in rar␥−/−. (j–r) ultrastructure of granular keratinocytes in adult mice bearing somatic mutations. (j) in tam-treated control
mice, granular keratinocytes contain lgs that release their lipid lamellar content at the cell surface (large arrows), and large cds
connect the corneocytes together. (k,l) in rar␥ep−/− and rar␥sb−/− mice, vesicles form aggregates at the apical pole of granular
af2o(c)
,
keratinocytes (thin arrows), while cds are small. (m–r) similar alterations are present in rxr␣ep−/−(c), rxr␣␤ep−/−(c), rxr␣␤ep
and ppar␤(␦)sb−/− mice, whereas in ppar␣−/− and ppar␥ep−/−(c) mice, granular keratinocytes contain normal lgs releasing their
lamellar content at the cell surface (large arrows). basal and spinous keratinocytes always appeared normal (not shown). c1, c2, and
c3 indicate the first, second, and third cornified layers, respectively. (cd) corneodesmosome; (d) desmosome; (g) granular keratinocyte; (kf) keratin filament bundle; (kg) keratohyalin granule; (m) mitochondria. bar in o represents 0.5 µm in a and b; 0.1 µm in the
insets in a, b, and c–e; and 0.15 µm in f–r.

genes & development

1527

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

cytes of rar␥−/− newborns contained numerous vesicles
devoid of lamellae (fig. 2b, asterisks in inset) or displaying disorganized lamellae (fig. 2b), which formed aggregates at the cell apical pole (fig. 2g) and remained
trapped between corneocytes (fig. 2i). all of these structural abnormalities were consistently observed in the
epidermis of both rar␥−/− newborns and adults (data
not shown).
to confirm that these vesicles lacking lamellae could
correspond to altered lgs, the distribution of acid lipase,
known to be packaged into lg (menon et al. 1986), was
analyzed by tem cytochemistry in newborn epidermis.
in wild-type mice, the product of lipase activity (electron-dense dots) was essentially restricted to lgs of
granular keratinocytes (fig. 2c, arrowhead), whereas it
was scattered throughout their cytoplasm in rar␥−/−
mutants (fig. 2d), as if acid lipase packaging into lgs
was not properly achieved.

uneven surface lipid distribution and altered
permeability barrier function in rar␥-null skin
in addition to proteins, lgs extrude lipids, whose transformation yields the epidermal permeability barrier
(madison 2003). nile red staining showed that neutral
lipids formed a dense, continuous ribbon on top of the
cornified layer in wild-type newborn (fig. 3a) and adult
(fig. 3c) epidermis. in contrast, neutral lipids were unevenly distributed along the cornified layer of the
rar␥−/− epidermis (arrowheads), both in newborns (fig.
3b) and adults (fig. 3d), suggesting possible alterations of
the skin permeability barrier. however, this barrier was
not severely altered at birth, as judged from diffusion in
the skin of the fluorescent dye lucifer yellow that was
retained in the upper layer of the stratum corneum both
in wild-type and rar␥−/− littermates (data not shown),
as well as from a comparison of weight loss between
wild-type and rar␥−/− littermates over a 24-h period
(data not shown). in adults, trans-epidermal water loss
(tewl) was increased by ∼20% in rar␥−/− mice
(6.48 ± 0.29 g/h · m2 in wild type [n = 12] vs. 8.12 ± 0.61
g/h · m2 in rar␥−/− [n = 10]; p < 0.05), indicating that
the permeability barrier function was actually altered.

rar␥ and rxr␣ are required in keratinocytes for
lamellar granule formation
to determine whether the above structural defects reflected a cell-autonomous function of rar␥, somatic
mutants in which rar␥ ablation was restricted to epidermal keratinocytes were generated. rar␥l2/l2 mice
bearing floxed rar␥ alleles were crossed with either
k14-creert2 or cmv-creert transgenic mice that express tamoxifen (tam)-inducible forms of cre recombinase in basal or suprabasal keratinocytes, respectively
(metzger et al. 2003). adults obtained from these crosses
were treated with tam, yielding rar␥ep−/− or rar␥sb−/−
mice, in which rar␥ ablation in all epidermal layers or
selectively in the suprabasal layer, respectively, was

1528

genes & development

figure 3. histochemical detection of lipids in newborn (a,b)
and adult (c–n) mice, using nile red staining. (a–h) on top of
the cornified layer, neutral lipids are concentrated as a yellow
continuous ribbon in wild-type (wt) epidermis, while their distribution is interrupted (arrowheads) in mutants as indicated.
the dermis staining in c is artifactual. (i–n) surface lipid distribution is interrupted (arrowheads) in wild-type mice topically
treated with ra, bms961, or br1211, whereas it remains continuous upon topical treatment with bms753, bms649, or
bms493. note in i the typical thickening of the epidermis resulting from ra-induced basal keratinocyte proliferation
(chapellier et al. 2002b). phospholipid distribution (orange) is
not affected. (b) basal layer; (c) cornified layer; (d) dermis; (e)
epidermis; (sb) suprabasal layer. bar in n represents, 50 µm in a
and b and 300 µm in c–n.

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

verified by southern blot analysis and ihc (metzger et
al. 2003). upon tam treatment, the epidermis ultrastructure of control littermates (rar␥l2/l2) was undistinguishable from that of wild-type mice (fig. 2j). in contrast, both rar␥ep−/− (fig. 2k) and rar␥sb−/− (fig. 2l)
adults displayed an epidermis phenotype identical to
that of rar␥−/− mice with regard to (1) alterations of
cds, (2) presence of vesicles forming aggregates at the
apical pole of granular keratinocytes, instead of normal
lgs (fig. 2, cf. k,l and g), and (3) uneven neutral lipid
distribution at the skin surface (fig. 3e,f, arrowheads).
thus, ablation of rar␥ in suprabasal keratinocytes is
sufficient to yield defects in cd, lg, and surface lipids
that were identical to those observed either in rar␥−/−
or rar␥ep−/− mice. hereafter, we refer to these abnormalities taken collectively as the “lg and related defects.” crossing rar␥l2/l2 mice with k14-cre transgenic mice generated rar␥ep−/−(c) mice, in which rar␥
ablation occurred in keratinocytes during fetal skin development (li et al. 2001). like the rar␥ep−/− adults
described above, rar␥ep−/−(c) newborns exhibited the lg
and related defects (data not shown). in addition, the skin
surface of rar␥ep−/−(c) newborns was glossy (fig. 1h),
and at adulthood the tewl of these mice was increased
(6.48 ± 0.29 g/h · m2 in wild type [n = 12] vs. 7.51 ± 0.30
g/h · m2 in rar␥ep−/−(c) [n = 14]; p < 0.05). there was apparently no functional redundancy between rar␥ and
rar␣ in keratinocytes, as the same abnormalities were
observed in rar␥−/− mice and in mice that, in addition,
lacked rar␣ selectively in epidermal keratinocytes,
while rar␣−/− epidermis was normal (chapellier et al.
2002b; data not shown).
to determine whether rxr␣ could be the heterodimerization partner of rar␥ in keratinocytes, mice
in which rxr␣ alleles are floxed (rxr␣l2/l2) were
crossed with k14-cre transgenic mice to generate
rxr␣ep−/−(c) mice, in which rxr␣ ablation is restricted
to keratinocytes during skin development (li et al. 2001).
as rar␥−/− and rar␥ep−/−(c) mice, rxr␣ep−/−(c) mice exhibited the lg and related defects (figs. 2m, 3g), and a
glossy skin at birth (li et al. 2001; data not shown). in
addition, mice bearing floxed rxr␣ and rxr␤ alleles
(rxr␣␤l2/l2 mice) were crossed with k14-cre transgenics to generate rxr␣␤ep−/−(c) mice. these mutants displayed cd and lg defects (fig. 2n), as well as skin
glossiness (fig. 1h), identical to those of rar␥−/−,
rar␥ep−/−(c), and rxr␣ep−/−(c) mice, while no lg and
related defects were seen in rxr␤-null mice (data not
shown). we concluded from these observations that, for
lg formation, there is little or no functional redundancy
between rxr␣ and rxr␤, and therefore that heterodimers between rar␥ and rxr␣ could be instrumental to lg formation in keratinocytes.
topical treatment with an rar␥-selective agonist
mimics rar␥ ablation, whereas a pan-rar
antagonist has no effect
the above results prompted us to investigate the effects
of topical treatment with ra and selective retinoids on

wild-type adult epidermis ultrastructure. administration of ra (40 nmol) resulted in the disappearance of lgs
that are easily recognized in the vehicle-treated control
mice (fig. 4a,d). instead, and similarly to the lg and
related defects, vesicles without lamellae appeared that
(1) had the same size and cellular localization as lgs
(fig. 4e), (2) formed aggregates at the apical pole of the
outermost granular keratinocytes (fig. 4b), and (3) were
retained between corneocytes (fig. 4b, asterisk). accordingly, the size and number of cds attaching the corneocytes together were reduced (data not shown), the lipid
multilamellar sheets between corneocytes did not form
at all (fig. 4, cf. a and b), and neutral lipids were unevenly distributed along the cornified layer (fig. 3i, arrowheads). in keeping with these results, similar empty
vesicles have been previously described in epidermis of
ra-fed mice (elias et al. 1981).
topical treatment with the rar␣-selective agonist
bms753 (40 nmol) or the rxr-selective agonist bms649
alone (10 nmol) had no effects on lg structure (fig.
4c,f,h,k) and lipid distribution at the skin surface (fig.
3k,l). in contrast, mice treated with the rar␥-selective
agonist bms961 (3 nmol) displayed lg, cd (fig. 4g,j),
and surface lipid defects (fig. 3j) similar to those described above that were enhanced upon coadministration of 10 nmol of the rxr-selective agonist bms649
(fig. 4i,l). it is worth noting that the lg and related
defects are independent of keratinocyte proliferation, as
they were observed using a dose of bms961 (3 nmol) too
low to induce epidermal hyperplasia (supplementary fig.
1c). these synergistic effects between bms961 and
bms649 indicate that the ra-induced alterations in keratinocytes resulted from activation of rxr/rar␥ heterodimers, in which transactivation by rxr was subordinated to binding of an agonistic ligand to rar␥.
importantly, treatment with the pan-rar antagonist
bms493 (40 nmol) did not alter structure and extrusion
of lgs at the apical pole of the outermost granular keratinocytes (fig. 4m,p), nor was neutral lipid distribution
irregular at the epidermis surface (fig. 3m). the effectiveness of the bms493 treatment was checked by its
ability to counteract the bms961-induced expression of
the ra-controlled cyp26a1 and  xxxg512xxx  genes (supplementary fig. 1g). note that, on its own, treatment with
acetone (the vehicle for retinoids) had no effect on lg
structure (fig. 4a,d) and lipid distribution at the skin
surface (data not shown), while none of the topical treatments altered rar␥ expression (supplementary fig. 2b).
altogether, the above data show that blocking ra signaling through treatment with the pan-rar antagonist
bms493 did not alter the structure of lgs, whereas activating ra signaling, through treatment with ra or
with a rar␥-selective agonist, produced lg alterations
identical to those observed upon ablation of rar␥ and
rxr␣ in keratinocytes. as unliganded rar/rxr heterodimers can repress gene transcription through interaction with corepressors (perissi and rosenfeld 2005), we
concluded that the lg defects exhibited by rar␥ and
rxr␣ loss-of-function mutants most likely reflected the
artifactual expression of one or several genes, whose ex-

genes & development

1529

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

figure 4. epidermis ultrastructure in adult mice topically treated with retinoids. (a–r) tem views from
mice treated as indicated using acetone (vehicle control), ra, bms753, bms961, bms649 alone or in combination with bms961, bms493, and br1211 alone or
in combination with bms649. in control, bms753-,
bms649-, and bms493-treated mice, normal lgs releasing their lipid content at granular keratinocyte apical pole (large arrows) to form multilamellar sheets between corneocytes (brackets) are observed. in ra-,
bms961-, and br1211-topically treated mice, vesicles
(thin arrows) form aggregates at the granular keratinocyte apical pole, and persist between corneocytes (asterisks). coadministration of bms649 and bms961
worsens the defects. coadministration of bms649
mostly prevents the appearance of the br1211-induced
defects, although few aggregates can be observed between corneocytes (asterisk in o). c1 and c2 indicate
the first and second cornified layers, respectively. (d)
desmosome; (g) granular keratinocyte. bar in r represents 0.1 µm in a–c, g–i, and m–o, and 0.5 µm in d–f,
j–l and p–r.

pression was normally repressed by unliganded rar␥/
rxr␣ heterodimers.
transcriptional activation mediated by ppar␤ is also
required for the formation of lamellar granules
according to the above repression scenario, impairment
of the af-2 ligand-dependent transcriptional activation
functions of rxr␣ and rxr␤ should not affect lg structure. unexpectedly, the epidermis of rxr␣af2o (mascrez
af2o(c)
et al. 1998) newborns and of rxr␣␤ep
adult mice expressing, respectively, rxr␣ or rxr␣ and rxr␤ that are
deleted for their af-2 core (helix 12) actually displayed
the lg and related defects (fig. 2o). in keeping with
these observations, topical application of 10 nmol of the
selective pan-rxr antagonist br1211 (supplementary
fig. 1; ohta et al. 2004) on wild-type adult skin also
resulted in the appearance of the lg and related defects
(figs. 4n,q, 3n). importantly, these br1211-induced lg

1530

genes & development

defects were mostly prevented upon coadministration of
200 nmol of the rxr-selective agonist bms649 (fig.
4o,r). altogether, these observations suggested that the
generation of lgs requires, in addition to an unliganded
rar␥/rxr-mediated repression, either an rxr homodimer-mediated activation, or a nr/rxr-mediated
activation in which rxr af-2 would synergistically act
with a nr heterodimerization partner distinct from
rar␥.
that ppars are involved in lipid metabolism and expressed in keratinocytes prompted us to examined the
epidermis of mice bearing ppar-null mutations. we
generated ppar␥ep−/−(c) and ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) mice, selectively lacking either ppar␥ or ppar␤(␦) in keratinocytes, through crossing mice bearing floxed ppar␥ or
ppar␤(␦) alleles with k14-cre transgenics, and also used
ppar␣−/− mice (lee et al. 1995). the ppar␣−/− (fig. 2p)
and ppar␥ep−/−(c) (fig. 2q) epidermis ultrastructure
and surface lipid distribution were normal. in contrast,

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

and similarly to rxr loss-of-function mutants,
ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) mutants displayed lg and related defects (data not shown), as well as uneven cdsn distribution along the granular layer (supplementary fig. 3).
to determine whether these defects reflected the requirement of ppar␤(␦) in basal or in suprabasal keratinocytes, ppar␤(␦)l2/l2 mice were crossed with k10creert2 transgenics that express the tam-inducible cre
in suprabasal keratinocytes. adults obtained from these
crosses were treated with tam, yielding ppar␤(␦)sb−/−
mice. importantly, ablation of ppar␤(␦) in suprabasal
keratinocytes of these mice resulted in the lg and related defects (figs. 2r, 3h). these results strongly suggested that, in addition to rxr/rar␥ heterodimers, heterodimers between rxr␣ and ppar␤ were also cell-autonomously required in suprabasal keratinocytes for the
generation of lg. note that none of the retinoid topical
treatments that were used altered ppar␤(␦) expression
(supplementary fig. 2b).
ablation of ppar␤(␦) most probably alters lamellar
granule formation through decreasing cholesterol
synthesis
impairment of cholesterol synthesis has been shown to
induce lg defects (menon et al. 1992). however, the
transcript levels of hmgcs1 and  xxxg1060xxx  (coding for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx  [hmg-coa] synthase 1 and  xxxg1060xxx , respectively) were
not altered in rar␥ep−/− and ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) newborn
epidermis (supplementary fig. 2c). in contrast, the
level of hmgcs2 transcript (coding for hmg-coa synthase 2) was strongly reduced in ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) and
rxr␣␤ep−/−(c) newborns, but not in rar␥ep−/−(c) newborns (fig. 5a). accordingly, tlc analysis of lipids extracted from the skin surface indicated a marked decrease in cholesterol in ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) and rxr␣␤ep−/−(c)
newborns (fig. 5b), but not in rar␥ep−/−(c) newborns
(data not shown). thus, even though the lg and related
defects generated by either rar␥ and ppar␤(␦) ablation
appear similar, hmgcs2 expression is not affected by
rar␥ ablation, indicating that the target genes of rar␥/
rxr␣ and ppar␤(␦)/rxr heterodimers could be different, which is in keeping with the observation that the
skin of rar␥ep−/−(c) newborns is shiny, in contrast to
that of ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) mutants (fig. 1h). even though
none of the other possible target genes that we analyzed
exhibited an altered expression in rar␥ep−/−(c) or
ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) newborn epidermis (supplementary fig.
2c), our data clearly indicate that ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers could be instrumental to lg formation
through controlling cholesterol synthesis. in this respect, we found that a topical administration of cholesterol to ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) adults cured the lg and related
defects (fig. 5c,d).
it is commonly thought that ppar/rxr heterodimers
are permissive heterodimers in which rxr can activate
transcription of target genes upon binding of its cognate
ligand, even when ppar is unliganded (gronemeyer et
al. 2004; chambon 2005). accordingly, expression of
hmgcs2 was approximately threefold increased in the

skin of wild-type adult mice topically treated with the
pan-rxr agonist bms649, whereas it was markedly decreased upon topical treatment with the pan-rxr-selective antagonist br1211 (fig. 5e), indicating that hmgcs2
expression was enhanced by ppar␤(␦)/rxr heterodimers in which the rxr partner was actually transcriptionally active. in keeping with this conclusion, exaf2o
pression of hmgcs2 was markedly reduced in rxr␣␤ep
adult mutant mice (fig. 5f), which selectively express in
their keratinocytes rxr␣ and rxr␤ lacking af-2. moreover, expression of hmgcs2 was approximately threefold
increased in the skin of wild-type adult mice treated
with the ppar␤(␦)-selective agonist l165041 (fig. 5e),
indicating that the ppar partner can also be transcriptionally active. to investigate their possible synergistic
action, we tested whether topical application of the
ppar␤(␦) agonist l165041 could rescue the lg and related defects observed in mice expressing rxr␣ and
af2o(c)
rxr␤ lacking their af-2. like their rxr␣␤ep
newaf2o
born counterparts (fig. 2o), rxr␣␤ep adult mutants
displayed the lg and related defects (fig. 6c,g,k). interestingly, upon treatment with the l165041 agonist, the
af2o
epidermis of rxr␣␤ep adult mice (fig. 6d,h) was similar to that of control mice (fig. 6a,b,e,f), and nile red
staining showed that, as in controls (fig. 6i,j), neutral
lipids formed a continuous ribbon on top of the cornified
af2o
layer in l165041-treated rxr␣␤ep
adult epidermis
(fig. 6l). in keeping with these observations, expression
af2o
of hmgcs2 was enhanced in the skin of rxr␣␤ep
adults treated with l164051 (fig. 5f). therefore, topical
administration of l165041 increases hmgcs2 expression,
and restores lg structure and extrusion in keratinocytes
of mice expressing rxr␣ and rxr␤ that are both lacking
their af-2.
ablation of rxr␣ af-2 abrogates the transcriptional
activity of rxr␣, but does not silence the ppar␤(␦)
partner
our above data strongly suggest that, within rxr␣/
ppar␤(␦) heterodimers, the ablation of rxr␣ af-2 does
not silence the transcriptional activity of the ppar␤(␦)
partner. alternatively, as deleting the af-2 helix 12
could possibly convert rxr into a transcriptional repressor due to increased affinity for corepressors (zhang et al.
1999), the ablation of rxr␣ af-2 may have decreased
the activity of the rxr␣⌬af-2/ppar␤(␦) heterodimer
through silencing of ppar␤(␦). to investigate this possibility, we first performed electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (emsa) using the hmgcs2 ppar-response element (ppre). deleting helix 12 of rxr␣ did not impair
the heterodimer binding to the ppre (fig. 5g). we then
analyzed the activity of rxr␣/ppar␤(␦) and rxr␣⌬af2/ppar␤(␦) heterodimers in transiently transfected
hepg2 cells, using a hmgcs2 ppre-containing reporter
(fig. 5h). compared with basal conditions (fig. 5h, lane
3), rxr␣/ppar␤(␦)-transfected cells treated either with
the rxr-selective ligand bms649 (fig. 5h, lane 4) or
with increasing concentrations of l165041 (fig. 5h,
lanes 7,11,15) exhibited a significant increase in expres-

genes & development

1531

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

figure 5. (a–f) alteration of cholesterol metabolism
upon ppar␤(␦) or rxr␣ (and ␤) ablations in keratinocytes. (a) real-time quantitative rt–pcr analysis for
hmgcs2 transcripts in total rna from wild-type (wt),
rar␥ep−/−(c), rxr␣␤ep−/−(c), and ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) newborn epidermis. values (arbitrary units) correspond to
the mean amount ± sem of rna transcripts detected
in the epidermis of each genotype (n = 4), relative to the
amount of ␤-actin transcripts (unchanged upon mutation). (b) tlc analysis of lipids from the surface of newborns with genotypes as indicated. (lanes 1,10) lipid
standards. (c) cholesterol; (ce) cholesteryl ester (stearate); (cer) ceramides; (fa)  xxxd2154xxx . (c,d) tem views
from ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) epidermis topically treated with
cholesterol. (c) in ethanol (vehicle)-treated mutants,
vesicles aggregate at the granular keratinocyte apical
pole and persist between corneocytes (asterisk). (d) in
cholesterol-treated mutants, lgs release their lipid
content at the granular keratinocytes apical pole to
form multilamellar sheets (brackets). aggregates of
vesicles present between corneocytes (asterisk) arise
from the ppar␤(␦)-null keratinocytes that differentiated into corneocytes before the onset of cholesterol
administration. c1 and c2 indicate the first and second
cornified layers, respectively. (cd) corneodesmosome;
(d) desmosome; (g) granular keratinocyte. bar in d represents 0.1 µm. (e) real-time quantitative rt–pcr
analysis for hmgcs2 transcripts in total rna from back skin of wild-type adult mice topically treated with acetone vehicle, bms649,
br1211, or l165041. values (arbitrary units) correspond to the mean amount ± sem of rna transcripts detected in each series (n = 3),
relative to the amount of  xxxg861xxx  transcripts (unchanged upon topical treatment). (f) real-time
af2o
quantitative rt–pcr analysis for hmgcs2 transcripts in total rna from the back skin of wild-type and rxr␣␤ep mice treated with
ethanol vehicle or l165041. values (arbitrary units) correspond to the mean amount ± sem of rna transcripts detected in the skin
of each genotype (n = 3), relative to the amount of 36b4 transcripts (unchanged upon mutation). (a,e,f) asterisks indicate a significant
difference from the wild-type values (p < 0.05). (g,h) effects of af-2 deletion on binding property and transcriptional activity of rxr␣
in heterodimer with ppar␤(␦). (g) emsa showing that both rxr␣/ppar␤(␦) (lane 4) and rxr␣⌬af-2/ppar␤(␦) (lane 12) heterodimers (h) equally bind to the hmgcs2 ppre (p). the complexes formed were supershifted by addition of antibodies against rxr␣
(closed arrowhead, lanes 5,13) or ppar␤(␦) (open arrowhead, lanes 6,14). emsa competitions were performed with a 1000-fold excess
of unlabeled ppre (lanes 7,15) or mutated ppre (m, lanes 8,16). the left inset shows sds-page analysis of in vitro translated proteins,
indicating that rxr␣ (lane b), rxr␣⌬af-2 (lane c), and ppar␤(␦) (lane d) were produced with similar efficiencies. lane a contains the
same amount of lysate translated without receptor cdna template. (h) hepg2 cell transfections with the hmgcs2 ppre-tk-cat
reporter, and rxr␣-, rxr␣⌬af-2-, and ppar␤(␦)-expressing vectors, as indicated. the ligand for rxr␣ (bms649) was added at 5.10−7
m, as indicated. the ligand for ppar␤(␦) (l165041) was added at increasing concentrations: 10−8 m (gray bars), 10−7 m (dark-gray bar),
and 10−6 m (black bars). (white bars) no l165041 added. four independent experiments were performed with triplicate transfections
for each condition. bars show the mean cat activity ± sem relative to ␤-galactosidase activity. (*,§,#) indicate a significant difference
versus lane 3 (p < 0.01), lane 4 (p < 0.001), and lane 5 (p < 0.01), respectively. there is no significant change between lanes 3, 5, and 6;
lanes 7, 9, and 10; lanes 11, 13, and 14; and lanes 15, 17, and 18.

sion of the reporter. when both compounds were added
together (fig. 5h, lanes 8,12,16), there was a synergistic
increase in reporter expression at all three l165041 concentrations. importantly, in rxr␣⌬af-2/ppar␤(␦)transfected cells, the reporter expression was still significantly increased upon addition of l165041 (fig. 5h, cf
lanes 9,13,17 and 5), but no synergism was observed
upon addition of bms649 (fig. 5h, lanes 10,14,18). it
appears therefore that both ligand-activated rxr␣ and
ppar␤(␦) can effectively contribute to the increased
transcription of responsive genes, and that deleting
rxr␣ af-2 selectively abrogates the rxr␣-dependent
activity. therefore, assuming that deletion of af-2 helix
12 is equivalent to the absence of an agonistic ligand
(mascrez et al. 1998), a liganded rxr␣ appears to be required to maintain hmgcs2 expression to a level compatible with efficient lg formation.

1532

genes & development

discussion
late during granular keratinocyte differentiation, ovoid
organelles named lamellar granules (lgs) are formed
from the tubular branched portion of the golgi apparatus. lgs contain lipids (e.g., phospholipids and cholesterol), hydrolytic enzymes (e.g., lipases, proteases), and
other proteins (e.g., corneodesmosin, cdsn), which are
organized as lamellae. at the apical pole of the outermost granular keratinocytes, lgs release their content,
which is then assembled into multilamellar lipid sheets
surrounding the corneocytes, and also contributes to the
formation of corneodesmosomes and of a continuous ribbon of neutral lipids evenly distributed on top of the
cornified layer, thereby participating in generation of the
skin permeability barrier (madison 2003).
our present data reveal that the keratinocyte-selective

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

figure 6. effects of ppar␤(␦) activation
on epidermis ultrastructure and surface
lipid distribution in adult mice with genotypes as indicated. tem views (a–h) and
histochemical detection of lipids using
nile red staining (i–l) in control mice
(rxr␣␤l2/l2) and in mutants expressing
rxr␣ and rxr␤ lacking their af-2
af2o
(rxr␣␤ep ), topically treated with acetone vehicle or with the ppar␤(␦)-selective agonist l165041. (a,b,e,f,i,j) in controls, normal lgs (large arrows) release
their content at the granular keratinocyte
apical pole, and lipid distribution is even.
af2o
mice treated with
(c,g,k) in rxr␣␤ep
acetone, vesicles (thin arrows) form aggregates that persist between corneocytes,
and lipid distribution is interrupted (arrowheads). (d,h,l) topical administraaf2o
tion of l165041 to rxr␣␤ep mice cures
lg and surface lipid defects. c1 and c2 indicate the first and second cornified layers, respectively. (cd) corneodesmosomes;
(d) desmosome; (g) granular keratinocyte; (m) mitochondria. bar in l represents 0.1 µm in a–d, 0.5 µm in e–h, and 160 µm in i–l.

genetic ablation of either rar␥, ppar␤(␦), or rxr␣ in
the mouse impairs the formation of these multilamellar
lipid sheets and of the corneodesmosomes, and alters the
even distribution of neutral lipids on top of the cornified
layer. that, concomitantly, the mutant granular keratinocytes contain vesicles whose size and localization
are similar to those of lgs and that are unable to fuse to
the membrane of the outermost granular keratinocytes
leaves little doubt that the primary defect(s) in these keratinocytes lie(s) in lg biogenesis. this conclusion is
further supported by the observation that (1) the acid
lipase that is normally associated with lgs is found scattered throughout the cytoplasm of rar␥-null granular
keratinocytes, and (2) cdsn, a protein normally packaged in lgs, is not regularly detected along the suprabasal layers of the mutant mice. thus, the biogenesis
of lgs in granular keratinocytes offers an interesting integrated model system in vivo to unveil the molecular
mechanisms that allow two nr signaling pathways,
those of rar␥ and ppar␤(␦), to keep their identity,
while sharing the same rxr␣ heterodimerization partner. whether and how rar␥/rxr␣ and ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣
heterodimers control gene expression, how actively
rxr␣ participates in this control within these heterodimers, whether or not there is any evidence that
rxr␣ could be liganded and what the nature of the ligand possibly could be are some of the questions that we
raised.

repressing heterodimers between unliganded rar␥
and rxr␣ are cell-autonomously required for the
generation of lgs in suprabasal keratinocytes
the finding of identical lg and stratum corneum defects
in rar␥-null and suprabasal keratinocyte-selective
rar␥sb−/− mutants demonstrates that rar␥ acts cellautonomously in suprabasal keratinocytes. this action

is a transcriptional repression, as a topical treatment
with a pan-rar antagonist (bms493) had no effect on
epidermis structure, whereas a treatment with all-trans
ra or with a rar␥-selective agonist (bms961), but not
with a rar␣-selective agonist (bms763), generates lg
defects identical to those resulting from rar␥ ablation.
furthermore, these defects were worsened by cotreatment with the rar␥-selective ligand and a pan-rxr
agonist (bms649), which on its own had no effect on lg
structure. this synergism indicates that the rar␥ agonist-induced lg defects result from activation of rar␥/
rxr␣ heterodimers, previously shown to operate in suprabasal keratinocytes (chapellier et al. 2002b), and in
which transactivation by rxr is subordinated to the
binding of an agonist ligand to rar␥.
that heterodimers between unliganded rar␥ and
rxr mediate repression events in epidermal keratinocytes is in keeping with the expression of the smrt
(ncor2) and ncor (ncor1) corepressors in mouse epidermal keratinocytes, and with the effect of a topical
treatment with the  xxxd565xxx   xxxd3426xxx  (yoshida et al. 1990) that results in epidermis
defects very similar, if not identical, to those displayed
by rar␥ loss-of-function mutants (supplementary fig.
4). it is also in keeping with the apparent lack of ra in
epidermis (randolph and siegenthaler 1999; saurat et al.
1999) and with the lack of lg abnormalities in vitamin
a-deficient mice (supplementary fig. 5). thus, we conclude that rar␥/rxr␣-mediated repression events are
cell-autonomously mandatory for lg biogenesis in suprabasal keratinocytes (fig. 7a). when this repression is
relieved, which can be achieved with doses of retinoids
lower than those required for triggering the rar␥/
rxr␣-mediated proliferation of basal keratinocytes
(supplementary fig. 1; chapellier et al. 2002b), the production of lgs is impaired due to the artifactual derepression of target gene(s), whose identity and function
remain to be determined.

genes & development

1533

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

figure 7. the concomitant occurrence of rar/rxr-mediated
repression and rxr/ppar␤(␦)-mediated activation events observed in mouse epidermis suprabasal keratinocytes refutes the
possibility that the ligand activating rxr af-2 could be 9-cis
ra. (a) scenario a: the rxr-activating ligand is not  xxxd114xxx .
within activating ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers, the af-2 of
rxr␣ is required to activate gene expression, notably that of
hmgcs2. thus, rxr␣ most likely binds an agonistic ligand, and
ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers interact with coactivators
(ncoas/srcs) (shown in the left panel). on the other hand,
within repressing rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers, rxr␣ cannot be
transcriptionally active, due to subordination of its transcriptional activity to that of its repressing rar␥ partner, which has
to be in its unliganded apo-form in order to bind corepressors
(ncor/smrt) that block the transcriptional activity of rxr␣
(shown in the middle panel). it follows that there should not be
any  xxxd2071xxx  in suprabasal keratinocytes, and therefore
that the rxr-activating ligand cannot be  xxxd114xxx . under these
conditions, lamellar granule (lg) formation and epidermis ultrastructure are normal (shown in the right panel). (b) scenario
b: the rxr-activating ligand is  xxxd114xxx . in this case, rxr␣
binds  xxxd114xxx  and ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers interact with
coactivators (ncoas/srcs) (shown in the left panel). however,
 xxxd114xxx  also binds to rar␥, thus relieving rxr␣ subordination and activating rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers, which no longer
repress gene expression (shown in the middle panel). under
these conditions, lg biogenesis is impaired (shown in the right
panel). as this is not actually the case, the possibility that 9-cis
ra could be the ligand activating rxr af-2 is ruled out.

activating heterodimers between ppar␤(␦) and a
transcriptionally active rxr␣ are cell-autonomously
required for the generation of lgs in suprabasal
keratinocytes
three lines of evidence strongly support the conclusion
that heterodimers between ppar␤(␦) and a transcriptionally active rxr␣ cell-autonomously activate the ex-

1534

genes & development

pression of target genes that are required for lg biogenesis in suprabasal keratinocytes (fig. 7a). firstly,
ablation of ppar␤(␦) in suprabasal keratinocytes
[ppar␤(␦)sb−/− mutants] results in lg and related defects
very similar to those generated by rxr␣ ablation. secondly, either topical treatment with a pan-rxr af-2 antagonist (br1211) or impairment of the af-2 of rxr␣
(and rxr␤) by deletion of the af-2 core (helix 12) in
af2o
epidermal keratinocytes (rxr␣␤ep mice), which both
should not relieve the repression exerted by rar␥/rxr
heterodimers in which rar␥ is unliganded (zhang et al.
1999), also result in lg defects. thirdly and importantly,
a topical application of the ppar␤(␦) agonist l165041
af2o
can rescue lg and related defects in rxr␣␤ep mice,
which supports the conclusion that ppar␤(␦) and rxr␣
synergistically contribute to lg biogenesis. in this respect, it is worth stressing that our data additionally indicate that deleting helix 12 of rxr␣ impairs neither the
heterodimerization with ppar␤(␦) in vitro nor the ligand-dependent activity of the ppar␤(␦) partner in
hepg2 cells. we conclude that it is most likely that the
effect of the rxr␣af2o mutation is to abrogate the rxr␣dependent transcriptional activity, without silencing
that of ppar␤(␦) within the heterodimers. this conclusion is in keeping with our earlier in vivo observations
showing that embryos expressing both rxr␣⌬af-2 and
rxr␤⌬af-2 survive until gestation day 14.5 (mark et al.
2006), while null mutants for rxr␣ and rxr␤ (wendling et al. 1999), ppar␤(␦) (barak et al. 2002), or ppar␥
(barak et al. 1999) all die at embryonic day 9.5 from
highly similar, if not identical, placental defects characterized by the absence of formation of the labyrinthine zone of the chorioallantoic placenta. therefore,
ppar␤(␦)/rxr⌬af-2 and ppar␥/rxr⌬af-2 heterodimers allow the early step of placentation to take place
normally, clearly indicating that af-2 deletions are not
converting rxrs into potent transcriptional repressors
that silence their ppar partners.
that inhibition of cholesterol synthesis by lovastatin
induces lg defects (menon et al. 1992) prompted us to
examine whether expression of genes involved in this
metabolic pathway could be a target for ppar␤(␦)/rxr
heterodimers. hmgcs2, encoding the hmg-coa synthase 2, is likely to be one of these target genes, as both
its expression and cholesterol levels are reduced in the
epidermis of ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c) and rxr␣␤ep−/−(c) newborns, while topical administration of cholesterol cures
the lg and related defects displayed by ppar␤(␦)ep−/−(c)
adults. in addition, hmgcs2 expression is increased in
wild-type adult epidermis topically treated with either
the ppar␤(␦)-selective agonist l165041 or the pan-rxr
agonist bms649, whereas it is decreased by the pan-rxr
antagonist br1211. these observations, the presence of
functional ppar response element in the hmgcs2 gene
(rodriguez et al. 1994), the decrease of its expression in
the skin of mutant mice lacking rxr af-2 in their keaf2o
ratinocytes (rxr␣␤ep mice), and the enhancement of
its expression by the ppar␤(␦) agonist l165041 in these
mice, all strongly support, at the molecular level, the
conclusion that ppar␤(␦)/rxr heterodimers, in which

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

rxr␣ is transcriptionally active, are instrumental to lg
biogenesis.
a  xxxd3417xxx  cannot be the physiological
rxr␣-activating ligand in mouse epidermal
suprabasal keratinocytes
two observations strongly support the conclusion that,
within activating ppar␤(␦)/rxr heterodimers, the transcriptionally active rxr␣ most probably binds an agonistic ligand, as both (1) deletion of the af-2 core (helix
12) and (2) topical treatment with an rxr antagonist
(br1211), whose effect can be competed out by a bona
fide rxr agonist (bms649), result in lg and related defects, as well as in decreased expression of the target gene
hmgcs2. our present study illustrates how, under physiological conditions in the mouse, two signaling pathways, that of rar␥, which is repressing, and that of
ppar␤(␦), which is activating, can be both mediated
through heterodimerization with rxr␣, under conditions in which an agonistic ligand is bound to rxr␣. the
solution of this conundrum lies in the so-called subordination mechanism through which the transcriptional activity of an agonist-bound rxr is subordinated, within
an rar/rxr heterodimer, to the binding of an agonistic
ligand to its rar partner. to prevent an agonist-bound
rxr␣ to transactivate on its own within a rar␥/rxr␣
heterodimer, a corepressor has to bind rar␥ in order to
block the transcriptional activity of its rxr␣ partner
(germain et al. 2002; gronemeyer et al. 2004). thus,
there should be very little, if any, rar␥-activating  xxxd2071xxx  in suprabasal keratinocytes in order to allow
the binding of a corepressor to rar␥, and to achieve
concomitantly rar␥/rxr␣-mediated repression and
ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣-mediated activation of target genes that
are instrumental to lg biogenesis (fig. 7a). several lines
of evidence actually support the lack of active retinoids
in epidermis (see above for references). that a retinoid is
not present in mouse keratinocytes is further supported
by the failure of the pan-rar antagonist bms493 or of
the pan-rxr antagonist br1211 to decrease cyp26a1
and  xxxg512xxx  expressions that are otherwise inducible by
the ra (supplementary fig. 1g). in addition, it is known
that  xxxd114xxx , which unlike all-trans ra can bind to
rxrs, (1) is nearly as efficient as all-trans ra for binding
and activating the rars, and (2) binds less efficiently to
rxrs than to rars (allenby et al. 1993). thus, if 9-cis
ra would be the rxr␣-activating ligand, its presence in
suprabasal keratinocytes could also activate rar␥
within rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers, thereby relieving
rar␥/rxr␣ repression and inducing lg and related defects (fig. 7b). we conclude that  xxxd114xxx  is most unlikely to be the rxr␣-activating ligand in suprabasal keratinocytes.
an alternative possibility would be that the epidermis
is made up of two subtype populations of suprabasal keratinocytes, one in which ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimers
mediate activation events, and another one in which the
rar␥/rxr␣-mediated repression events are occurring.
this possibility is, however, very unlikely as both the

rar␥ and rxr␣ proteins (chapellier et al. 2002a;
metzger et al. 2003), as well as ppar␤(␦) transcripts
(matsuura et al. 1999), have been uniformly detected in
suprabasal keratinocytes. furthermore, as retinoids are
diffusible molecules able to act far away from their site
of production (matt et al. 2005), any rxr␣-activating
retinoid selectively synthesized in keratinocytes containing ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ would diffuse toward neighboring keratinocytes containing rar␥/rxr␣, unless a retinoid degrading enzyme would be selectively expressed in
the latter. that the ra oxidative enzyme cyp26b1 is
uniformly detected in epidermis (abu-abed et al. 2002)
makes this possibility most unlikely.
potential rxr agonistic ligands that do not activate
rars include phytol metabolites (kitareewan et al.
1996), docosahexaenoic acid (de urquiza et al. 2000), and
several unsaturated  xxxd2154xxx  (goldstein et al. 2003)
whose impaired synthesis results in lg defects reminiscent of those described in the present study (mao-qiang
et al. 1993). as  xxxd2154xxx  activate not only rxrs, but
also ppars, it is tempting to speculate that the same
ligand could activate the two partners of ppar␤(␦)/
rxr␣ heterodimers. it should, however, be stressed that
our present study does not rule out that the transcriptional activity of rxr␣ may not be induced by the binding of an agonistic ligand, but through another mechanism; for example, specific phosphorylation events. this
possibility cannot be excluded but appears unlikely, because such an event would (1) require the integrity of the
rxr ligand-binding domain (lbd) helix 12, (2) have to
mimic the binding of an agonist ligand to the lbd of
rxr␣, and (3) have to be blocked by the binding of a
competitive rxr antagonist. in any event,  xxxd114xxx 
binding would not be the event triggering the transcriptional activity of rxr␣ within the ppar␤(␦)/rxr␣ heterodimer in suprabasal keratinocytes.
in view of the almost ubiquitous presence of rar␣
and rxr␣ in a variety of cell types, one can wonder
whether  xxxd114xxx  could ever be an rxr agonistic ligand
in vivo. investigating, in a variety of tissues/cell types,
whether rar/rxr-mediated repression is concomitant
with transactivation mediated by other nr/rxr heterodimers in which rxr is transcriptionally active
should tell us where  xxxd114xxx  is unlikely to be an rxr
agonistic ligand. moreover, examining where the expression of genes is reduced both in rxraf2o mutants (lacking af-2) and in  xxxd3105xxx -deficient (vad) mice (lacking
 xxxd114xxx ) should reveal in which cases  xxxd114xxx  could be
an agonistic ligand for rxr in vivo. in this respect, we
recently reported that cholesterol efflux from sertoli
cells involves activating lxr␤/rxr␤ heterodimers in
which rxr␤ af-2 is transcriptionally active, whereas
vad has no affect on this efflux, which strongly suggests
that, in this case also,  xxxd114xxx  is most unlikely to be the
rxr␤-activating ligand (mascrez et al. 2004).
we have proposed elsewhere that low affinity agonist
ligands bound to the rxr partners of nr/rxr heterodimers could “sensitize,” through synergistic effects,
the transcriptional activity of these heterodimers to discrete variations in the concentration of the nr cognate

genes & development

1535

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

ligands (chambon 2005). in the present case, it is interesting to note that the level of the “sensitizing” rxr
ligand is high enough in suprabasal keratinocytes to synergistically reach, with a 3-nmol rar␥-selective ligand
(bms961) treatment, the threshold level sufficient to relieve the repression exerted by rar␥/rxr␣ heterodimers, but not to trigger in these cells the paracrine
events that induce the proliferation of basal keratinocytes that necessitates an additional cotreatment with
the selective rxr ligand bms649.
altered rar␥, ppar␤(␦), and rxr␣-dependent
mechanisms may be involved in the etiology of
human skin diseases
exposure of human skin to uv irradiation results in the
formation of “abnormal, vacuolated and lamellar bodydeficient” granular keratinocytes (holleran et al. 1997).
these findings, reminiscent of the phenotype found in
our loss-of-function mutants, point to possible alterations of rar␥-, ppar␤(␦)-, and/or rxr␣-dependent
functions in lg formation in aging, photo-damaged skin.
along these lines, xerosis senilis is a disorder of keratinization characterized by (1) the presence of vesicles
similar in size and shape to lg, but without lamellate
internal structure; and (2) the disappearance of the lipid
film on top of the cornified layer (tezuka 1983); two
features resembling those displayed by the rar␥-,
ppar␤(␦)-, and rxr␣-null epidermis.
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses (arci) are
heterogeneous keratinization diseases (fartasch 1997)
that belong either to the erythrodermic scaly type (nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, ncie)
or to the thick lamellar type (lamellar ichthyosis, li),
both of which are characterized by lg and/or abnormalities of multilamellar lipid sheets (ghadially et al. 1992).
mutations in alox12b and aloxe3 genes have been
linked to ncie, while mutations in tgm1 have been
observed in li; however, our results rule out altered expression of these genes in rar␥ and ppar␤ loss-of-function mutants (see supplementary fig. 3), and none of the
“orphan” mutated loci for ncie or li colocalized with
gene loci encoding rar␥, ppar␤(␦), and rxr␣ (jobard et
al. 2002 and references therein). however, a third type of
arci of unknown origin, type iii congenital ichthyosis,
is characterized by the occurrence of lg-derived vesicular complexes accumulating at the apical side of granular
keratinocytes and between corneocytes (arnold et al.
1988; niemi et al. 1992). this suggests that alteration of
rxr␣-, rar␥-, and/or ppar␤-dependent mechanisms
could be involved in the etiology of some keratinization
disorders in humans.
materials and methods
generation of mutants and skin treatments
mice bearing floxed alleles and expressing cre or creert2 in
keratinocytes were genotyped and treated by tamoxifen as described (metzger et al. 2003). a single dose of retinoids or

1536

genes & development

l165041 was applied topically on dorsal skin for 5 d, then every
second day for 15 d. skin samples were analyzed 24 h after the
last topical treatment.
immunohistochemistry, lipid staining, and thin-layer
chromatography
corneodesmosin was detected as described (montézin et al.
1997). frozen sections (10 µm thick) of unfixed epidermis were
stained with nile red and examined by fluorescence microscopy
(450 nm). skin lipids were extracted using the bligh and dyer
procedure; loaded onto silica plates run in chloroform-methanol
(9:1, v/v) for 2 min, then in chloroform- xxxd2052xxx -ethyl acetate (8:0.4:1.6, v/v) for 20 min; and revealed by molybdatophosphoric acid staining.
electron microscopic analyses
for stem, the samples were coated with palladium gold and
observed with a philips xl20 electron microscope. for tem,
skin samples were fixed at 4°c in karnovsky’s solution, postfixed in ruthenium tetroxide (0.2% in 100 mm cacodylate
buffer), and embedded in epon 812. sections (50–70 nm thick)
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate were examined with
a philips 208 electron microscope. analysis of acid lipase localization was as described (menon et al. 1986).
rna and gene expression analysis
quantitative analysis of rna was carried out by rt coupled to
real-time pcr in the presence of sybr green i dye (qbiogen).
the specific primers are listed in supplementary table 1. emsa
was performed as described (mascrez et al. 2004) using the
mouse hmgcs2 ppar response element (rodriguez et al. 1994).
hepg2 cells were transfected with the hmgcs2 ppre-tk-cat
construct using jetpei (polyplus-transfection). cat assays
were performed using an elisa test (roche), and values were
normalized to ␤-galactosidase activity.
see the supplemental material for details.

acknowledgments
we are grateful to professor e. grosshans for helpful discussions; to dr. c. rochette-egly and professor g. serre for antibodies against rar␥ and cdsn, respectively; to dr. f. gonzalez for ppar␣-null mice; and to professor w. walhi and professor b. desvergne for the l165041 compound. we thank b. féret,
b. weber, and m. teletin, as well as the staff from the animal
facility for technical assistance. this work was supported by
funds from the centre national de la recherche scientifique
(cnrs), institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale (inserm), collège de france, and bristol myers squibb.

references
abu-abed, s., maclean, g., fraulob, v., chambon, p., petkovich, m., and dolle, p. 2002. differential expression of the
 xxxd3417xxx -metabolizing enzymes cyp26a1 and cyp26b1
during murine organogenesis. mech. dev. 110: 173–177.
allenby, g., bocquel, m.t., saunders, m., kazmer, s., speck, j.,
rosenberger, m., lovey, a., kastner, p., grippo, j.f., chambon, p., et al. 1993.  xxxd3417xxx  receptors and retinoid x
receptors: interactions with endogenous  xxxd2071xxx . proc.
natl. acad. sci. 90: 30–34.
andersen, b. and rosenfeld, m.g. 1995. intracellular receptors.

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

nuclear receptors and epidermis differentiation

new wrinkles in retinoids. nature 374: 118–119.
arnold, m.l., anton-lamprecht, i., melz-rothfuss, b., and
hartschuh, w. 1988. ichthyosis congenita type iii. clinical
and ultrastructural characteristics and distinction within
the heterogeneous ichthyosis congenita group. arch. dermatol. res. 280: 268–278.
attar, p.s., wertz, p.w., mcarthur, m., imakado, s., bickenbach, j.r., and roop, d.r. 1997. inhibition of retinoid signaling in transgenic mice alters lipid processing and disrupts
epidermal barrier function. mol. endocrinol. 11: 792–800.
barak, y., nelson, m.c., ong, e.s., jones, y.z., ruiz-lozano, p.,
chien, k.r., koder, a., and evans, r.m. 1999. ppar ␥ is
required for placental, cardiac, and adipose tissue development. mol. cell 4: 585–595.
barak, y., liao, d., he, w., ong, e.s., nelson, m.c., olefsky,
j.m., boland, r., and evans, r.m. 2002. effects of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor ␦ on placentation, adiposity,
and colorectal cancer. proc. natl. acad. sci. 99: 303–308.
chambon, p. 1996. a decade of molecular biology of retinoic
acid receptors. faseb j. 10: 940–954.
———. 2005. the nuclear receptor superfamily: a personal retrospect on the first two decades. mol. endocrinol. 19: 1418–
1428.
chapellier, b., mark, m., garnier, j.m., diérich, a., chambon,
p., and ghyselinck, n.b. 2002a. a conditional floxed (loxpflanked) allele for the  xxxd3417xxx  receptor ␥ (rar␥) gene.
genesis 32: 95–98.
chapellier, b., mark, m., messaddeq, n., calléja, c., warot, x.,
brocard, j., gérard, c., li, m., metzger, d., ghyselinck, n.b.,
et al. 2002b. physiological and retinoid-induced proliferations of epidermis basal keratinocytes are differently controlled. embo j. 21: 3402–3413.
chen, c.f. and lohnes, d.l. 2004. dominant negative rars
elicit epidermal defects through a non-canonical pathway. j.
biol. chem. 280: 3012–3021.
de urquiza, a.m., liu, s., sjoberg, m., zetterstrom, r.h., griffiths, w., sjovall, j., and perlmann, t. 2000. docosahexaenoic acid, a ligand for the retinoid x receptor in mouse brain.
science 290: 2140–2144.
elias, p.m., fritsch, p.o., lampe, m., williams, m.l., brown,
b.e., nemanic, m., and grayson, s. 1981. retinoid effects on
epidermal structure, differentiation, and permeability. lab.
invest. 44: 531–540.
fartasch, m. 1997. epidermal barrier in disorders of the skin.
microsc. res. tech. 38: 361–372.
feng, x., peng, z.h., di, w., li, x.y., rochette-egly, c., chambon, p., voorhees, j.j., and xiao, j.h. 1997. suprabasal expression of a dominant-negative rxr ␣ mutant in transgenic
mouse epidermis impairs regulation of gene transcription
and basal keratinocyte proliferation by rar-selective retinoids. genes & dev. 11: 59–71.
fisher, g.j., talwar, h.s., xiao, j.h., datta, s.c., reddy, a.p.,
gaub, m.p., rochette-egly, c., chambon, p., and voorhees,
j.j. 1994. immunological identification and functional quantitation of  xxxd3417xxx  and retinoid x receptor proteins in
human skin. j. biol. chem. 269: 20629–20635.
germain, p., iyer, j., zechel, c., and gronemeyer, h. 2002. coregulator recruitment and the mechanism of  xxxd3417xxx 
receptor synergy. nature 415: 187–192.
ghadially, r., williams, m.l., hou, s.y., and elias, p.m. 1992.
membrane structural abnormalities in the stratum corneum
of the autosomal recessive ichthyoses. j. invest. dermatol.
99: 755–763.
goldstein, j.t., dobrzyn, a., clagett-dame, m., pike, j.w., and
deluca, h.f. 2003. isolation and characterization of unsaturated  xxxd2154xxx  as natural ligands for the retinoid-x recep-

tor. arch. biochem. biophys. 420: 185–193.
gronemeyer, h., gustafsson, j.a., and laudet, v. 2004. principles for modulation of the nuclear receptor superfamily.
nat. rev. drug discov. 3: 950–964.
holleran, w.m., uchida, y., halkier-sorensen, l., haratake, a.,
hara, m., epstein, j.h., and elias, p.m. 1997. structural and
biochemical basis for the uvb-induced alterations in epidermal barrier function. photodermatol. photoimmunol. photomed. 13: 117–128.
imakado, s., bickenbach, j.r., bundman, d.s., rothnagel, j.a.,
attar, p.s., wang, x.j., walczak, v.r., wisniewski, s., pote,
j., gordon, j.s., et al. 1995. targeting expression of a dominant-negative  xxxd3417xxx  receptor mutant in the epidermis
of transgenic mice results in loss of barrier function. genes
& dev. 9: 317–329.
ishida-yamamoto, a., simon, m., kishibe, m., miyauchi, y.,
takahashi, h., yoshida, s., o’brien, t.j., serre, g., and iizuka, h. 2004. epidermal lamellar granules transport different cargoes as distinct aggregates. j. invest. dermatol. 122:
1137–1144.
jobard, f., lefevre, c., karaduman, a., blanchet-bardon, c.,
emre, s., weissenbach, j., ozguc, m., lathrop, m.,
prud’homme, j.f., and fischer, j. 2002. lipoxygenase-3
(aloxe3) and 12(r)-lipoxygenase (alox12b) are mutated
in non-bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma
(ncie) linked to chromosome 17p13.1. hum. mol. genet.
11: 107–113.
kitareewan, s., burka, l.t., tomer, k.b., parker, c.e., deterding, l.j., stevens, r.d., forman, b.m., mais, d.e., heyman,
r.a., mcmorris, t., et al. 1996. phytol metabolites are circulating dietary factors that activate the nuclear receptor
rxr. mol. biol. cell 7: 1153–1166.
laudet, v. and gronemeyer, h. 2002. the nuclear receptor facts
book. academic press, london.
lee, s.s., pineau, t., drago, j., lee, e.j., owens, j.w., kroetz,
d.l., fernandez-salguero, p.m., westphal, h., and gonzalez,
f.j. 1995. targeted disruption of the ␣ isoform of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene in mice results in
abolishment of the pleiotropic effects of peroxisome proliferators. mol. cell. biol. 15: 3012–3022.
li, m., chiba, h., warot, x., messaddeq, n., gérard, c., chambon, p., and metzger, d. 2001. rxr␣ ablation in skin keratinocytes results in alopecia and epidermal alterations. development 128: 675–688.
madison, k.c. 2003. barrier function of the skin: ‘la raison
d’être’ of the epidermis. j. invest. dermatol. 121: 231–241.
mao-qiang, m., elias, p.m., and feingold, k.r. 1993.  xxxd2154xxx 
are required for epidermal permeability barrier function. j.
clin. invest. 92: 791–798.
mark, m., ghyselinck, n.b., and chambon, p. 2006. function of
retinoid nuclear receptors: lessons from genetic and pharmacological dissections of the  xxxd3417xxx  signaling pathway during mouse embryogenesis. annu. rev. pharmacol.
toxicol. 46: 451–480.
mascrez, b., mark, m., dierich, a., ghyselinck, n.b., kastner,
p., and chambon, p. 1998. the rxr␣ ligand-dependent activation function 2 (af-2) is important for mouse development. development 125: 4691–4707.
mascrez, b., ghyselinck, n.b., watanabe, m., annicotte, j.s.,
chambon, p., auwerx, j., and mark, m. 2004. ligand-dependent contribution of rxr␤ to cholesterol homeostasis in
sertoli cells. embo rep. 5: 285–290.
matsuura, h., adachi, h., smart, r.c., xu, x., arata, j., and
jetten, a.m. 1999. correlation between expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ␤ and squamous differentiation in epidermal and tracheobronchial epithelial cells.

genes & development

1537

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

calléja et al.

mol. cell. endocrinol. 147: 85–92.
matt, n., dupe, v., garnier, j.m., dennefeld, c., chambon, p.,
mark, m., and ghyselinck, n.b. 2005.  xxxd3417xxx -dependent eye morphogenesis is orchestrated by neural crest cells.
development 132: 4789–4800.
menon, g.k., grayson, s., and elias, p.m. 1986. cytochemical
and biochemical localization of lipase and sphyngomyelinase activity in mammalian epidermis. j. invest. dermatol.
86: 591–597.
menon, g.k., feingold, k.r., mao-qiang, m., schaude, m., and
elias, p.m. 1992. structural basis for the barrier abnormality
following inhibition of  xxxg1060xxx  in murine epidermis. j. invest. dermatol. 98: 209–219.
metzger, d., indra, a.k., li, m., chapellier, b., calleja, c., ghyselinck, n.b., and chambon, p. 2003. targeted conditional
somatic mutagenesis in the mouse: temporally-controlled
knock out of retinoid receptors in epidermal keratinocytes.
methods enzymol. 364: 379–408.
montézin, m., simon, m., guerrin, m., and serre, g. 1997. corneodesmosin, a corneodesmosome-specific basic protein, is
expressed in the cornified epithelia of the pig, guinea pig, rat
and mouse. exp. cell res. 231: 132–140.
niemi, k.m., kanerva, l., wahlgren, c.f., and ignatius, j. 1992.
clinical, light and electron microscopic features of recessive
ichthyosis congenita type iii. arch. dermatol. 284: 259–265.
ohta, k., iijima, t., kawachi, e., kagechika, h., and endo, y.
2004. novel retinoid x receptor (rxr) antagonists having
a dicarba-closo-dodecaborane as a hydrophobic moiety.
bioorg. med. chem. lett. 14: 5913–5918.
perissi, v. and rosenfeld, m.g. 2005. controlling nuclear receptors: the circular logic of cofactor cycles. nat. rev. mol. cell
biol. 6: 542–554.
randolph, r.k. and siegenthaler, g. 1999.  xxxd3105xxx  homeostasis in human epidermis: native retinoid composition and
metabolism. in retinoids. the biochemical and molecular
basis of  xxxd3105xxx  and retinoid action (eds. h. nau and w.s.
blaner), pp. 491–520. springer, new york.
rodriguez, j.c., gil-gomez, g., hegardt, f.g., and haro, d.
1994. peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor mediates
induction of the mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoa synthase gene by  xxxd2154xxx . j. biol. chem. 269: 18767–
18772.
saitou, m., sugai, s., tanaka, t., shimouchi, k., fuchs, e., narumiya, s., and kakizuka, a. 1995. inhibition of skin development by targeted expression of a dominant negative  xxxd3417xxx  receptor. nature 374: 159–162.
saurat, j.h., sorg, o., and didierjean, l. 1999. new concepts for
delivery of topical retinoid activity to human skin. in retinoids. the biochemical and molecular basis of  xxxd3105xxx 
and retinoid action (eds. h. nau and w.s. blaner), pp. 521–
538. springer, new york.
tezuka, t. 1983. electron-microscopic changes in xerosis senile
epidermis. its abnormal membrane-coating granule formation. dermatologica 166: 57–61.
wendling, o., chambon, p., and mark, m. 1999. retinoid x
receptors are essential for early mouse development and
placentogenesis. proc. natl. acad. sci. 96: 547–551.
xiao, j.h., feng, x., di, w., peng, z.h., li, l.a., chambon, p.,
and voorhees, j.j. 1999. identification of heparin-binding
egf-like growth factor as a target in intercellular regulation
of epidermal basal cell growth by suprabasal  xxxd3417xxx 
receptors. embo j. 18: 1539–1548.
yoshida, m., kijima, m., akita, m., and beppu, t. 1990. potent
and specific inhibition of mammalian histone deacetylase
both in vivo and in vitro by  xxxd3426xxx . j. biol. chem.
265: 17174–17179.

1538

genes & development

zhang, j., hu, x., and lazar, m.a. 1999. a novel role for helix 12
of retinoid x receptor in regulating repression. mol. cell.
biol. 19: 6448–6457.

downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on may 24, 2015 - published by cold spring harbor laboratory press

genetic and pharmacological evidence that a  xxxd3417xxx  cannot be
the rxr-activating ligand in mouse epidermis keratinocytes
cécile calléja, nadia messaddeq, benoit chapellier, et al.
genes dev. 2006 20: 1525-1538
access the most recent version at doi:10.1101/gad.368706

supplemental
material
references
email alerting
service

http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/suppl/2006/05/16/20.11.1525.dc1.html

this article cites 49 articles, 19 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/20/11/1525.full.html#ref-list-1
receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right corner of the article or click here.

to subscribe to genes & development go to:

http://genesdev.cshlp.org/subscriptions

copyright © 2006, cold spring harbor laboratory press

