j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404
doi 10.1007/s10545-006-0265-4

ssiem symposium 2005

direct multiplex assay of enzymes in dried blood spots by tandem
mass spectrometry for the newborn screening of lysosomal storage
disorders
michael h. gelb · frantisek turecek · c. ron scott ·
nestor a. chamoles

received: 8 november 2005 / accepted: 16 january 2006
c ssiem and springer 2006


summary tandem mass spectrometry is currently used in
newborn screening programmes to quantify the level of
amino acids and acylcarnitines in dried blood spots for detection of metabolites associated with treatable diseases.
we have developed assays for lysosomal enzymes in rehydrated dried blood spots in which a set of substrates is
added and the set of corresponding enzymatic products are
quantified using tandem mass spectrometry with the aid of
mass-differentiated internal standards. we have developed
communicating editor: jean-marie saudubray
competing interests: none declared
the authors m.h.g, f.t. and c.r.c. are co-pis that direct the research
described at the university of washington. the contribution of n.a.c.
was to provided many of the dried blood spots used in this study. the
research at the university of washington was funded by grants from
the national institutes of health (dk67859) and from genzyme
corporation. all authors are independent of the sponsors.
presented at the 42nd annual meeting of the ssiem, paris, 6–9
september 2005
m. h. gelb ()
department of chemistry, university of washington, seattle,
washington, usa; department of biochemistry, university of
washington, seattle, washington, usa
e-mail: gelb@chem.washington.edu
f. turecek
department of chemistry, university of washington, seattle,
washington, usa
c. r. scott
department of pediatrics, university of washington, seattle,
washington, usa
n. a. chamoles
laboratory of neurochemistry, uriarte 2383, 1425, buenos aires,
argentina; department of chemistry, simon fraser university,
burnaby, bc, canada; deceased

a multiplex assay of the set of enzymes that, when deficient, cause the lysosomal storage disorders fabry, gaucher,
hurler, krabbe, niemann–pick a/b and pompe diseases.
these diseases were selected because treatments are now
available or expected to emerge shortly. the discovery that
acarbose is a selective inhibitor of  xxxg1401xxx   xxxg1401xxx  allows the  xxxg826xxx  enzyme, acid alpha-glucosidase, to be
selectively assayed in white blood cells and dried blood spots.
when tested with dried blood spots from 40 unaffected individuals and 10–12 individuals with the lysosomal storage
disorder, the tandem mass spectrometry assay led to the correct identification of the affected individuals with 100% sensitivity. many of the reagents needed for the new assays are
commercially available, and those that are not are being prepared under good manufacturing procedures for approval by
the fda. our newborn screening assay for  xxxg854xxx  is
currently being put in place at the wadsworth center in new
york state for the analysis of ∼1000 dried blood spots per
day.
summary we have developed tandem mass spectrometry
for the direct assay of lysosomal enzymes in rehydrated dried
blood spots that can be implemented for newborn screening of lysosomal storage disorders. several enzymes can be
analysed by a single method (multiplex analysis) and in a
high-throughput manner appropriate for newborn screening
laboratories.

introduction
over the past 5 years or so we have been developing the use
of tandem mass spectrometry (tandem ms) as a diagnostic
platform for the early detection and confirmation of genetic
disorders. tandem ms as a diagnostic tool offers a number
of key advantages, as will become apparent from studies and
springer

398

summary points described in this review. the confirmation of
a genetic disease in humans continues to rest on the identification of an altered protein in the form of diminished or altered
enzyme activity, or an alteration or absence of a structural
protein. for some common genetic diseases for which there
has been selection or genetic drift in certain ethnic groups,
dna technology can be utilized in an efficient manner for
their early detection. the most common approach for individuals who unexpectedly present with clinical symptoms
remains, however, the measurement of protein function from
a biological sample. various technologies have been used
to measure protein function, including spectrophotometric,
fluorometric, radiometric or immunological assays. with the
exception of immunological assays, these assay methods are
generally not multiplexable; that is, they are applied to assay
the function of one protein at a time. immunological assays
may be multiplexable, but they provide protein abundance
data, which is not useful in cases where nonfunctional protein is produced.

assays for enzyme deficiencies: lysosomal storage
disorders
our focus has been the development of the tandem mass
spectrometer as a common platform for measuring enzyme
function. this has been applied to blood samples obtained
from individuals suspected or confirmed to have a particular
genetic disease. we were originally successful in demonstrating, as a proof of principle, that the tandem mass spectrometer
could be used to measure the four enzymes responsible for
the sanfilippo syndrome and that it could be performed in a
multiplexed fashion in which all four enzymes in a fibroblast lysate are assayed in a single sample infusion into the
tandem mass spectrometer (gerber et al 2001a,b). we subsequently demonstrated that, for several of the lysosomal storage disorders, blood samples could be utilized for the quantitative measurement of the activities of enzymes responsible
for gaucher disease, fabry disease, mucopolysaccharidosis-i
(mps i),  xxxg826xxx ,  xxxg854xxx  and niemann–pick
a or b diseases (li et al 2004a,b). in each of these cases,
the technology proved so sensitive that activity could actually be measured in dried blood spots that were submitted
for newborn screening (after they were rehydrated in suitable buffers). thus, the technology has been extended from
the theoretical concept of a common platform used for diagnosis to a sensitive technology that can used for large-scale
screening of newborns independently of selection by clinical symptoms. this is of clinical importance because the
disorders of gaucher, fabry, mps i and pompe currently
have available, for clinical use or trials, enzyme replacement therapy that either has been demonstrated to improve
(gaucher, fabry; scott et al 2003; shah and elliott 2005)
springer

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

or is expected to improve (mps i, pompe; desnick 2004;
miebach 2005) the clinical status of affected individuals.
in the case of krabbe and niemann–pick disease, there is
evidence that presymptomatic detection and intervention by
the use of umbilical stem cell transplantation markedly improves the clinical course of the disease (escolar et al 2005;
krivit 2004).

tandem mass spectrometry for the multiplex
analysis of lysosomal enzymes in dried blood spots
the laboratory of nestor chamoles has shown over the past
several years that many lysosomal enzymes remain active
in dried blood spots and can be assayed with fluorometric or
radiometric substrates after rehydration in a suitable reaction
buffer (see, for example, chamoles et al (2002)). such blood
spots are prepared shortly after birth by spotting a drop of
newborn blood onto a filter paper card and allowing the liquid
to dry on the card. it is now commonplace in many countries
to send dried blood spots to newborn screening laboratories
for tandem ms analysis of amino acids and acylcarnitines
(see, for example, chace and kalas (2005), wilcken et al
(2003)). quantification of these compounds allows screening
for up to about 30 treatable metabolic diseases. based on all
of this information, we decided to develop a multiplex tandem
ms assay of several lysosomal enzymes using dried blood
spots as the input sample.
the detection of lysosomal enzyme activities in dried
blood spots faces the problem of low protein content and
hence low concentration of enzymatic products to be analysed. we developed a new methodology that consists of the
following steps: (1) a small punch (typically a few millimetres in diameter) is taken from the dried blood spot and rehydrated in a buffer to extract the enzymes of interest. (2) the
substrate for the enzyme is added, and the mixture is allowed
to incubate under defined conditions to allow enzymatic conversion of substrate to product. (3) the sample is submitted
to a simple workup involving passage through a solid-phase
extraction cartridge to remove the relatively large amounts
of buffer salts and detergent (if present), as these would interfere with the electrospray ionization process in the mass
spectrometer. (4) the sample is infused directly into the electrospray ionization mass spectrometer operating in tandem
mode, and the amount of enzymatically-generated product is
selectively detected along with an internal standard to determine the absolute amount of reaction product. the internal
standard is chemically identical to or similar to the reaction
product but is distinguished in the mass spectrometer from the
reaction product by having a different mass. it is anticipated
that this procedure would be easily transferable to newborn
screening laboratories, many of which routinely use tandem
ms to analyse metabolites in dried blood spots.

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

399

fig. 1 tandem ms assay of
galactocerebroside-betagalactosidase for the analysis of
 xxxg854xxx . see text for
discussion

our method for use of tandem ms to assay lysosomal
enzymes in dried blood spots is illustrated in fig. 1 for our
assay of  xxxg854xxx  (li et al 2004a).  xxxg854xxx  is
caused by deficiency in the enzyme galactocerebroside-betagalactosidase. the krabbe substrate is a synthetic galactosylceramide (from avanti polar lipids, inc. alabaster, alabama, usa) containing an 8-carbon fatty acyl chain in the
ceramide moiety. this substrate is very similar in structure
to that of the natural substrates, which contain longer fatty
acyl chains. the dried blood spot punch is incubated with
reaction buffer containing detergent and krabbe substrate.
action of the krabbe enzyme generates the krabbe product,
whose mass is different from that of the substrate (fig. 1).
at the end of the reaction, internal standard is added. this
standard is similar in structure to the product, the only difference is that it contains a 10-carbon fatty acyl chain instead
of an 8-carbon chain. the reaction mixture is extracted with
ethyl acetate, and the extract is passed through a small plug
of silica gel. product and internal standard elute immediately from the silica, whereas buffer salts and detergent are
retained. the eluant is concentrated to dryness with a stream
of air (or in a vacuum desiccator), the residue is dissolved
in methanol, and the solution is infused directly into the tandem mass spectrometer. all of these steps are simple liquid
transfers and can be carried out using 96-well plates. the
solid-phase extraction step is also carried out using a 96-well
plate, a filter plate in this case, and a simple suction manifold
attached to a water aspirator.
the tandem ms analyses were carried out on a tandem
quadrupole mass spectrometer (sciex api iii+), symbolized
as q1-q2-q3, which is a type of instrument commonly used
in clinical laboratories. q1-q2-q3 mass spectrometers are
currently available from abi-sciex, thermoelectron (finnigan), or waters (micromass). precursor analyte ions that are

produced by electrospray ionization are selected by the first
quadrupole mass filter (q1); these are allowed to dissociate
in a collision multipole (q2), and their dissociation products
detected after passing through the second quadrupole mass
filter (q3). as shown in fig. 1 the krabbe product and internal
standard ions undergo collision-induced dissociation (cid)
to give fragment ions of m/z 264.3. however, the product and
internal standard parent ions differ in mass, and thus are selectively quantified. since ion intensities from electrospray
are proportional to analyte concentrations (kebarle and ho
1997), the measured relative intensities of product and internal standard reporter fragment ions are proportional to product and internal standard concentrations. the proportionalities (response factors in the electrospray ionization source)
are determined from calibration curves for product and internal standard. in this case, the krabbe product and internal
standard have near-identical ionization efficiencies, not surprisingly given the similarity in their structure.
we showed that the amount of krabbe product increases
linearly with the incubation time, that the product formed at
fixed time increases linearly with the amount of blood (surface area of the dried blood spot punch), and that the reaction
velocity displays hyperbolic kinetics with respect to substrate
concentration (li et al 2004a). we also optimized the reaction
conditions with respect to ph and detergent concentration (li
et al 2004a). the coefficient of variance measured for 14 different punches from the same dried blood spot was 9.6%.
figure 2 shows typical tandem ms data obtained using our
krabbe enzyme assay.
we also developed assays for gaucher and niemann–pick
types a/b diseases using the same strategy as for  xxxg854xxx  (li et al 2004a). the enzyme deficient in gaucher disease is beta-glucocerebrosidase, and we used a substrate containing a ceramide with a 12-carbon fatty acyl chain with
springer

400

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

fig. 2 tandem ms data
obtained with the krabbe assay.
panel (a) is from a dried blood
spot from a healthy patient, and
panel (b) is from a krabbe
patient. the product-to-internal
standard ratio (c8 -cer to
c10 -cer) is much higher for the
former

an alpha-glucosyl headgroup. the product is the 12-carbon fatty
acyl ceramide, and the internal standard is the 14-carbon fatty
acyl ceramide. the enzyme deficient in niemann–pick types
a/b disease is sphingomyelinase, and we used a substrate
containing a ceramide with a 6-carbon fatty acyl chain and a
 xxxd2929xxx  head group. the product is the 6-carbon
fatty acyl ceramide, and the internal standard is the ceramide
with a 4-carbon fatty acyl chain. since all products and internal standards have different masses, the krabbe, gaucher and
niemann–pick-a/b enzymes can be analysed together by a
single infusion into the tandem mass spectrometer (li et al
fig. 3 tandem ms assay of
alpha-galactosidase a for the
analysis of fabry disease. see
text for discussion

springer

2004b). all substrates and internal standards are available
from avanti polar lipids, inc.
we also developed a tandem ms assay for analysis of
fabry disease, caused by the deficiency of the enzyme acid
alpha-galactosidase a (li et al 2004b). the assay is illustrated
in fig. 3. the fabry product has three design features that
facilitate the tandem ms analysis: (1) it is sufficiently hydrophobic that it elutes under the same conditions during
the silica gel solid-phase extraction step as the ceramides
formed in the three enzymatic reactions described above. (2)
it contains a boc (t-butoxycarbonyl) group which readily

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

fragments in the collision cell of the mass spectrometer to
give a major fragment ion. directing the fragmentation along
a single pathway increases the sensitivity of the assay. (3) it
contains a benzoyl group, which provides a practical site of
heavy isotope incorporation. the internal standard contains
a [2 h5 ]benzoyl group, which is prepared using inexpensive
[2 h5 ]benzoyl chloride.
 xxxg826xxx  is caused by deficiency of acid alphaglucosidase. our assay developed for this disease is similar
to that used for fabry disease. the pompe substrate contains
an alpha-linked glucosyl group and the hydrocarbon chain in
the leaving group contains 8 carbons instead of 6 present in
the fabry substrate. thus, the pompe product and internal
standard are distinguished in the mass spectrometer from the
corresponding fabry species.
the assay for  xxxg826xxx  in dried blood spots has
been known to suffer from interference from another acid
alpha-glucosidase, known as  xxxg1401xxx   xxxg1401xxx , which is
present in neutrophils (blood also contains two other alphaglucosidases but these have a ph optimum near neutral ph
and do not interfere with our pompe assay carried out under
acidic conditions). according to our measurements (li et al
2004b), the pompe enzyme constitutes only about 30% of
total acid alpha-glucosidase activity in a detergent extract from
human neutrophils. thus, purified lymphocytes, fibroblasts,
or muscle tissue have been recommended for the biochemical diagnosis of  xxxg826xxx  (koster et al 1974; shin
et al 1985). although an immunocapture procedure has been
reported to allow a specific assay of the pompe enzyme
(umapathysivam et al 2001), antibody availability and

401

expense may be prohibitive for newborn screening.
furthermore, the development of a tandem ms assay for
 xxxg826xxx  would allow this assay to be multiplexed with
assays of the other lysosomal storage disorders using the
same analytical method. we solved the  xxxg1401xxx   xxxg1401xxx  interference problem by finding that the commercially
available tetrasaccharide acarbose is an efficient and specific
inhibitor of  xxxg1401xxx   xxxg1401xxx , as expressed by the measured ki values, 142 and 0.14 mmol/l for the pompe enzyme
and  xxxg1401xxx   xxxg1401xxx , respectively (li et al 2004b). by
including acarbose in the pompe assay buffer, we have been
able to spot pompe patients with 100% sensitivity as shown
by the data presented in fig. 5 below.
we also developed an assay for alpha-l-iduronidase for the
analysis of mucopolysaccharidosis type i (mps i, hurler disease) (wang et al 2005). the assay is similar to those for
the other lysosomal storage disorders described above and
is shown in fig. 4. the hurler substrate is our structurally
most complex substrate prepared to date. we were able to
prepare the compound starting from commercially availably
heparin. degradation of heparin with nitrous acid gives a
synthetic intermediate that can readily be elaborated into the
hurler substrate. we have prepared this substrate on the gram
scale, sufficient for 100 000 assays. reagent costs, even for
this structurally complex substrate, are minimal (estimated
to be $0.01–0.02 per assay).
we tested our set of six lysosomal enzyme assays using
dried blood spots from 40 normal patients and from 10–
15 patients previously diagnosed with the lysosomal storage disorders. results are shown in fig. 5. in all cases, the

fig. 4 tandem ms assay of
alpha-l-iduronidase for the analysis
of mucopolysaccharidosis type
i. see text for discussion

springer

402

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

fig. 5 tandem ms assays of gaucher, niemann–pick-a/b, krabbe,
pompe and fabry diseases (left panel). gd, gc, gha and ghi are
gaucher disease, carrier, healthy adult, and healthy infant patients, respectively. npd, npc, npha and nphi are for niemann–pick-a/b

samples. kd, kha and khi are for krabbe samples. pd, pc, pha
and phi are for pompe samples. fd, fc, fha and fhi are for fabry
samples. the right panel shows hurler disease assay results

enzyme activities measured using dried blood spots from
patients previously diagnosed with the lysosomal storage
disease are well separated from the activities measured with
healthy patient dried blood spots. our assay method using
acarbose has been further examined by dr helmut kallwass at genzyme corporation on 150 normal patient dried
blood spots and blood spots from 24 infantile pompe patients and 58 late-onset patients. all patients had low levels
of alpha-glucosidase activity that were well resolved from the
activities of normal patients (kallwass et al 2005).
we also examined the stability of the six enzymes in dried
blood spots that had been stored for a number of years at room
temperature (li et al 2004b; wang et al 2005). all enzymes
except the krabbe enzyme were found to be stable over a
3-year storage period (less than 10% decrease in activity). in
the case of the krabbe enzyme, activity decreased by 9% over
a 10-day storage period at room temperature. these results
establish that collection of dried blood spots and shipment
to newborn screening laboratories at room temperature will
not be a problem.

educate/pass krabbe.htm). dr pass’ laboratory is currently
equipping the laboratory for tandem ms assays on ∼1000
dried blood spots per day. it must be stressed that the krabbe
disease enzyme assay carried out with dried blood spots
in a newborn screening programme is only the first step.
newborns with low enzyme activity found in a screen will
be further evaluated with a collection of follow-up tests to
confirm the diagnosis of  xxxg854xxx  before a decision is
made to initiate treatment.
over the past two years, we have been in communication with dr joan keutzer at genzyme corporation to bring
our tandem ms assays for  xxxg854xxx  and other treatable lysosomal diseases into practice in newborn screening laboratories. some of the reagents are commercially
available from avanti polar lipids, inc. pilot lots of the
reagents for assaying fabry disease and  xxxg826xxx  have
been synthesized by genzyme. we have been consulting
with genzyme to optimize the synthesis of our substrate
for mps i on the multi-gram scale, and we are close to accomplishing this goal. these reagents are being manufactured under good manufacturing practice (gmp), which is
now required by the fda for newborn screening reagents
(http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/oivd/guidance/1301.html). genzyme is planning to provide these reagents to newborn
screening laboratories worldwide and has also agreed to provide assay training. no intellectual property protection for
these assays have been sought (the assays have been published and are thus in the public domain), which will ensure
that reagent costs will remain close to the manufacturing
costs.

developments towards tandem ms newborn
screening for lysosomal storage disorders
the tandem ms assays that we have developed for lysosomal
storage disorders may soon move into newborn screening
laboratories. in response to the success of early bone
marrow transplantation for the treatment of  xxxg854xxx 
(escolar et al 2005), the hunter’s hope foundation met
with state representatives in albany, new york (http://
www.huntershope.org/news/press releases/hh albany pr.as
p). as a result, the new york state screening laboratory
at the wadsworth center is establishing our krabbe
disease assay (li et al 2004a) and intend to use it as
part of their newborn screening assay panel (under the
direction of dr. kenneth pass; (http://www.wadsworth.org/
springer

development of tandem ms assays for additional
enzymes
given the recent developments in the use of enzyme replacement therapy and cord blood transplantation for the

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404

treatment of other lysosomal storage disorders (harmatz
et al 2004; http://www.biomarinpharm.com, muenzer et al
2002), we are currently developing tandem ms assays
for hunter syndrome, maroteaux–lamy syndrome and
metachromic leukodystrophy. a tandem ms assay for taysachs disease has recently been developed (m. h. gelb,
unpublished).
we are also developing tandem ms enzyme assays for
other genetic diseases that have been difficult to diagnose
at the biochemical level. one example is the enzymes that
comprise the haem biosynthetic pathway. deficiency of these
enzymes give rise to the various types of porphyrias. direct
enzyme assays are rarely carried out in clinical laboratories because of a lack of robust and easily executed assays. more often, diagnoses are evaluated by measuring the
level of porphyrin precursors in urine samples. such analyses require 24 h urine collection during periods in which
severe symptoms occur. this compromises rapid diagnosis and is also difficult because of problems with patient
compliance.

summary of the advantages of tandem ms for
clinical enzyme activity profiling
in closing, we emphasize the following points to summarize the advantages of using tandem ms for providing early
diagnosis information.
1. tandem ms provides a powerful means of direct assay
of the enzyme of interest. while the alternative approach
of spotting a deficient enzyme activity by looking for an
accumulated metabolite is also useful (for example in
the screening for aminoacidurias and fatty acid oxidation diseases), for many diseases, including many lysosomal storage disorders, a suitable biomarker has not
been identified despite extensive efforts by several laboratories. for example, the tetrasaccharide composed of
four glucose residues was once considered as a possible
indicator of  xxxg826xxx , but subsequent studies have
led to the conclusion that this marker is not adequate
(rozaklis et al 2002; and personal conversations with
d. millington, duke university).
2. tandem ms can quantify metabolites in complex samples without the need for time-consuming chromatographic steps.
3. highly accurate quantitative information is obtained
with the use of a suitable internal standard.
4. tandem ms is highly multiplexable. for example, if 20
amino acids and dozens of fatty acyl carnitines can be
detected in a single injection into the tandem mass spectrometer, it should be possible to quantify the products
of 50–100 enzymes in a single run.

403

5. tandem ms is an extremely sensitive technique, requiring only a few microlitres of blood or a few thousand
fibroblasts.
6. tandem ms is a fast technique, requiring less than
1–2 min per patient sample.
7. reagents for tandem ms assays are needed only in
minute amounts, and thus costs are kept to a minimum.
8. tandem ms allows the use of the natural substrate or
a close analogue. there are known cases of mutant enzymes that display low activity on the artificial substrate
but not on the natural substrate.
9. it is our opinion that most enzymes can be assayed using tandem ms. even assays for isomerases, for which
the substrate and product have the same mass, can be
developed as we have shown (li et al 2003). in those
few cases where the product cannot be analysed directly
by tandem ms, it should be possible to develop a simple derivatization procedure to provide an analyte that
is readily quantified by tandem ms.
acknowledgements we are grateful to j. keutzer, h. kallwass, k.
zhang and w.-l. chuang at genzyme corporation for continued support and helpful discussions. this work was also supported by a grant
from the national institutes of health (dk067859).
all studies with human subjects were approved by the irb at the
university of washington and the laboratory of neurochemistry.

references
chace dh, kalas ta (2005) a biochemical perspective on the use
of tandem mass spectrometry for newborn screening and clinical
testing. clin biochem 38: 296–309.
chamoles na, blanco m, gaggioli d, casentini c (2002) tay–sachs
and sandhoff diseases: enzymatic diagnosis in dried blood spots on
filter paper: retrospective diagnoses in newborn-screening cards.
clin chim acta 318: 133–137.
desnick rj (2004) enzyme replacement and enhancement therapies for
lysosomal diseases. j inherit metab dis 27: 385–410.
escolar ml, poe md, provenzale mj, et al (2005) transplantation of
umbilical-cord blood in babies with infantile krabbe’s disease. n
engl j med 352: 2069–2081.
gerber sa, scott cr, turecek f, gelb mh (2001a) direct profiling of
multiple enzyme activities in human cell lysates by affinity chromatography/electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: application to clinical enzymology. anal chem 73: 1651–1657.
gerber sa, turecek f, gelb mh (2001b) design and synthesis of
substrate and internal standard conjugates for profiling enzyme
activity in the sanfilippo syndrome by affinity chromatography/electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. bioconj chem 12:
603–615.
harmatz p, whitley cb, waber l, et al (2004) enzyme replacement therapy in mucopolysaccharidosis vi (maroteaux–lamy syndrome).
j pediatr 144: 574–580.
kallwass h, carr c, chamoles na, keutzer j (2005) diagnosis of
 xxxg826xxx  by enzyme assay in dried blood spots. j inherit
metab dis 28(supplement 1): 193.
kebarle p, ho y (1997) on the mechanism of eletrospray mass
spectrometry. in: cole rb, ed. electrospray ionization mass

springer

404
spectrometry, fundamental, instrumentation & applications. new
york: wiley, 4–63.
koster jf, slee rg, hulsmann wc (1974) the use of leucocytes as an
aid in the diagnosis of  xxxg826xxx  (pompe’s
disease). clin chim acta 51: 319–325.
krivit w (2004) allogeneic stem cell transplantation for the treatment
of lysosomal and peroxisomal metabolic diseases. semin immunol
26: 119–132.
li y, ogata y, freeze hh, scott cr, turecek f, gelb mh (2003) affinity capture and elution/electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
assay of phosphomannomutase and phosphomannose isomerase
for the multiplex analysis of congenital disorders of glycosylation
types ia and ib. anal chem 75: 42–48.
li y, brockman k, turecek f, scott cr, gelb mh (2004a) tandem
mass spectrometry for the direct assay of enzymes in dried blood
spots: application to newborn screening for  xxxg854xxx . clin
chem 50: 638–640.
li y, scott cr, chamoles na, et al (2004b) direct multiplex assay of
lysosomal enzymes in dried blood spots for newborn screening.
clin chem 50: 1785–1796.
miebach e (2005) enzyme replacement therapy in mucopolysaccharidosis type i. acta paediatr suppl 94: 58–60.
muenzer j, lamsa jc, garcia a, dacosta j, garcia j, treco da (2002)
enzyme replacement therapy in mucopolysaccharidosis type ii
(hunter syndrome): a preliminary report. acta paediatr suppl 91:
98–99.

springer

j inherit metab dis (2006) 29:397–404
rozaklis t, ramsay sl, whitfield pd, ranieri e, hopwood jj, miekle
pj (2002) determination of oligosaccharides in  xxxg826xxx  by
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. clin chem 48:
131–139.
scott cr, gelb mh, turecek f, li y, ogata y, wang: d (2003) development of tandem mass spectrometry for the detection of lysosomal
storage diseases from newborn blood spots. am j hum genet 73:
1660.
shah js, elliott pm (2005) fabry disease and the heart: an overview of
the natural history and the effect of enzyme replacement therapy.
acta paediatr suppl 94: 11–14.
shin ys, endres w, unterreithmeier j, rieth m, schaub j (1985) diagnosis of pompe’s disease using leukocyte preparations. kinetic
and immunological studies of 1,4-alpha-glucosidase in human fetal
and adult tissues and cultured cells. clin chem acta 148: 9–
19.
umapathysivam k, hopwood jj, meikle pj (2001) determination of acid alpha-glucosidase activity in blood spots as a
diagnostic test for  xxxg826xxx . clin chem 47: 1378–
1383.
wang d, eadala b, sadı́lek m, et al (2005) tandem mass spectrometry
for newborn screening of mucopolysaccharidosis type i using dried
blood spots. clin chem 51: 898–900.
wilcken b, wiley v, hammond j, carpenter k (2003) screening newborns for inborn errors of metabolism by tandem mass spectrometry. n engl j med 348: 2304–2312.

