biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621 – 635
www.elsevier.com/locate/bbamcr

review

cell biology of molybdenum
ralf r. mendel ⁎, florian bittner
department of plant biology, technical university of braunschweig, humboldtstrasse 1, 38106 braunschweig, germany
received 21 december 2005; received in revised form 13 march 2006; accepted 18 march 2006
available online 12 may 2006

abstract
the transition element molybdenum (mo) is of essential importance for (nearly) all biological systems as it is required by enzymes catalyzing
diverse key reactions in the global carbon, sulfur and nitrogen metabolism. the metal itself is biologically inactive unless it is complexed by a
special cofactor. with the exception of bacterial nitrogenase, where mo is a constituent of the femo-cofactor, mo is bound to a pterin, thus
forming the molybdenum cofactor (moco) which is the active compound at the catalytic site of all other mo-enzymes. in eukaryotes, the most
prominent mo-enzymes are (1) sulfite oxidase, which catalyzes the final step in the degradation of sulfur-containing amino acids and is involved
in detoxifying excess sulfite, (2)  xxxg2431xxx , which is involved in purine catabolism and reactive oxygen production, (3) aldehyde
oxidase, which oxidizes a variety of aldehydes and is essential for the biosynthesis of the phytohormone abscisic acid, and in autotrophic
organisms also (4) nitrate reductase, which catalyzes the key step in inorganic nitrogen assimilation. all mo-enzymes, except plant sulfite oxidase,
need at least one more redox active center, many of them involving iron in electron transfer. the biosynthesis of moco involves the complex
interaction of six proteins and is a process of four steps, which also includes iron as well as copper in an indespensable way. moco as released after
synthesis is likely to be distributed to the apoproteins of mo-enzymes by putative moco-carrier proteins.  xxxg2431xxx  and aldehyde
oxidase, but not sulfite oxidase and nitrate reductase, require the postranslational sulfuration of their mo-site for becoming active. this final
maturation step is catalyzed by a moco-sulfurase enzyme, which mobilizes sulfur from l-cysteine in a  xxxd3047xxx -dependent manner as
typical for cysteine desulfurases.
© 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
keywords: molybdenum cofactor; sulfite oxidase; nitrate reductase;  xxxg2431xxx ;  xxxg168xxx ; molybdenum cofactor deficiency

1. introduction
molybdenum (mo) occurs in a wide range of metalloenzymes in bacteria, fungi, algae, plants and animals where it
forms part of the active sites of these enzymes. in order to gain
biological activity, mo has to be complexed by a pterin
compound thereby forming the molybdenum cofactor (moco).
abbreviations: ao,  xxxg168xxx ; a. thaliana, arabidopsis thaliana;
cnx1-e, n-terminal domain of cnx1, homologous to e. coli moea; cnx1-g, cterminal domain of cnx1, homologous to e. coli moga; c. rheinhardtii,
chlamydomonas rheinhardtii; cu, copper; fe, iron; fad, flavin adenine
dinucleotide; mcp, molybdenum cofactor carrier protein; mo, molybdenum;
moco, molybdenum cofactor; mpt, molybdopterin; nr, nitrate reductase; no,
 xxxd2738xxx ; ros, reactive oxygen species; so, sulfite oxidase; xdh, xanthine
dehydrogenase; xo,  xxxg2431xxx 
⁎ corresponding author. tel.: +49 531 391 5870; fax: +49 531 391 8128.
e-mail address: r.mendel@tu-bs.de (r.r. mendel).
0167-4889/$ - see front matter © 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.03.013

in this article review, we will review and follow the way that mo
takes from uptake into the cell, via formation of the moco and
its storage, to the final modification of moco and its insertion
into apo-metalloenzymes. we will focus on eukaryotes because
here our understanding of the cell biology of mo is much more
advanced. most of this knowledge derives from studies in plants
and humans which may be surprising—but yeast as model
organism plays no role in mo research as saccharomyces
cerevisiae is the only organism known to date that does not
contain mo-enzymes. other yeasts like candida and pichia,
however, need and synthesize mo-enzymes.
it has been long known that the transition element mo [1] is
an essential nutrient for plants, animals and microorganisms.
mo is very abundant in the oceans in the form of the moo42anion. and also in soils, the molybdate anion is the only form of
mo that is available for plants and bacteria. mo-containing
enzymes hold key positions both in the biogeochemical redox

622

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

cycles of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur on earth [2] and in the
metabolism of every the individual organism. to this end, more
than 50 enzymes are known to contain mo and most of them
occur in bacteria while in eukaryotes only six were found [3].
biologically, mo belongs to the group of trace elements, i.e., the
organism needs it only in minute amounts. if, however, an
organism takes up too high amounts of mo, toxicity symptoms
are observed [4]. on the other side, unavailability of mo is
lethal for the organism. but even if mo is available for the cell, it
seems to be biologically inactive until it becomes complexed to
form moco thus gaining biological activity.
2. molybdenum uptake into cells
how do mo-enzymes acquire their catalytically important
metal? organisms take up mo in the form of its molybdate anion.
it requires specific uptake systems to scavenge molybdate in the
presence of competing anions. in bacteria, high-affinity
molybdate transporters are described consisting of three protein
components and requiring atp-hydrolysis for operation. in
some bacteria specific molybdate-binding proteins are known
with a capacity of up to eight anions [5] that store molybdate
until further use by the cell. in contrast to the well-studied
molybdate transport and homeostasis mechanism in bacteria,
eukaryotic molybdate transport is still poorly understood. in the
alga chlamydomonas rheinhardtii genetic evidence suggested
the existence of a distinct molybdate uptake system [6] and very
recently a molybdate transporter has been cloned from this
organism (e. fernandez, personal communication). in parallel,
also in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana a molybdate transporter has been cloned and characterized (t. fujiwara, personal
communication).
3. the molybdenum cofactor
besides one other type of mo-containing cofactor, mo is
bound to a unique tricyclic pterin compound named moco (as
shown on the bottom of fig. 1). the other type of mocontaining cofactor is found only once in nature namely in
bacterial nitrogenase, forming the so-called femo-cofactor that
consists of two partial cubanes (mofe3s3 and fe4s3) which are
joined by three bridging sulfurs. nitrogenase reduces atmospheric dinitrogen to ammonia under atmospheric pressure and
temperature with concomitant hydrolysis of atp. nitrogenase is
required for biological nitrogen fixation, which is an essential
step in the nitrogen cycle in the biosphere, and a major
contributor to the nitrogen available to many plants species like
legumes. in contrast to nitrogenase all other mo-containing
enzymes characterized to this end contain the pterin-type
cofactor [7]. for this reason, and as very recently a number of
reviews about nitrogenase have been published (e.g., [8,9]) we
will focus on the ubiquitously occurring moco in this review.
early work with mutants of the filamentous fungus
aspergillus nidulans and of the higher plant nicotiana tabacum
revealed a novel mutant phenotype, namely the simultaneous
loss of the two mo-enzymes nitrate reductase and xanthine
dehydrogenase. since mo was the only common link between

these two – otherwise very different – enzymes, it was
suggested that both enzymes should share a common morelated cofactor, named moco. the elucidation of the chemical
nature of moco is based on the work of j. johnson and k.v.
rajoagopalan. their final description of moco was confirmed
by crystal structures of mo-enzymes with the only exception
that a third ring, a novel pyrano ring, is formed (fig. 1). due to
the labile nature of moco and its high sensitivity to oxidation
most of the work was done by using degradation or oxidation
products of the cofactor thereby revealing the pterin nature of
moco and its c6 substitution with a unique four-carbon side
chain [10] that coordinates the metal via a dithiolene group (fig.
1). crystal structures of different mo enzymes confirmed the
core structure of moco and helped to clarify the redox state of
moco [11]. due to the formation of a third pyrano ring between
the c3′ hydroxy group and the pterin c7 atom, a fully reduced
hydrogenated pterin (tetrahydro state) is formed. because of the
unique nature of the pterin in moco, the metal-free form of the
cofactor is called molybdopterin or metal-containing pterin
(mpt). the pterin structure of moco is unique in nature and has
probably been evolved in order to control and maintain the
special redox properties of mo. the task of the cofactor is to
position the catalytic metal mo correctly within the active
center, to control its redox behaviour and to participate with its
pterin ring system in the electron transfer to or from the mo
atom. the pterin with its several possible reduction states as
well as different structural conformations might also be
important in channeling electrons from or to other prosthetic
groups [12]. x-ray crystallographic analyses of mo-enzymes
revealed that the cofactor is not located on the surface of the
protein, but it is buried deeply within the interior of the enzyme
and a tunnel-like structure makes it accessible to the appropriate
substrates [11,13]. once moco is liberated from the holoenzyme, it loses the mo atom and undergoes rapid and irreversible
loss of function due to oxidation [14]. the demolybdo-forms of
mo-enzymes are catalytically inactive.
4. molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis
a mutational block of moco biosynthesis leads to the loss of
essential metabolic functions because all enzymes depending on
mo lose their activity, which ultimately causes death of the
organism. the identification of several genetic complementation
groups among moco-deficient mutants in a given organism and
the conserved structure of moco provided a basis to propose an
evolutionary old multi-step biosynthetic pathway [15]. already
in pre-genomic times, a detailed mutant characterization
contributed substantially to our understanding of the genetics
and biochemistry of moco biosynthesis in bacteria, plants, fungi
and humans. among eukaryotes, the molecular, biochemical and
genetic analysis of moco mutants was most advanced in higher
plants. these results formed the basis to decipher moco
biosynthesis also in humans [16] where moco deficiency is a
severe genetic disease with fatal consequences for the affected
individuals [17]. it turned out that the pathways of moco
biosynthesis showed many similarities in both organisms and
therefore we will compare them whenever appropriate.

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

623

fig. 1. biosynthesis of eukaryotic molybdenum cofactor. the pathway of moco synthesis can be divided into four steps, each being characterized by its main features
as given in italics on the right side. for mpt and mpt-amp, the ligands of the dithiolate sulfurs are indicated by an “r” as it is currently unknown at which state copper
is bound to the dithiolate. upon mo insertion, it is also not clear how many oxo ligands are bound to the metal. therefore, two mo-oxo ligands are depicted and a third
line indicates an additional ligand. the proteins from plants and humans catalyzing the respective steps are depicted and their names are given in green (plants) and red
(humans). functional properties like [fe–s] clusters in cnx2 and mocs1a, the use of s-adenosyl methionine (sam), adenylation and sulfuration of the small subunit
of mpt synthase (cnx7 and mocs2b, respectively) are indicated. all substrates/co-substrates are indicated in blue. the in vivo source of sulfur (x–s) for cnx5 and
mocs3 is not known yet. steps three and four in plants and humans are catalyzed by the individual domains of cnx1 (g and e) or  xxxg937xxx  (g and e). (for
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

in all organisms studied so far, moco is synthesized by a
conserved biosynthetic pathway that can be divided into four
steps, according to the biosynthetic intermediates precursor
z, mpt, adenlyated mpt, and moco (fig. 1). in eukaryotes
always six gene products catalyzing moco biosynthesis have
been identified in plants [18], fungi [19] and humans [20–
22]. these genes are homologous to their counterparts in
bacteria, and some but not all of the eukaryotic moco

biosynthesis genes are able to functionally complement the
matching bacterial mutants. genes and gene products were
named in plants according to the cnx nomenclature (cofactor
for nitrate reductase and  xxxg2431xxx ) introduced
for the fungal mutants with the mutants labeled by letters
(cnxa-f) and the cdnas labeled by numbers (cnx1–3,
cnx5–7). for human moco synthetic genes, a different
mocs (molybdenum cofactor synthesis) nomenclature has

624

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

been introduced [20]. we will now discuss the individual
steps of moco biosynthesis.
4.1. step 1: conversion of gtp into precursor z
during the first stage, a guanosine derivative (probably gtp)
is transformed into a sulfur-free pterin compound, the precursor
z, possessing already the moco-typical four carbon side chain
(fig. 1). in comparison to moco and mpt, precursor z is the
most stable intermediate with an estimated half life of several
hours at a low ph [23]. mass spectrometry and 1 h nmr
recently revealed that precursor z already possesses a fully
reduced tetrahydropyranopterin structure and is predominantly
hydrated at the c1′ position resulting in a geminal diol [24].
gtp labeling studies and nmr demonstrated that each carbon
atom of the ribose and of the guanine ring are incorporated into
precursor z [25,26]. the detailed mechanism of this reaction
step remains unclear, yet hypothetical multistep-reactions have
been suggested [25,26]. in all organisms, the conversion of gtp
to precursor z is catalyzed by two proteins, one of them (cnx2
in plants, mocs1a in humans) belonging to the superfamily of
s- xxxd3156xxx -dependent radical enzymes [27]. members of this large family catalyze the formation of protein and/or
substrate radicals by reductive cleavage of sam by a [4fe–4s]
cluster [28]. both, cnx2 and mocs1a, have n-terminal
extensions carrying putative targeting motifs for organellar
transport.
4.2. step 2: synthesis of molybdopterin
in the second stage, sulfur is transferred to precursor z in
order to generate mpt. this reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme
mpt synthase, a heterotetrameric complex of two small and two
large subunits that stoichiometrically converts precursor z into
mpt. the sulfur is bound to the c-terminus of the small subunit
as thiocarboxylate. due to the fact that each small subunit of
mpt synthase carries a single sulfur atom, a two-step mechanism for the formation of the mpt dithiolate has been
proposed, which involves the formation of a mono-sulfurated
intermediate [29,30]. after mpt synthase has transferred the
two sulfurs to precursor z, it has to be re-sulfurated by the mptsynthase sulfurase in order to reactivate the enzyme for the next
reaction cycle of precursor z conversion. this resulfuration is
catalyzed by plant cnx5 or human mocs3, respectively,
involving an adenylation of mpt synthase followed by sulfur
transfer [31,32]. cnx5 and mocs3 are two-domain proteins
consisting of a n-terminal domain responsible for adenylating
mpt synthase and a c-terminal rhodanese-like domain where
the sulfur is bound to a conserved cysteine in form of persulfide
[32]. the identity of the donor for the reactive mobile sulfur is as
yet unknown, but a redundant function of different persulfidegenerating systems is possible [33].
4.3. step 3: adenylation of molybdopterin
after synthesis of the mpt moiety, the chemical backbone is
built for binding and coordination of the mo atom. in the third

step, therefore, mo has to be transferred to mpt in order to
form moco, thus linking the molybdate uptake system to the
mpt pathway. mutants defective in this step produce mpt
and can be partially repaired by growing them on highmolybdate medium. in bacteria, this step is catalyzed by two
proteins while during evolution to higher organisms these two
proteins were fused to a two-domain protein. early it was
assumed that one domain should be essential for generating
an activated form of mo that is incorporated by the other
domain into bound mpt [34,35]. but only recently the exact
mechanism was uncovered in plants where the protein cnx1
is catalyzing this step [36]. the c-terminal cnx1 domain
(=cnx1-g) was known to tightly bind mpt [37]. yet, its
crystal structure [38] revealed an unexpected finding: a novel
reaction intermediate, adenylated mpt (mpt-amp) (fig. 1),
was found. subsequently, it was demonstrated that cnx1-g
adenylates mpt in a mg2+- and atp-dependent way and
forms mpt-amp that remains bound to cnx1-g [36].
4.4. step 4: molybdenum insertion and crosstalk to copper
metabolism
the crystal structure of the cnx1-g revealed another
unexpected finding, namely a copper bound to the mpt
dithiolate sulfurs, whose nature was confirmed by anomalous
scattering of the metal. in both structures the copper atom shows
tetragonal coordination with two waters as additional ligands in
the mpt-bound state, while one of these waters is replaced by a
histidine in the mpt-amp-bound structure. up to now the
function of this novel mpt ligand is unknown but copper might
play a role in sulfur transfer to precursor z, in protecting the
mpt dithiolate from oxidation, and/or presenting a suitable
leaving group for mo insertion. the origin of this copper is still
unclear but it is reasonable to assume that it binds to the
enedithiolate group just after the latter has been formed, i.e., at
the end of step 2 of moco biosynthesis.
in the final step of moco biosynthesis mpt-amp has to be
converted into mature moco: mpt-amp is transferred to the
n-terminal domain of cnx1 (=cnx1-e) thereby building a
product-substrate channel. cnx1-e that cleaves the adenylate,
releases copper and inserts mo, thus yielding active moco. we
found that mpt adenylate was hydrolyzed in a molybdatedependent way [39]. this reaction was coupled to the metal
exchange reaction where bound copper was released and mo
was transferred to mpt thus yielding mature moco (figs. 2
and 3). as copper is always found in a protein-bound state it
might be that cnx1 interacts with a copper chaperone when
the metal is released during mo insertion. using a splitubiquitin based two-hybrid approach with cnx1 as bait, a
copper chaperone homolog has been recently identified (j.
winking, r. mendel, g. schwarz, unpublished data).
in vitro studies with cnx1-g-bound mpt-amp revealed
an inhibition of moco synthesis in the presence of 1 mum
cucl2, providing a link between mo and copper metabolism
[38]. copper inhibition of moco synthesis can be explained
by inhibition of the mg-dependent mo insertion reaction. the
latter is supported by the suppression of copper inhibition

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

625

fig. 2. domain structure of eukaryotic molybdenum-enzymes (a). so as depicted represents the animal form; so from plants (not shown) is lacking the heme domain.
structure of the molybdenum center in enzymes of the so/nr (b) and xdh/ao family (c).

with equimolar amounts of cnx1-e and is in line with the
known copper inhibition of pyrophosphatases [40]. our
finding implies that moco deficiency might occur when
cellular copper concentrations are increased, as seen in
individuals affected with wilson's disease [41], where copper
accumulates in liver and brain, resulting in severe damage to
both organs. some of the symptoms may be attributed to an
underlying moco deficiency. however, this copper-mo
antagonism is opposite to the previously known mo-copper
antagonism (particularly in cattle), where increased molybdate
causes copper deficiency owing to the formation of copperchelating thiomolybdate complexes [42]. further, also copper
shortage should be detrimental for moco biosynthesis.
therefore analysis of patients affected with menke's disease,
where copper transfer is impaired, could shed further light
onto the link between mo and copper metabolism.
5. storage of the molybdenum cofactor
after synthesis, moco has to be incorporated into the
appropriate apo-enzyme. as moco is labile and oxygensensitive [43] it was assumed that there is no free moco
occurring in the cell, rather it was suggested that moco
should be transferred immediately after biosynthesis to the
apo-mo-enzyme or that it could be bound to a carrier protein
that protects and stores moco until further use. the
availability of sufficient amounts of moco is essential for
the cell to meet its changing demand for synthesizing mo
enzymes, therefore, the existence of a moco carrier protein
(mcp) would provide a way to buffer supply and demand of
moco. among eukaryotes, first in the green alga c.
rheinhardtii a mcp was described [44]. later it was purified
and a 16 kda protein identified which was able to bind and
protect moco against oxidation [45,46]. c. rheinhardtii mcp
forms a homotetramer (fig. 3) in solution and is homologous
to bacterial proteins with unknown function that contain a
predicted nucleotide-binding rossman fold. among higher

plants, proteins with homologies to c. reinhardtii mcp are
found that are classified as lysine decarboxylase-like proteins
forming a multi-gene family in a. thaliana with nine
conserved members. the crystal structures of two of these
proteins turned out to be highly similar to the crystal structure
of c. rheinhardtii mcp (k. fischer, g. schwarz, unpublished
data).
6. insertion of the molybdenum cofactor into molybdenum
enyzmes
insertion of moco into mo-enzymes is not understood.
using a defined in vitro-system it was shown that human aposulfite oxidase can directly incorporate moco [33]. however,
for insertion of moco into the target apo-enzymes as it occurs
in the living cell either (still unknown) chaperone proteins
would be needed or the moco carrier proteins could become
involved at this stage. for some bacterial mo-enzymes,
system-specific chaperones are required for moco insertion
and protein folding, e.g., narj for e. coli nitrate reductase
[47] and xdhc for  xxxg2431xxx  from rhodobacter capsulatus [48] and comamonas acidovorans [49].
7. crosslink to neuroreceptor anchoring
in plants, cnx1 catalyzes the activation of mpt followed
by insertion of mo. the primary structure of cnx1 shows
striking homologies to the mammalian protein  xxxg937xxx  that
was first described as a neuroreceptor anchor protein linking
glycine receptors in the postsynaptic membrane to the
subcellular cytoskeleton. the crystal structure of  xxxg937xxx  g
domain is extremely similar to its plant homolog [50].
however, the orientation of the n-terminal and c-terminal
domains is reversed in  xxxg937xxx .  xxxg937xxx  is thought to be
an instructive molecule for the formation of glycinergic
synapses [51] and its expression was shown to be essential
for the postsynaptic aggregation of glycine receptors [52].

626

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

fig. 3. organization of biosynthesis, distribution, and maturation of moco in plant cells. the basic steps of moco biosynthesis are shown starting from gtp to moco,
including moco biosynthesis enzymes. the dependence of cnx2 on [fe–s] from mitochondria is indicated. mpt-synthase, consisting of cnx6 and cnx7, is sulfurated
by cnx5, with the primary sulfur donor of cnx5 (x–s) being unknown. it is assumed that copper (cu) is inserted directly after dithiolene formation. the individual
reactions of cnx1 and its products (moco, pyrophosphate, amp, copper) are indicated. due to subcellular localization and functional homology to human  xxxg937xxx 
cnx1 is believed to be in close proximity to the plasmamembrane where it might interact with the molybdate transporter. mature moco can be either bound to a moco
carrier protein (mcp), to nr and so, or to the aba3 protein. aba3 is known to generate a protein-bound persulfide, which is the source of the terminal sulfur ligand
of moco in enzymes of the xdh/ao family. like cnx2, xdh and ao also depend on [fe–s] from mitochondria. the different metals (mo, fe, and cu) are indicated
by different colours. (for interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

based on the homology of  xxxg937xxx  to cnx1 we suggested an
additional function of  xxxg937xxx  in moco biosynthesis, which
was demonstrated by the following experiments. recombinant
 xxxg937xxx  binds mpt with high affinity and heterologous
expression of  xxxg937xxx  could restore moco biosynthesis in e.
coli, plants and the murine cell line l929 [22]. in addition,
 xxxg937xxx  knockout-mice did not only show the expected
absence of synaptic  xxxg904xxx  clustering, but also
developed symptoms identical to those of moco deficiency
[53] where no so activity could be detected. recently, we
identified a  xxxg937xxx  gene deletion in a patient with symptoms
typical for moco deficiency [54]. biochemical studies with the

patient's fibroblasts demonstrated that  xxxg937xxx  catalyzes the
insertion of mo into mpt suggesting that this form of moco
deficiency might be curable with high doses of molybdate. it
is obvious that  xxxg937xxx  combines two different functions: (1)
a biosynthetic activity in moco formation, and (2) a structural
role in receptor clustering. the latter function is evolutionary
younger and hence must have been recruited from the older in
primary metabolism. the observation that differentially
spliced transcripts of  xxxg937xxx  can be found not only in
brain and spinal cord, but also in liver, kidney, heart and lung
[55] raises the possibility that differential splicing of  xxxg937xxx 
results in the modulation of its functionality.

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

8. micro-compartmentalization and cytoskeleton binding
not only  xxxg937xxx , but also its plant homologue cnx1
exhibits functional properties that are distinct from moco
biosynthesis. based on the observed cytoskeleton binding of
 xxxg937xxx , a binding of cnx1 to actin filaments, exclusively
mediated by the e domain, could be demonstrated [35]. also
 xxxg937xxx  binds to actin filaments via its e-domain [56], and this
domain also interacts with profilin, a major modulator of actin
polymerization [57].
finally, cnx1 is essential for stabilizing the newly formed
moco [58]. what could be the functional significance of
cytoskeleton binding of cnx1 in terms of moco biosynthesis?
we assume that during evolution it became important to
facilitate product-substrate flow, which could result in microcompartmentalization of a hypothetical moco biosynthetic
multi-enzyme complex ensuring the fast and protected transfer
of the labile intermediates within the reaction sequence from
gtp to moco. therefore anchoring to cellular structures like the
cytoskeleton might help organizing and stabilizing such a
biosynthetic machinery and would bring it close to the
molybdate transporter providing the metal for moco synthesis.
in humans, moco biosynthesis is very similar to the pathway
described for higher plants. surprisingly, differences were
found on the gene level. like in all other organisms, two
proteins are involved in the conversion of gtp to precursor z
(step 1), however these two proteins are encoded by only one
gene (mocs1) in human [59]. the corresponding transcript is
bicistronic with two consecutive reading frames separated by a
stop codon. the first reading frame encodes for mocs1a, the
second one for mocs1b, and for both proteins human patients
were identified [60]. recently, further transcripts of the mocs1
gene were found [61] that are spliced in order to bypass the
normal termination codon of mocs1a.
the human system became even more fascinating when we
found that also the two subunits of human mpt synthase (step
2) were encoded by only one gene, named mocs2 [21]. on the
bicistronic messenger rna, the first reading frame codes for the
small subunit mocs2a and the second one for the large
subunit mocs2b. both reading frames do overlap and exhibit a
frameshift of + 1 for mocs2b. again here, human patients were
identified for both proteins [62] thus confirming their functional
role. in both cases of bicistronic expression, always the first of
the two encoded proteins shows a functionally important gly–
gly motif at its c-terminus. bicistronicity would ensure
colinear expression and implicates vicinity of the newly
synthesized and interacting proteins. such a microcompartmentalization is certainly advantageous for low substrate
concentrations like in moco biosynthesis. yet, it remains
enigmatic why in the human moco biosynthetic pathway two
times the extremely rare case of bicistronicity is found while in
higher plants the corresponding genes are widely separated and
like in the case of the step 1 genes are even located on different
chromosomes. this is surprising because in particular the plants
would need vicinity of the newly synthesized and interacting
proteins because here we encounter a strong cytoplasmic
streaming.

627

9. molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis and the evolution of
ubiquitin
during evolution, not only  xxxg904xxx  anchoring lend
support from moco biosynthesis by recruiting  xxxg937xxx , but
also the development of ubiquitin used moco biosynthesis as
toolbox. when comparing crystal structures, the small subunit
of mpt synthase from e. coli revealed an unexpected high
structural similarity to ubiquitin including the terminal double
glycine motif. in addition, the bacterial mpt synthase sulfurase
moeb that is essential for activating the small subunit of mpt
synthase, is homologous in its entire region to the n-terminal
part of the ubiquitin-activating enzyme uba1 from saccharomyces cerevisiae [63,64]. further, the atp-dependent mechanism by which both ubiquitin and the small subunit of mpt
synthase are activated, is identical. these similarities suggest
that the ubiquitin dependent protein degradation evolved from
the evolutionary older pathway of moco biosynthesis.
10. molybdenum cofactor deficiency and therapy
for higher organisms like man and plants, a shortage of mo
in nutrition or a mutational block of the cellular ability to use
mo – i.e., to synthesize mpt, to take up mo into the cell or to
bind it to mpt – leads to the loss of essential metabolic
functions because all enzymes needing mo lose their activity at
the same time. in humans, a combined deficiency of moenzymes was first described by duran et al. [65]. babies born
with this defect show feeding difficulties, severe and progressive neurologic abnormalities, and dysmorphic features of the
brain and head. so far, disease-causing mutations have been
identified in three of the four known moco-synthetic human
genes: mocs1, mocs2 and  xxxg937xxx  [16]. to this end, more than
100 cases have been diagnosed, and approximately 50 unrelated
families have been analyzed at the molecular level [16]. the
incidence, however, is estimated to be higher than these
numbers would indicate, as it is likely that many cases remain
unrecognized. the clinical symptoms may result from the
deficiency of so that protects the organism, in particular the
brain, from elevated levels of toxic sulfite [17].
to this end, no therapy is available to cure the symptoms of
this disease. moco deficiency cannot be treated by supplementation with the cofactor. moco is extremely unstable outside the
protecting environment of an apo-mo-enzyme. its half-life is
only a few minutes in aqueous solutions with neutral ph [66]. in
addition, no chemical synthesis of moco or any of its
intermediates has been successful so far, which hampers its
large-scale production for therapeutic use. however, very
recently, we have developed a model that could lead to the
cure of moco-deficiency. genetic analyses of patients showed
that most of them had defects in the first step of moco
biosynthesis, i.e., the conversion of gtp to precursor z [60].
our idea was to treat patients of this class with the missing
intermediate precursor z because the steps subsequent to
precursor z formation are not affected by the mutation and
should facilitate the synthesis of moco. precursor z is more
stable than moco itself and has an identical structure in all

628

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

organisms. thus, it was overproduced in the bacterium e. coli
and purified. mocs1 knockout-mice with a block in the first
step of moco biosynthesis were created bearing a genetic defect
identical to the human patients [67]. similar to humans,
heterozygous mice displayed no symptoms, but homozygous
moco-deficient animals displayed symptoms resembling those
of the human deficiency state and they died within ten days after
birth. due to the mutation, no mpt or active moco was
detectable, and consequently all mo-enzyme activities were
absent.
repeated injections of precursor z into mocs1-deficient
mice resulted in a dose-dependent extension of life span [68].
mpt levels and mo-enzyme activities were partially restored.
stopping precursor z treatment at any time resulted in a
progressive reduction of mpt levels and mo-enzyme activities
and death of the animal 10–15 days after receiving the last
injection. injection of precursor z into these mice every second
day normalized their symptoms, they reached adolescence and
were fertile [68]. it remains to be seen whether delayed onset of
the described therapy will still allow reversal of neurological
damage. as a next step, scaling up of precursor z production is
in progress in order to have sufficient amounts available for
clinical trials.
11. molybdenum enzymes
mo-enzymes are required for diverse key reactions in the
global carbon, sulfur and nitrogen metabolism, and up to now
more than 50 different mononuclear mo-enzymes have been
found in nature, mostly from bacterial origin. among those
dissimilatory and respiratory nitrate reductase, dmso reductase, formate dehydrogenase and tmao reductase are
prominent.
in contrast, only a limited number of mo-enzymes is present
in eukaryotes that can be subdivided into two classes: the
 xxxg2431xxx  (xo) family is represented by xanthine
dehydrogenase (xdh),  xxxg168xxx  (ao), pyridoxal
oxidase and nicotinate hydroxylase, and the so class of moenzymes is formed by sulfite oxidase (so) and nitrate reductase
(nr). while pyridoxal oxidase and nicotinate hydroxylase were
exclusively found in drosophila melanogaster [69] and
aspergillus nidulans [70], respectively, xdh, ao, and so
are typical for all eukaryotes analyzed so far. as nr is required
for nitrate assimilation this enzyme is only present in
autotrophic organisms like plants, algae and fungi. in general,
reactions catalyzed by mo-enzymes are characterized by the
transfer of an oxygen atom, ultimately derived from or
incorporated into water, to or from a substrate in a two-electron
redox reaction [12,71] in which the oxidation state of mo ranges
between iv and vi. below we will focus on the eukaryotic moenzymes with their specific functions, physiological roles and
distribution within the cell.
12.  xxxg2431xxx 
the members of the xo family are molybdo-flavoenzymes
that catalyze the oxidative hydroxylation of a wide range of

aldehydes and aromatic heterocycles. xdh (ec 1.1.1.204) is a
key enzyme of purine degradation and oxidizes hypoxanthine
to xanthine and xanthine to  xxxd3472xxx  by simultaneous release
of electrons from the substrate. the enzyme is active as a
homodimer composed of two identical subunits of approximately 150 kda, each being subdivided into three distinct
domains (fig. 2a): an n-terminal domain with a size of
20 kda for binding of two [2fe–2s] clusters, a 40 kda
domain harboring a fad-binding site, and a c-terminal
domain required for moco-binding and dimerization. electrons
derived from substrate hydroxylation at the mo-center go via
fe–sii and fe–si to the flavin cofactor. at the fad site, the
electrons are transferred either to nad+ to form nadh, or
they are transferred to molecular oxygen to yield superoxide
anions. animal xdh [72], but not plant xdh [73], can also
form  xxxd2298xxx . both electron acceptors can be used
by xdh, but not by the oxidase form (xo), which in some
organisms derives from reversible [74] or irreversible [75]
conversion of xdh. xo exclusively transfers electrons to
molecular oxygen with concomitant production of superoxide.
in addition to the hypoxanthine/xanthine-dependent production of reactive oxygen species (ros) also nadh oxidase
activity with simultaneous production of superoxide has been
shown for the mammalian [76] as well as for the plant enzyme
[73]. therefore, xdh enzymes are discussed not only to
decompose purines but also to have additional physiological
functions in ros metabolism. human xdh is discussed to be
a pathogenic agent in many forms of ischaemia–reperfusion
injury and might also be involved in inflammatory signal
transduction [77,78]. the ros production of plant xdh
might also be of physiological importance because increasing
xdh activities and simultaneous ros production were
observed upon plant–pathogen interactions [79,80], hypersensitive response [81], drought stress [73] and natural senescence [82,83].
in humans, xdh activity is high in the liver and the lung
[77,84], while in mice and rats highest xdh activity was found
in the first part of the intestinal tract [84, 85]. in addition, xdh
from mice was shown to be present also in the lactating
mammary epithelium where it obviously plays an important role
in enveloping milk fat droplets with the apical plasma
membrane prior to secretion from the lactating mammary
gland [86,87]. thus, besides its enzymatic function xdh plays
also a role as membrane-associated structural protein in the
secretion milk fat droplets.
the subcellular localization of both, animal and plant xdh,
is still not absolutely clear. while cytosolic localization in
endothelian cells of bovine tissue [88]) and in rat hepatocytes
[89] was shown on the one hand, ultrastructural studies with rat
hepatocytes identified xdh activity in the peroxisomes [90,91].
also for plant xdh cytosolic [92] and peroxisomal localization
[93] was reported. yet it should be mentioned that neither in
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gelelectrophoresis with highly
pure peroxisomes nor by use of the araperox database [94],
specifically designed for identifying peroxisomal proteins from
a. thaliana, xdh from a. thaliana was detected in this
compartment.

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

629

13.  xxxg168xxx 

14. sulfite oxidase

ao proteins are cytoplasmic enzymes ( xxxg168xxx ) that
catalyze the oxidation of a variety of aromatic and nonaromatic heterocycles and aldehydes, thereby converting
them to the respective carboxylic acid. ao enzymes are
very similar to xdh enzymes (fig. 2a) as they share a
high degree of sequence homology, have nearly identical
molecular mass, bind the same cofactors, form dimers, and
also act as hydroxylases. ao enzymes can be aligned along
their entire length with xdh enzymes and phylogenetic
analysis has shown that ao proteins have derived from
xdh after ancient gene duplications [95]. the most
prominent characteristics which distinguish ao from xdh
enzymes have been found to concern the substrate binding
at the mo-center and binding of the physiological electron
acceptor [96]. ao enzymes are strict oxidases that are
unable to bind nad+ and exclusively use molecular oxygen as
electron acceptor. while animal ao is capable of producing
superoxide as well as  xxxd2298xxx  by transferring
electrons to molecular oxygen [97] plant ao was shown to
generate  xxxd2298xxx  only [73].
in most animals ao is encoded by one gene, thus leading to
one homodimeric enzyme being most abundant in the liver and
the lung [98]. in contrast to xdh much less is known about the
physiological function of animal ao as even its native
substrates are yet unravelled. ao is capable of converting
retinaldehyde into  xxxd3417xxx  ([99] [terao, 2001 #711]) [100]
which is the active metabolite of  xxxd3105xxx , a known
morphogen [101] and a key regulator of many tissues and cell
types in the adult animal. thus, animal ao may be of relevance
for development and may control the homeostasis of certain
types of tissues. the enzyme has also been implicated in the
hepatotoxicity of ethanol in humans and other mammals by
oxidizing the toxic metabolite acetaldehyde into acetic acid
[102]. besides ao other ao-homologs were found in mice and
rats, represented by  xxxg168xxx , aoh2 and aoh3 [99,103]. the
physiological functions of these ao-homologs are even less
clear and remain to be shown.
in contrast to ao from animals the physiological
importance of the plant counterpart is much better
understood. the a. thaliana genome harbors four ao
genes, aao1–aao4, whose products form homodimers as
well as heterodimers thus leading to altered substrate
specificities of the respective isoenzymes. in 6-day-old
seedlings, three ao isoenzymes can be detected capable
of producing  xxxd2348xxx  and 1- xxxd1338xxx 
[104], respectively, both belonging to the auxin family of
plant hormones. during plant development the isoenzyme
composition changes, thereby generating aodelta [105] which
acts best with abscisic aldehyde as substrate. abscisic
aldehyde is the native precursor of the plant hormone
abscisic acid which is essential for many developmental
processes as well as for a variety of abiotic and biotic stress
responses [106–108]. hence, ao enzymes in plants are
essential for many physiological processes that require the
involvement of the hormones abscisic acid and/or auxines.

so (ec 1.8.3.1), the name-giving enzyme for all members
of the so-family of mo-enzymes, catalyzes the oxidation
from sulfite to sulfate, the final step in the degradation of
sulfur-containing amino acids. while the animal enzyme
basically consists of an n-terminal iron-heme containing
cytochrome b5 domain and a c-terminal domain responsible
for moco binding and dimerization [12] (fig. 2a), its
counterpart from plants is lacking the cytochrome b5 domain
[109,110]. thus, plant so is the simplest mo-enzyme found
in eukaryotes with its intramolecular redox center only
consisting of moco. oxidation of sulfite is a two-electron
transfer reaction in which the electrons from sulfite reduce the
mo-center from movi to moiv. in case of the plant enzyme
the electrons are subsequently transferred to molecular
oxygen with simultaneous formation of  xxxd2298xxx 
[111]. in the animal enzyme, they are transferred to the heme
feiii of the cytochrome b5 domain and finally from feii to the
external electron acceptor  xxxg569xxx .
so from animals is located in the intermembrane space of
mitochondria and its activity is indispensable to life as a lack
of so activity is connected to severe neurological abnormalities and early death [17]. in contrast, plant so is a
peroxisomal protein [112] and its physiological role is as
yet not absolutely clear. as sulfite is a strong nucleophile that
can react with a wide variety of cellular components it might
well be that so is required for removing excess sulfite from
the cell, which accumulates either upon decomposition of
methionine and cysteine or which is derived from high
concentrations of so2 gas in the atmosphere [113,114].
recent results indicate that the latter point indeed is of
importance as so-knockout plants from a. thaliana were
found to be more susceptible to high concentrations of so2
than wildtype plants (r. hänsch, r.r. mendel, unpublished
data). however, as the enzyme is capable of producing
 xxxd2298xxx  its function might also be connected to
ros metabolism.
15. nitrate reductase
nr (ec 1.6.6.1) which does not occur in animals is a
another member of the so family and a key enzyme of nitrate
assimilation, where it catalyzes the reduction of nitrate to
nitrite in the cytosol. like ao and xdh it also consists of
three distinct domains, however, of different order and
composition (fig. 2a). the n-terminal domain of an nr
monomer is specified by a bound moco and is followed by a
heme-binding cytochrome b5 domain and a c-terminal fadbinding domain, whereby two such monomers form the active
homodimeric enzyme. the domains are separated by solventexposed linker regions, called hinge i and hinge ii. in plants
hinge i, the linker between the cytochrome b5 domain and the
moco/dimerization domain, contains a conserved serine
residue which mediates contact with a 14-3-3 protein when
phosphorylated, subsequently leading to inhibition of enzyme
activity [115]. an n-terminal extension preceding the moco

630

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

domain was shown to be important for the post-transcriptional
regulation of nr by light [116], but is not required for
enzyme activity.
in contrast to the reactions as catalyzed by ao, xdh and so
the process of nitrate reduction consumes rather than produces
electrons deriving either from nadh or nadph. while
nadh-specific forms of nr are most abundant in higher plants
and algae, nadph-specific forms were exclusively found in
fungi. however, bispecific forms, capable of using nadh as
well as nadph, have been found in all these organisms, mostly
in fungi [117]. the intramolecular electron transfer starts with
the reductive half-reaction, characterized by the reduction of
fad by nad(p)h. the electrons are then transferred via the
cytochrome b5 domain into the oxidative half-reaction at the
mo-center, where nitrate is reduced to nitrite by concomitant
release of hydroxide [118]. while in terms of nitrogen
assimilation nitrite is further reduced in the chloroplasts to
ammonium by nitrite reductase, it can also be reduced to nitric
oxide (no) by nr itself [119,120]. it was shown that nr,
purified and in crude extracts, produces no at saturating nadh
and nitrite concentrations at about 1% of its nitrate reduction
capacity in vitro [121]. however, as post-translational modification of nr also modulated the no-production rates, it was
concluded that nr is indeed a producer of active nitrogen
species also in vivo. thus, the signalling molecule no
generated by nr might well contribute to plant growth
development [122], protection against cytotoxicity of ros
[122] and accumulation of phytoalexin [123], but also to plant
pathogen resistance [124] by increasing cgmp and salicylic
acid levels.
16. post-translational sulfuration of
molybdenum-hydroxylases
mo-enzymes in plants and humans can be subdivided into
two groups: nr and so belong to the so family of moenzymes and are activated by insertion of moco. xdh and ao,
both members of the xo family of mo-enzymes, require a final
step of maturation during or after insertion of moco. these
enzymes need the addition of a terminal inorganic sulfur to the
mo-center in order to gain enzymatic activity. this sulfur ligand
does not originate from the apoprotein nor does it come from the
moco moiety [125,126]. it was demonstrated that in vitro this
sulfur can be spontaneously lost or can be removed from xdh/
ao by cyanide treatment generating an inactive enzyme [127].
the reaction, however, is reversible and the enzyme can be
reactivated by sulfide-treatment under reducing conditions. in
vivo, this terminal sulfur has to be added by a separate
enzymatic reaction. bittner et al. [128] identified the protein
aba3 from a. thaliana as moco-sulfurase catalyzing the
insertion of the cyanolyzable sulfur into the active center of
xdh and ao, thus leading to activation of these enzymes.
aba3 is a two domain protein acting as a homodimer. its nterminus shares significant homologies to bacterial cysteine
desulfurases, thereby being more similar to sufs than to  xxxg1562xxx  or
 xxxg1562xxx . in a  xxxd3047xxx -dependent manner, the nterminal domain of aba3 decomposes l-cysteine to yield

alanine and elemental sulfur, the latter being bound as a
persulfide to a highly conserved cysteine residue of aba3 (fig.
3) [129]. as the c-terminal domain of aba3 recently was
found to efficiently bind sulfurated moco (s. wollers, f. bittner,
unpublished data), it appears likely that the persulfide sulfur is
transferred from the n-terminal domain to moco bound at the
c-terminal domain prior to activation of the respective target
enzyme. it is still unclear whether aba3 finally activates its
target enzymes by transferring only the sulfur, which is bound to
the moco of the c-terminal domain, or whether it transfers the
entire sulfurated moco of the c-terminus in order to activate
xdh and ao. in the first case the c-terminus thus would act as
a scaffold for the assembly of a mo-s center of which only the
sulfur is subsequently passed to the moco of the target enzymes.
in the second case the reaction catalyzed by aba3 would be an
exchange reaction where non-sulfurated moco of the inactive
target enzymes is replaced by sulfurated moco from the cterminal domain of aba3.
under physiological aspects the terminal sulfuration step
provides an efficient way of regulating the amount of active
xdh and ao enzymes in the cell. the concentration of
physiologically active compounds like hormones, as produced
by plant ao, and ros, as produced by the action of ao and
xdh from many species, can rapidly be increased by changing
the ratio of inactive and active xdh and ao molecules. in fact,
a rapid induction of the aba3 gene was found upon drought and
salt stress in a. thaliana as well as upon aba treatment [130],
thereby being consistent with the conditions required for
induction of ao and xdh [73,83,106].
17. deficiencies of molybdenum-enzymes and of
 xxxg1441xxx 
while moco deficiency results in the pleiotropic loss or
reduction of all mo-enzyme activities isolated mo-enzyme
deficiency is characterized by the loss or reduction of the
activity of only one particular mo-enzyme.
in humans the most severe phenotype is observed upon
isolated so deficiency which is a very rare disease, mostly
accompanied by death at early childhood [16,17]. typical
symptoms of so deficiency are mental retardation, attenuated
growth of brain and dislocated ocular lenses [17] and can be
primarily ascribed to either elevated levels of sulfite or to
reduced levels of sulfate, or to a combination of both: high
amounts of sulfite are toxic for the organism, in particular for
the brain, while sulfate is required for sphingolipid formation
which constitute major components of the myelin sheath [131].
so deficiency is clinically indistinguishable from moco
deficiency as the effects of xdh and ao in moco patients
are negligible. in contrast to human so deficiency the lack of
so activity in plants is not related to an obvious phenotype.
only when so mutants are exposed to high concentrations of
so2 gas a reduced resistance towards this particular stress can
be observed (r. hänsch, r.r. mendel, unpublished data).
in comparison to isolated so deficiency in humans many
more patients were found with inherited isolated xdh
deficiency, referred to as xanthinuria type i. this autosomal-

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

recessive disorder may lead to kidney stone formation,
urinary tract disorders, acute renal failure and muscle
diseases [132], but until recently no other physiological
symptoms have been found to be associated with reduced
xdh activity. however, heterozygous xdh knockout-mice
were found to be unable to maintain lactation due to collapsed mammary epithelium while mice, homozygous for
the xdh deficiency, died at latest 6 weeks after birth [86].
with respect to this particular phenotype the importance of
the structural function of xdh rather than the enzymatic
one is discussed. from this observations the authors conclude human females suffering from xanthinuria may be
potential candidates for lactation problems. it is noteworthy
that increased xdh activity, referred to as hyperuricemia, is
associated with elevated levels of  xxxd3472xxx  in the serum
which may lead to formation of urate crystals in the joint
regions, thus leading to gout. as allopurinol is a well
known inhibitor of xdh enzymes it is commonly used for
therapy of hyperuricemia and gout patients.
contrary to the isolated deficiencies of so and xdh no
case of isolated ao deficiency is reported in humans or other
vertebrates until now. in plants severe phenotypes have been
observed when those ao isoforms were mutated that are
responsible for the production of abscisic acid. the ao
mutants aao3 from a. thaliana [133] and sitiens from tomato
[134], both characterized by dramatically reduced levels of
the phytohormone abscisic acid, suffer from excessive loss of
water and are unable to respond to environmental stresses,
and thus are unable to survive in nature. however, mutations
in any of the other a. thaliana ao genes have not been
reported to be associated with phenotypes.
as nr is specific for autotrophic organisms isolated nr
deficiency in eukaryotes has been reported only for plants
[135–137], fungi [138] and algae [139]. such mutants have lost
the ability to grow on nitrate medium as the sole nitrogen source
and thus are dependent on alternative nitrogen sources such as
ammonium. however, as some organisms, e.g., a. thaliana,
express a second nr gene, the deficiency in one can be
compensated by the other [140].
moco-sulfurase deficiency in vertebrates and plants is
characterized by the simultaneous loss of xdh and ao
activities while the activities of so, and in plants also nr,
are preserved. the disease in mammals, referred to as
xanthinuria type ii, can be differentiated from xanthinuria
type i by means of the allopurinol loading test [141]. as
allopurinol is converted to  xxxd2818xxx  by both, xdh and
ao, upon application of allopurinol  xxxd2818xxx  is detected
in urine of patients with classical xanthinuria type i, but not
in urine of those with xanthinuria type ii. however, no
other difference can be found between type ii and type i
patients, indicating that the loss of xdh activity is the
primary cause of the type ii phenotype [142]. in plants
moco-sulfurase deficiency was found to be basically
ascribed to the reduction of abscisic acid levels due to the
lack of ao activities [130,143]. the phenotype is even
worse in comparison to mutants with a single mutation in
any of the ao or xdh genes, as all the important processes

631

controlled by ao and xdh enzymes are disturbed in mocosulfurase mutants, thus presenting an overlapping phenotype.
18. crosstalk between molybdenum and iron metabolism
in eukaryotes, the moco biosynthesis pathway is
intimately linked to the homeostasis of other metals: (1)
copper is essential for protecting the highly reactive
dithiolene group of mpt before molybdenum is inserted
for moco completion (figs. 2 and 3). (2) the first step of
moco-biosynthesis, i.e., the conversion of gtp to precursor
z, requires the availability of iron as cnx2 in plants and
mocs1a in mammals are iron–sulfur [fe–s] cluster-binding
proteins (fig. 3). two [fe–s] clusters of the [4fe–4s] type
are essentially involved in the s- xxxd3156xxx -dependent mechanism of precursor z formation [27] and have to
be preassembled in the mitochondria, where mitochondrial
as well as extramitochondrial [fe–s] clusters originate from
[144]. (3) iron in the form of [2fe–2s] clusters is required
by xdh and ao, and in the form of iron-heme by nr and
animal so.
the importance of the crosslink between iron and mo was
found recently by investigating the sta1 mutant of a. thaliana. it
was shown that the  xxxg22xxx  sta1 in the membrane of
mitochondria is a homolog of abc7 and mtabc3 from humans
and mediates the export of compounds required for cytosolic
[fe–s] clusters from mitochondria into the cytosol [145]. the
sta1 mutant was shown to have wildtype amounts of total iron,
but to accumulate free (non-heme and non-protein) iron in the
mitochondria as iron for extramitochondrial [fe–s] proteins is
not exported. in this mutant also moco biosynthesis has been
found to be affected because precursor z levels were elevated
while mpt amounts were reduced (j. teschner, f. bittner,
unpublished data). a possible explanation could be that besides
the export of [fe–s] clusters sta1 also mediates export of a
sulfur-containing compound which is the sulfur substrate for the
second step of cytosolic moco synthesis (conversion of
precursor z into mpt by formation of the dithiolene group).
another possible explanation might well be that in addition to
[fe–s] clusters sta1 also mediates the export of precursor z,
thus requiring the proteins of the first step of moco
biosynthesis, cnx2 and cnx3, to be located in mitochondria
rather than in the cytosol.
to this end it is not clear what other compounds besides [fe–
s] constituents are exported by sta1, but it is obvious that sta1
bridges iron/[fe–s]- and mo-metabolism as it is essential for
exporting a moco biosynthesis-related molecule. this is
supported by the mo-enzyme activities of the sta1 mutant:
nr activities are reduced in the same manner as mpt amounts
while the activities of xdh and ao are nearly completely
abolished, indicating that nr is affected solely by the reduction
of moco amounts while xdh and ao are additionally affected
by the non-availability of cytosolic [fe–s] clusters, which they
require as prosthetic group.
as each of the three basic steps in moco biosynthesis
depends on a different metal (step 1 = fe, step 2 = cu, step
3 = mo), a possibility is provided for the cell to sense supply and

632

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

demand of these metals as well as of substrates and products of
moco biosynthesis.
19. outlook
our understanding of the biological role and the function of
mo is progressing rapidly. regardless of many breaking results,
there is still a large number of unresolved questions that need to
be answered. now that most of the relevant genes are cloned
and the basic function of the proteins encoded are known,
research concentrates both on the detailed enzymology of moco
biosynthesis/allocation and on studying regulation and structure–function relationships of mo-enzymes. how is the
molybdate transporter organized in detail? the chemistry
underlying precursor z formation is still enigmatic, and
proposed theories have to be proven. and, given the great
medical relevance of precursor z for the treatment of mocodeficient patients, can it be synthesized chemically? how is the
multienzyme complex for moco biosynthesis organized? what
can mpt synthesis mechanism tell us about the state of copper
bound to mpt, and what is the role of copper in moco synthesis
in general? is there any metabolic link between mo and copper
metabolism?
what is the mechanism of moco insertion into apo-enzymes?
how is moco biosynthesis regulated to meet the changing
demands of the cell for moco?—the coming years will bring
insight into the integration and (perhaps unexpected) regulatory
connections of moco-biosynthesis and mo-enzymes within the
metabolic and physiological network of the cell.
acknowledgements
we thank the many people who worked with us over the
years on molybdenum. in particular we are grateful to dr.
günter schwarz and dr. robert hänsch for many critical
discussions during the preparation of this review. the research
was consistently supported by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (r.r.m) which is gratefully acknowledged. financial support came also from the european union (r.r.m.) and
the fonds der chemischen industrie (r.r.m.).
references
[1] h. bortels, molybdän als katalysator bei der biologischen stickstoffbindung, arch. mikrobiol. 1 (1930) 333–342.
[2] e.i. stiefel, the biogeochemistry of molybdenum and tungsten, met. ions
biol. syst. 39 (2002) 1–29.
[3] a. sigel, h. sigel, molybdenum and tungsten, their roles in biological
processes, vol. 39, marcel dekker, new york, 2002.
[4] j.r. turnlund, molybdenum metabolism and requirements in humans,
met. ions biol. syst. 39 (2002) 727–739.
[5] r.n. pau, d.m. lawson, transport, homeostasis, regulation, and binding
of molybdate and tungstate to proteins, met. ions biol. syst. 39 (2002)
3–74.
[6] a. llamas, k.l. kalakoutskii, e. fernandez, molybdenum cofactor
amounts in chlamydomonas reinhardtii depend on the nit5 gene function
related to molybdate transport, plant cell environ. 23 (2000) 1247–1255.
[7] r. hille, the mononuclear molybdenum enzymes, chem. rev. 96 (1996)
2757–2816.

[8] d.c. rees, f. akif tezcan, c.a. haynes, m.y. walton, s. andrade, o.
einsle, j.b. howard, structural basis of biological nitrogen fixation,
philos. trans., a math. phys. eng. sci. 363 (2005) 971–984 (discussion
1035–40).
[9] p.c. dos santos, d.r. dean, y. hu, m.w. ribbe, formation and insertion
of the nitrogenase iron–molybdenum cofactor, chem. rev. 104 (2004)
1159–1173.
[10] j.l. johnson, b.e. hainline, k.v. rajagopalan, b.h. arison, the pterin
component of the molybdenum cofactor. structural characterization of
two fluorescent derivatives, j. biol. chem. 259 (1984) 5414–5422.
[11] c. kisker, h. schindelin, a. pacheco, w.a. wehbi, r.m. garrett, k.v.
rajagopalan, j.h. enemark, d.c. rees, molecular basis of sulfite oxidase
deficiency from the structure of sulfite oxidase, cell 91 (1997) 973–983.
[12] c. kisker, h. schindelin, d.c. rees, molybdenum-cofactor-containing
enzymes: structure and mechanism, annu. rev. biochem. 66 (1997)
233–267.
[13] k. fischer, g.g. barbier, h.j. hecht, r.r. mendel, w.h. campbell, g.
schwarz, structural basis of eukaryotic nitrate reduction: crystal
structures of the nitrate reductase active site, plant cell 17 (2005)
1167–1179.
[14] k.v. rajagopalan, in: f.c. neidhardt (ed.), escherichia coli
and salmonella typhimurium, asm press, washington dc, 1996,
pp. 674–679.
[15] r.r. mendel, in: p.m. gresshoff (ed.), plant biotechnology and
development—current topics in plant molecular biology, crc press,
boca raton, 1992, pp. 11–16.
[16] j. reiss, j.l. johnson, mutations in the molybdenum cofactor
biosynthetic genes mocs1, mocs2, and  xxxg937xxx , hum. mutat. 21
(2003) 569–576.
[17] j.l. johnson, m. duran, in: c. scriver, a. beaudet, w. sly, d. valle
(eds.), the metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease,
mcgraw-hill, new york, 2001, pp. 3163–3177.
[18] r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, biosynthesis and molecular biology of the
molybdenum cofactor (moco), met. ions biol. syst. 39 (2002) 317–368.
[19] l.j. millar, i.s. heck, j. sloan, g.j. kana'n, j.r. kinghorn, s.e. unkles,
deletion of the cnxe gene encoding the  xxxg937xxx -like protein involved in
the final stages of molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in aspergillus
nidulans, mol. genet. genomics 266 (2001) 445–453.
[20] j. reiss, n. cohen, c. dorche, h. mandel, r.r. mendel, b. stallmeyer,
m.t. zabot, t. dierks, mutations in a polycistronic nuclear gene
associated with molybdenum cofactor deficiency, nat. genet. 20 (1998)
51–53.
[21] b. stallmeyer, g. drugeon, j. reiss, a.l. haenni, r.r. mendel, human
molybdopterin synthase gene: identification of a bicistronic transcript
with overlapping reading frames, am. j. hum. genet. 64 (1999)
698–705.
[22] b. stallmeyer, g. schwarz, j. schulze, a. nerlich, j. reiss, j. kirsch, r.r.
mendel, the neurotransmitter receptor-anchoring protein  xxxg937xxx 
reconstitutes molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in bacteria, plants, and
mammalian cells, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 96 (1999) 1333–1338.
[23] m.m. wuebbens, k.v. rajagopalan, structural characterization of a
molybdopterin precursor, j. biol. chem. 268 (1993) 13493–13498.
[24] j.a. santamaria-araujo, b. fischer, t. otte, m. nimtz, r.r. mendel, v.
wray, g. schwarz, the tetrahydropyranopterin structure of the sulfur-free
and metal-free molybdenum cofactor precursor, j. biol. chem. 279
(2004) 15994–15999.
[25] m.m. wuebbens, k.v. rajagopalan, investigation of the early steps of
molybdopterin biosynthesis in escherichia coli through the use of in vivo
labeling studies, j. biol. chem. 270 (1995) 1082–1087.
[26] c. rieder, w. eisenreich, j. o'brien, g. richter, e. götze, p. boyle, s.
blanchard, a. bacher, h. simon, rearrangement reactions in the
biosynthesis of molybdopterin—an nmr study with multiply 13c/15n
labelled precursors, eur. j. biochem. 255 (1998) 24–36.
[27] p. hanzelmann, h.l. hernandez, c. menzel, r. garcia-serres, b.h.
huynh, m.k. johnson, r.r. mendel, h. schindelin, characterization
of mocs1a, an oxygen-sensitive iron–sulfur protein involved in
human molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004)
34721–34732.

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635
[28] h.j. sofia, g. chen, b.g. hetzler, j.f. reyes-spindola, n.e. miller,
radical sam, a novel protein superfamily linking unresolved steps in
familiar biosynthetic pathways with radical mechanisms: functional
characterization using new analysis and information visualization
methods, nucleic acids res. 29 (2001) 1097–1106.
[29] g. gutzke, b. fischer, r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, thiocarboxylation of
molybdopterin synthase provides evidence for the mechanism of
dithiolene formation in metal-binding pterins, j. biol. chem. 276
(2001) 36268–36274.
[30] m.m. wuebbens, k.v. rajagopalan, mechanistic and mutational
studies of escherichia coli molybdopterin synthase clarify the final
step of molybdopterin biosynthesis, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003)
14523–14532.
[31] a. matthies, k.v. rajagopalan, r.r. mendel, s. leimkuhler, evidence
for the physiological role of a rhodanese-like protein for the biosynthesis
of the molybdenum cofactor in humans, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a.
101 (2004) 5946–5951.
[32] a. matthies, m. nimtz, s. leimkuhler, molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans: identification of a persulfide group in the rhodaneselike domain of mocs3 by mass spectrometry, biochemistry 44 (2005)
7912–7920.
[33] s. leimkühler, m.m. wuebbens, k.v. rajagopalan, characterization of
escherichia coli moeb and its involvement in the activation of
molybdopterin synthase for the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor,
j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 34695–34701.
[34] g. schwarz, d.h. boxer, r.r. mendel, in: w. pfleiderer, h. rokos (eds.),
chemistry and biology of pteridines and folates, blackwell science,
berlin, 1997, pp. 697–702.
[35] g. schwarz, j. schulze, f. bittner, t. eilers, j. kuper, g. bollmann, a.
nerlich, h. brinkmann, r.r. mendel, the molybdenum cofactor
biosynthetic protein cnx1 complements molybdate-repairable mutants,
transfers molybdenum to the metal binding pterin, and is associated with
the cytoskeleton, plant cell 12 (2000) 2455–2472.
[36] a. llamas, r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, synthesis of adenylated
molybdopterin: an essential step for molybdenum insertion, j. biol.
chem. 279 (2004) 55241–55246.
[37] g. schwarz, d.h. boxer, r.r. mendel, molybdenum cofactor
biosynthesis. the plant protein cnx1 binds molybdopterin with high
affinity, j. biol. chem. 272 (1997) 26811–26814.
[38] j. kuper, a. llamas, h.j. hecht, r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, structure of
molybdopterin-bound cnx1g domain links molybdenum and copper
metabolism, nature 430 (2004) 806.
[39] a. llamas, t. otte, g. multhaupt, r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, the
mechanism of nucleotide-assisted molybdenum insertion into molybdopterin: a novel route towards metal cofactor assembly, j. biol. chem.
(in press).
[40] g.b. moorhead, s.e. meek, p. douglas, d. bridges, c.s. smith, n.
morrice, c. mackintosh, purification of a plant nucleotide pyrophosphatase as a protein that interferes with nitrate reductase and glutamine
synthetase assays, eur. j. biochem. 270 (2003) 1356–1362.
[41] j.f. mercer, the molecular basis of copper-transport diseases, trends
mol. med. 7 (2001) 64–69.
[42] j. mason, thiomolybdates: mediators of molybdenum toxicity and
enzyme inhibitors, toxicology 42 (1986) 99–109.
[43] k.v. rajagopalan, j.l. johnson, the pterin molybdenum cofactors,
j. biol. chem. 267 (1992) 10199–10202.
[44] m. aguilar, j. cardenas, e. fernandez, quantitation of molybdopterin
oxidation product in wild-type and molybdenum cofactor deficient
mutants of chlamydomonas reinhardtii, biochim. biophys. acta 1160
(1992) 269–274.
[45] c.p. witte, m.i. igeno, r. mendel, g. schwarz, e. fernandez, the
chlamydomonas reinhardtii moco carrier protein is multimeric and
stabilizes molybdopterin cofactor in a molybdate charged form, febs
lett. 431 (1998) 205–209.
[46] f.s. ataya, c.p. witte, a. galvan, m.i. igeno, e. fernandez,  xxxg357xxx 
encodes the molybdenum cofactor carrier protein in chlamydomonas
reinhardtii and participates in protection, binding, and storage functions
of the cofactor, j. biol. chem. 278 (2003) 10885–10890.

633

[47] f. blasco, j.p. dos santos, a. magalon, c. frixon, b. guigliarelli, c.l.
santini, g. giordano, narj is a specific chaperone required for
molybdenum cofactor assembly in nitrate reductase a of escherichia
coli, mol. microbiol. 28 (1998) 435–447.
[48] s. leimkühler, w. klipp, role of xdhc in molybdenum cofactor
insertion into  xxxg2431xxx  of rhodobacter capsulatus,
j. bacteriol. 181 (1999) 2745–2751.
[49] n.v. ivanov, f. hubalek, m. trani, d.e. edmondson, factors involved in
the assembly of a functional molybdopyranopterin center in recombinant
comamonas acidovorans  xxxg2431xxx , eur. j. biochem. 270
(2003) 4744–4754.
[50] g. schwarz, n. schrader, r.r. mendel, h.j. hecht, h. schindelin,
crystal structures of human  xxxg937xxx  and plant cnx1 g domains:
comparative analysis and functional implications, j. mol. biol. 312
(2001) 405–418.
[51] j. kirsch, h. betz, glycine-receptor activation is required for receptor
clustering in spinal neurons, nature 392 (1998) 717–720.
[52] j. kirsch, i. wolters, a. triller, h. betz,  xxxg937xxx  antisense
oligonucleotides prevent  xxxg904xxx  clustering in spinal neurons
(see comments), nature 366 (1993) 745–748.
[53] g. feng, h. tintrup, j. kirsch, m.c. nichol, j. kuhse, h. betz, j.r.
sanes, dual requirement for  xxxg937xxx  in  xxxg904xxx  clustering
and molybdoenzyme activity (see comments), science 282 (1998)
1321–1324.
[54] j. reiss, s. gross-hardt, e. christensen, p. schmidt, r.r. mendel, g.
schwarz, a mutation in the gene for the neurotransmitter receptorclustering protein  xxxg937xxx  causes a novel form of molybdenum cofactor
deficiency, am. j. hum. genet. 68 (2001) 208–213.
[55] m. ramming, s. kins, n. werner, a. hermann, h. betz, j. kirsch,
diversity and phylogeny of  xxxg937xxx : tissue-specific splice variants, gene
structure, and sequence similarities to molybdenum cofactor-synthesizing
and cytoskeleton-associated proteins, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 97
(2000) 10266–10271.
[56] j. meier, m. de chaldee, a. triller, c. vannier, functional heterogeneity
of gephyrins, mol. cell. neurosci. 16 (2000) 566–577.
[57] t. giesemann, g. schwarz, r. navrotzki, k. berhörster, m.
rothkegel, k. schlüter, n. schrader, h. schindelin, r.r. mendel, j.
kirsch, b.m. jockusch, profilin and mena link the postsynaptic
scaffold protein  xxxg937xxx  to the microfilament system, j. neurosci. 23
(2003) 8330–8339.
[58] j. kuper, t. palmer, r.r. mendel, g. schwarz, mutations in the
molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic protein cnx1g from arabidopsis
thaliana define functions for molybdopterin bind, mo-insertion and
molybdenum cofactor stabilization, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 97
(2000) 6475–6480.
[59] j. reiss, e. christensen, g. kurlemann, m.-t. zabot, c. dorche,
genomic structure and mutational spectrum of the bicistronic mocs1
gene defective in molybdenum cofactor deficiency type a, hum. genet.
103 (1998) 639–644.
[60] j. reiss, genetics of molybdenum cofactor deficiency, hum. genet. 106
(2000) 157–163.
[61] t.a. gray, r.d. nicholls, diverse splicing mechanisms fuse the
evolutionarily conserved bicistronic mocs1a and mocs1b open
reading frames, rna 6 (2000) 928–936.
[62] j. reiss, c. dorche, b. stallmeyer, r.r. mendel, n. cohen, m.t. zabot,
human molybdopterin synthase gene: genomic structure and mutations in
molybdenum cofactor deficiency type b, am. j. hum. genet. 64 (1999)
706–711.
[63] j.p. mcgrath, s. jentsch, a. varshavsky, uba1: an essential yeast gene
encoding ubiquitin-activating enzyme, embo j. 10 (1991) 227–236.
[64] a. hershko, a. ciechanover, the ubiquitin system for protein
degradation, annu. rev. biochem. 61 (1992) 761–807.
[65] m. duran, f.a. beemer, c. van de heiden, j. korteland, p.k. de bree, m.
brink, s.k. wadman, i. lombeck, combined deficiency of xanthine
oxidase and sulphite oxidase: a defect of molybdenum metabolism or
transport? j. inherit. metab. dis. 1 (1978) 175–178.
[66] s. kramer, r.v. hageman, k.v. rajagopalan, in vitro reconstitution of
nitrate reductase activity of the neurospora crassa mutant nit-1: specific

634

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]
[72]
[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]
[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635
incorporation of molybdopterin, arch. biochem. biophys. 233 (1984)
821–829.
h.-j. lee, i.m. adham, g. schwarz, m. kneussel, j.-o. sass, w. engel, j.
reiss, molybdenum cofactor-deficient mice resemble the phenotype of
human patients, hum. mol. gen. 11 (2002) 3309–3317.
g. schwarz, j.a. santamaria-araujo, s. wolf, h.j. lee, i.m. adham, h.j.
grone, h. schwegler, j.o. sass, t. otte, p. hanzelmann, r.r. mendel, w.
engel, j. reiss, rescue of lethal molybdenum cofactor deficiency by a
biosynthetic precursor from escherichia coli, hum. mol. genet. 13
(2004) 1249–1255.
c.k. warner, v. finnerty, molybdenum hydroxylases in drosophila: ii.
molybdenum cofactor in  xxxg2431xxx ,  xxxg168xxx  and
pyridoxal oxidase, mol. gen. genet. 184 (1981).
n.j. lewis, p. hurt, h.m. sealy-lewis, c. scazzocchio, the genetic
control of the molybdoflavoproteins in aspergillus nidulans: iv. a
comparison between purine hydroxylase i and ii, eur. j. biochem. 91
(1978) 311–316.
r. hille, molybdenum enzymes containing the pyranopterin cofactor: an
overview, met. ions biol. syst. 39 (2002) 187–226.
r. hille, t. nishino, flavoprotein structure and mechanism: 4. xanthine
oxidase and  xxxg2431xxx , faseb j. 9 (1995) 995–1003.
z. yesbergenova, g. yang, e. oron, d. soffer, r. fluhr, m. sagi, the
plant mo-hydroxylases  xxxg168xxx  and  xxxg2431xxx 
have distinct reactive oxygen species signatures and are induced by
drought and abscisic acid, plant j. 42 (2005) 862–876.
f. stirpe, e. della corte, the regulation of rat liver  xxxg2431xxx .
conversion in vitro of the enzyme activity from dehydrogenase (type d)
to oxidase (type o), j. biol. chem. 244 (1969) 3855–3863.
y. amaya, k. yamazaki, m. sato, k. noda, t. nishino, proteolytic
conversion of  xxxg2431xxx  from the nad-dependent type to
the o2-dependent type. amino acid sequence of rat liver xanthine
dehydrogenase and identification of the cleavage sites of the enzyme
protein during irreversible conversion by trypsin, j. biol. chem. 265
(1990) 14170–14175.
s.a. sanders, r. eisenthal, r. harrison, nadh oxidase activity of
human  xxxg2431xxx —generation of superoxide anion, eur. j.
biochem. 245 (1997) 541–548.
r. harrison, structure and function of  xxxg2431xxx : where are
we now? free radic. biol. med. 33 (2002) 774–797.
a. meneshian, g.b. bulkley, the physiology of endothelial xanthine
oxidase: from urate catabolism to reperfusion injury to inflammatory
signal transduction, microcirculation 9 (2002) 161–175.
p. montalbini, inhibition of hypersensitive response by allopurinol
applied to the host in the incompatible relationship between phaseolus
vulgaris and uromyces phaseoli, j. phytopathol. 134 (1992) 218–228.
p. montalbini, ureides and enzymes of ureide synthesis in wheat seeds
and leaves and effect of allopurinol on puccinia recondita f.sp. tritici
infection, plant sci. 87 (1992) 225–231.
p. montalbini, g. della torre, evidence of a two-fold mechanism
responsible for the inhibition by allopurinol of the hypersensitive
response induced in tobacco by tobacco necrosis virus, phys. mol.
plant pathol. 48 (1996) 273–287.
g.m. pastori, l.a. rio, natural senescence of pea leaves: an activated
oxygen-mediated function for peroxisomes, plant physiol. 113 (1997)
411–418.
c. hesberg, r. hansch, r.r. mendel, f. bittner, tandem orientation of
duplicated  xxxg2431xxx  genes from arabidopsis thaliana:
differential gene expression and enzyme activities, j. biol. chem. 279
(2004) 13547–13554.
m. kurosaki, m. li calzi, e. scanziani, e. garattini, m. terao, tissueand cell-specific expression of mouse  xxxg2431xxx  gene in
vivo: regulation by bacterial lipopolysaccharide, biochem. j. 306 (pt 1)
(1995) 225–234.
y. moriwaki, t. yamamoto, j. yamakita, s. takahashi, k. higashino,
comparative localization of  xxxg168xxx  and  xxxg2431xxx  activity in rat tissues, histochem. j. 30 (1998) 69–74.
c. vorbach, a. scriven, m.r. capecchi, the housekeeping gene xanthine
oxidoreductase is necessary for milk fat droplet enveloping and secretion:

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]
[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]
[102]
[103]

[104]

gene sharing in the lactating mammary gland, genes dev. 16 (2002)
3223–3235.
j.l. mcmanaman, c.a. palmer, r.m. wright, m.c. neville, functional
regulation of  xxxg2431xxx  expression and localization in the
mouse mammary gland: evidence of a role in lipid secretion, j. physiol.
545 (2002) 567–579.
e.d. jarasch, c. grund, g. bruder, h.w. heid, t.w. keenan, w.w.
franke, localization of  xxxg2431xxx  in mammary-gland epithelium
and capillary endothelium, cell 25 (1981) 67–82.
m. ichikawa, t. nishino, a. ichikawa, subcellular localization of
 xxxg2431xxx  in rat hepatocytes: high-resolution immunoelectron
microscopic study combined with biochemical analysis, j. histochem.
cytochem. 40 (1992) 1097–1103.
s. angermuller, g. bruder, a. volkl, h. wesch, h.d. fahimi,
localization of  xxxg2431xxx  in crystalline cores of peroxisomes. a
cytochemical and biochemical study, eur. j. cell biol. 45 (1987)
137–144.
a. dikov, i. alexandrov, a. russinova, a. boyadjieva-michailova,
ultracytochemical demonstration of enzymes by reduction of potassium
hexacyanoferrate (iii): i. a method for demonstration of xanthine
oxidase, acta histochem. 83 (1988) 107–115.
d.b. datta, e.w. triplett, e.h. newcomb, localization of xanthine
dehydrogenase in cowpea root nodules: implications for the interaction
between cellular compartments during ureide biogenesis, proc. natl.
acad. sci. u. s. a. 88 (1991) 4700–4702.
l.m. sandalio, v.m. fernandez, f.l. ruperez, l.a. del rio, superoxide
free radicals are produced in glyoxysomes, plant physiol. 127 (1988)
1–4.
s. reumann, c. ma, s. lemke, l. babujee, araperox. a database of
putative arabidopsis proteins from plant peroxisomes, plant physiol. 136
(2004) 2587–2608.
f. rodriguez-trelles, r. tarrio, f.j. ayala, convergent neofunctionalization by positive darwinian selection after ancient recurrent duplications
of the  xxxg2431xxx  gene, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 100
(2003) 13413–13417.
r. hille, molybdenum-containing hydroxylases, arch. biochem. biophys. 433 (2005) 107–116.
j.a. badwey, j.m. robinson, m.j. karnovsky, m.l. karnovsky,
superoxide production by an unusual  xxxg168xxx  in guinea pig
granulocytes. characterization and cytochemical localization, j. biol.
chem. 256 (1981) 3479–3486.
d.y. huang, a. furukawa, y. ichikawa, molecular cloning of retinal
oxidase/ xxxg168xxx  cdnas from rabbit and mouse livers and
functional expression of recombinant mouse retinal oxidase cdna in
escherichia coli, arch. biochem. biophys. 364 (1999) 264–272.
m. terao, m. kurosaki, g. saltini, s. demontis, m. marini, m.
salmona, e. garattini, cloning of the cdnas coding for two novel
molybdo-flavoproteins showing high similarity with aldehyde
oxidase and  xxxg2431xxx , j. biol. chem. 275 (2000)
30690–30700.
m. terao, m. kurosaki, m. marini, m.a. vanoni, g. saltini, v. bonetto,
a. bastone, c. federico, s. saccone, r. fanelli, m. salmona, e.
garattini, purification of the  xxxg168xxx  homolog 1 ( xxxg168xxx )
protein and cloning of the  xxxg168xxx  and  xxxg168xxx  homolog 2
(aoh2) genes. identification of a novel molybdo-flavoprotein gene
cluster on mouse chromosome 1, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001)
46347–46363.
p. chambon, a decade of molecular biology of  xxxd3417xxx  receptors,
faseb j. 10 (1996) 940–954.
s. shaw, e. jayatilleke, the role of  xxxg168xxx  in  xxxd102xxx induced
hepatic lipid peroxidation in the rat, biochem. j. 268 (1990) 579–583.
m. kurosaki, m. terao, m.m. barzago, a. bastone, d. bernardinello,
m. salmona, e. garattini, the  xxxg168xxx  gene cluster in mice
and rats.  xxxg168xxx  homologue 3, a novel member of the
molybdo-flavoenzyme family with selective expression in the olfactory
mucosa, j. biol. chem. 279 (2004) 50482–50498.
s. akaba, m. seo, n. dohmae, k. takio, h. sekimoto, y. kamiya, n.
furuya, t. komano, t. koshiba, production of homo- and hetero-dimeric

r.r. mendel, f. bittner / biochimica et biophysica acta 1763 (2006) 621–635

[105]

[106]
[107]

[108]
[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]
[114]
[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]
[125]

isozymes from two  xxxg168xxx  genes of arabidopsis thaliana,
j. biochem. (tokyo) 126 (1999) 395–401.
m. seo, h. koiwai, s. akaba, t. komano, t. oritani, y. kamiya, t.
koshiba, abscisic  xxxg168xxx  in leaves of arabidopsis thaliana,
plant j. 23 (2000) 481–488.
m. seo, t. koshiba, complex regulation of aba biosynthesis in plants,
trends plant sci. 7 (2002) 41–48.
p.e. verslues, j.k. zhu, before and beyond aba: upstream sensing and
internal signals that determine aba accumulation and response under
abiotic stress, biochem. soc. trans. 33 (2005) 375–379.
b. mauch-mani, f. mauch, the role of abscisic acid in plant–pathogen
interactions, curr. opin. plant biol. 8 (2005) 409–414.
t. eilers, g. schwarz, h. brinkmann, c. witt, t. richter, j. nieder, b.
koch, r. hille, r. hansch, r.r. mendel, identification and biochemical
characterization of arabidopsis thaliana sulfite oxidase. a new player in
plant sulfur metabolism, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001) 46989–46994.
n. schrader, e.y. kim, j. winking, j. paulukat, h. schindelin, g.
schwarz, biochemical characterization of the high affinity binding
between the  xxxg904xxx  and  xxxg937xxx , j. biol. chem. 279 (2004)
18733–18741.
r. hänsch, c. lang, e. riebeseel, r. lindigkeit, a. gessler, h.
rennenberg, r.r. mendel, plant sulfite oxidase as novel producer of
h2o2: combination of enzyme catalysis with a subsequent nonenzymatic reaction step, j. biol. chem. 281 (2006) 6884–6888.
k. nowak, n. luniak, c. witt, y. wustefeld, a. wachter, r.r. mendel,
r. hansch, peroxisomal localization of sulfite oxidase separates it from
chloroplast-based sulfur assimilation, plant cell physiol. 45 (2004)
1889–1894.
r. hansch, r.r. mendel, sulfite oxidation in plant peroxisomes,
photosynth. res. 86 (2005) 337–343.
u. heber, k. hüve, action of so2 on plants and metabolic detoxification
of so2, int. rev. cytol. 177 (1998) 255–286.
w.m. kaiser, s.c. huber, post-translational regulation of nitrate
reductase: mechanism, physiological relevance and environmental
triggers, j. exp. bot. 52 (2001) 1981–1989.
l. nussaume, m. vincentz, c. meyer, j.p. boutin, m. caboche, posttranscriptional regulation of nitrate reductase by light is abolished by an
n-terminal deletion, plant cell 7 (1995) 611–621.
w.h. campbell, k.r. kinghorn, functional domains of assimilatory
nitrate reductases and nitrite reductases, trends biochem. sci. 15 (1990)
315–319.
l. skipper, w.h. campbell, j.a. mertens, d.j. lowe, pre-steady-state
kinetic analysis of recombinant arabidopsis nadh:nitrate reductase:
rate-limiting processes in catalysis, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001)
26995–27002.
h. yamasaki, y. sakihama, simultaneous production of  xxxd2738xxx  and
peroxynitrite by plant nitrate reductase: in vitro evidence for the nrdependent formation of active nitrogen species, febs lett. 468 (2000)
89–92.
h. yamasaki, y. sakihama, s. takahashi, an alternative pathway for
 xxxd2738xxx  production in plants: new features of an old enzyme, trends
plant sci. 4 (1999) 128–129.
p. rockel, f. strube, a. rockel, j. wildt, w.m. kaiser, regulation of
 xxxd2738xxx  (no) production by plant nitrate reductase in vivo and in
vitro, j. exp. bot. 53 (2002) 103–110.
m.v. beligni, l. lamattina,  xxxd2738xxx  stimulates seed germination and
de-etiolation, and inhibits hypocotyl elongation, three light-inducible
responses in plants, planta 210 (2000) 215–221.
t. noritake, k. kawakita, n. doke,  xxxd2738xxx  induces phytoalexin
accumulation in potato tuber tissues, plant cell physiol. 37 (1996)
113–116.
j. durner, d.f. klessig,  xxxd2738xxx  as a signal in plants, curr. opin.
plant biol. 2 (1999) 369–374.
j. bordas, r.c. bray, c.d. garner, s. gutteridge, s.s. hasnain, x-ray
absorption spectroscopy of  xxxg2431xxx . the molybdenum centres of
the functional and the desulpho forms, biochem. j. 191 (1980) 499–508.

635

[126] r.c. wahl, k.v. rajagopalan, evidence for the inorganic nature of the
cyanolyzable sulfur of molybdenum hydroxylases, j. biol. chem. 257
(1982) 1354–1359.
[127] v. massey, d.e. edmondson, on the mechanism of inactivation of
 xxxg2431xxx  by cyanide, j. biol. chem. 245 (1970) 6595–6598.
[128] f. bittner, m. oreb, r.r. mendel, aba3 is a molybdenum cofactor
sulfurase required for activation of  xxxg168xxx  and xanthine
dehydrogenase in arabidopsis thaliana, j. biol. chem. 276 (2001)
40381–40384.
[129] t. heidenreich, s. wollers, r.r. mendel, f. bittner, characterization of
the  xxxg1562xxx -like domain of aba3 from arabidopsis thaliana provides
insight into the mechanism of molybdenum cofactor sulfuration, j. biol.
chem. 280 (2005) 4213–4218.
[130] l. xiong, m. ishitani, h. lee, j.k. zhu, the arabidopsis los5/aba3 locus
encodes a  xxxg1441xxx  and modulates cold stressand osmotic stress-responsive gene expression, plant cell 13 (2001)
2063–2083.
[131] s.k. wadman, m. duran, f.a. beemer, b.p. cats, j.l. johnson, k.v.
rajagopalan, j.m. saudubray, h. ogier, c. charpentier, r. berger, et al.,
absence of hepatic molybdenum cofactor: an inborn error of metabolism
leading to a combined deficiency of sulphite oxidase and xanthine
dehydrogenase, j. inherit. metab. dis. 6 (1983) 78–83.
[132] c.e. dent, g.r. philpot, xanthinuria, an inborn error (or deviation) of
metabolism, lancet 266 (1954) 182–185.
[133] m. seo, a.j. peeters, h. koiwai, t. oritani, a. marion-poll, j.a.
zeevaart, m. koornneef, y. kamiya, t. koshiba, the arabidopsis
 xxxg168xxx  3 (aao3) gene product catalyzes the final step in
abscisic acid biosynthesis in leaves, proc. natl. acad. sci. u. s. a. 97
(2000) 12908–12913.
[134] e. marin, a. marion-poll, tomato flacca mutant is impaired in aba
 xxxg168xxx  and  xxxg2431xxx  activities, plant physiol.
biochem. 35 (1997) 369–372.
[135] r.r. mendel, a.j. müller, reconstitution of nadh-nitrate reductase in
vitro from nitrate reductase-deficient nicotiana tabacum mutants, mol.
gen. genet. 161 (1978) 77–80.
[136] f.j. braaksma, w.j. feenstra, isolation and characterization of nitrate
reductase-deficient mutants of arabidopsis thaliana, theor. appl. genet.
64 (1982) 83–90.
[137] a. kleinhofs, r.l. warner, j.m. lawrence, j.m. jeter, d.a. kudrna, in:
j.l. wray, j.r. kinghorn (eds.), molecular and genetic aspects of
nitrate assimilation, oxford univ. press, oxford, 1989, pp. 197–211.
[138] d.j. cove, genetic studies of nitrate assimilation in aspergillus nidulans,
biol. rev. 54 (1979) 291–327.
[139] e. fernandez, j. cardenas, in: j.l. wray, j.r. kinghorn (eds.), molecular
and genetic aspects of nitrate assimilation, oxford univ. press, oxford,
1989, pp. 102–124.
[140] n.m. crawford, in: j.k. setlow (ed.), genetic engineering, principles
and methods, plenum press, new york, 1992, pp. 89–98.
[141] k. ichida, m. yoshida, r. sakuma, t. hosoya, two siblings with classical
xanthinuria type 1: significance of allopurinol loading test, intern. med.
37 (1998) 77–82.
[142] k. ichida, t. matsumura, r. sakuma, t. hosoya, t. nishino, mutation of
human  xxxg1441xxx  gene is responsible for classical
xanthinuria type ii, biochem. biophys. res. commun. 282 (2001)
1194–1200.
[143] k.m. leon-klooserziel, g.j. ruijs, s.e. jacobsen, n.e. olszewski, s.h.
schwartz, j.a.d. zeevaart, m. koorneef, isolation and characterization of
abscisic acid-deficient arabidopsis mutants at tow new loci, plant j. 10
(1996) 655–661.
[144] j. balk, r. lill, the cell's cookbook for iron–sulfur clusters: recipes for
fool's gold? chembiochem 5 (2004) 1044–1049.
[145] s. kushnir, e. babiychuk, s. storozhenko, m.w. davey, j. papenbrock,
r. de rycke, g. engler, u.w. stephan, h. lange, g. kispal, r. lill, m.
van montagu, a mutation of the mitochondrial  xxxg22xxx  sta1
leads to dwarfism and chlorosis in the arabidopsis mutant starik, plant
cell 13 (2001) 89–100.

