infection and immunity, july 2006, p. 3804–3816
0019-9567/06/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/iai.00161-06
copyright © 2006, american society for microbiology. all rights reserved.

vol. 74, no. 7

 xxxg110xxx  restricts the ability of the pathogen
candida albicans to form a biofilm on catheter surfaces
through an  xxxd102xxx based mechanism‡
pranab k. mukherjee,1 sotohy mohamed,1 jyotsna chandra,1 duncan kuhn,1† shuqing liu,2
omar s. antar,3 ryan munyon,1 aaron p. mitchell,3 david andes,4 mark r. chance,2
mahmoud rouabhia,5 and mahmoud a. ghannoum1*

received 30 january 2006/returned for modification 28 february 2006/accepted 25 march 2006

candida biofilms formed on indwelling medical devices are increasingly associated with severe infections. in
this study, we used proteomics and western and northern blotting analyses to demonstrate that alcohol
dehydrogenase (adh) is downregulated in candida biofilms. disruption of  xxxg72xxx  significantly (p ⴝ 0.0046)
enhanced the ability of candida albicans to form biofilm. confocal scanning laser microscopy showed that the
 xxxg72xxx  mutant formed thicker biofilm than the parent strain (210 ␮m and 140 ␮m, respectively). these
observations were extended to an engineered human oral mucosa and an in vivo rat model of catheterassociated biofilm. inhibition of candida adh enzyme using disulfiram and  xxxd2148xxx  resulted in
thicker biofilm (p < 0.05). moreover, biofilms formed by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain produced significantly smaller
amounts of ethanol, but larger amounts of acetaldehyde, than biofilms formed by the parent and revertant
strains (p < 0.0001), demonstrating that the effect of adh1p on biofilm formation is mediated by its enzymatic
activity. furthermore, we found that 10% ethanol significantly inhibited biofilm formation in vitro, with
complete inhibition of biofilm formation at ethanol concentrations of >20%. similarly, using a clinically
relevant rabbit model of catheter-associated biofilm, we found that ethanol treatment inhibited biofilm formation by c. albicans in vivo (p < 0.05) but not by staphylococcus spp. (p > 0.05), indicating that ethanol
specifically inhibits candida biofilm formation. taken together, our studies revealed that adh1p contributes to
the ability of c. albicans to form biofilms in vitro and in vivo and that the protein restricts biofilm formation
through an  xxxd102xxx dependent mechanism. these results are clinically relevant and may suggest novel antibiofilm treatment strategies.
indwelling medical devices (imds) infected with candida
represent a major problem, since members of this pathogenic
genus, particularly candida albicans, adhere avidly to biomaterials, including catheters, and form biofilms (a community of
microorganisms encased in a self-produced extracellular matrix [ecm]), making antifungal therapy alone insufficient for
cure (19, 35, 39). c. albicans is the most common fungal pathogen associated with colonization and biofilm formation on the
surfaces of imds, such as intravenous catheters (35, 38). candida biofilms are extremely resistant to commonly used antifungals (7, 37), and as stipulated in the infectious diseases
society of america guidelines, removal of the catheter is often
necessary to effect a cure (53). however, removal of imds may
not be feasible in many cases, e.g., in patients with coagulopathy or those with limited vascular access (as often occurs
among the pediatric population). moreover, catheter removal

is also associated with increased health care expenses, as well
as other complications (49). therefore, it is critical to devise
new approaches to manage biofilm-associated infections, a
prerequisite for which is obtaining a better understanding of
the biology of the candida biofilm.
an approach that has been used to understand the biology
and gain a global insight into the processes occurring in cells
living in a biofilm environment is proteomics. unlike genomic
analyses, the proteomic approach provides information on the
functional roles of proteins and protein-protein interactions.
this state-of-the-art technique has been used to identify specific proteins expressed differentially in biofilms formed by
bacteria (2, 51, 52, 60, 66). a recent proteomic analysis by ojha
et al. (50) identified mycolic acid and groel1, a heat shock
protein (hsp60) chaperone involved in biosynthesis of mycolic
acid, as unique components essential for biofilm formation by
mycobacterium smegmatis. proteomics has been used to study
global protein expression and to identify proteins specific to
candida germination and virulence (56) but has not been applied to candida biofilms.
the objectives of this study were to (i) use a proteomic
approach to identify proteins that are differentially expressed
in early-phase biofilms; (ii) use gene disruption and inhibition
assays to prove that one of the identified proteins contributes

* corresponding author. mailing address: center for medical mycology, department of dermatology, case western reserve university, 11100 euclid avenue, lks-5028, cleveland, oh 44106. phone:
(216) 844-8580. fax: (216) 844-1076. e-mail: mag3@case.edu.
† present address: division of pulmonary and critical care, massachusetts general hospital, boston, ma 02114.
‡ supplemental material for this article may be found at http://iai
.asm.org/.
3804

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

center for medical mycology, case western reserve university, cleveland, ohio1; center for proteomics, case western reserve university,
cleveland, ohio2; department of microbiology, columbia university, new york, new york3; department of medicine,
university of wisconsin, madison, wisconsin4; and groupe de recherche en ecologie buccale, faculte de
medecine dentaire, universite laval, quebec city, quebec, canada5

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

3805

table 1. strains used in this study
strain

genotype

bwp17 (day1)
osa101 (parent)
osa108 (revertant)
osa114 ( xxxg72xxx  mutant)
w303 (amp 1411)

ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg  xxxg72xxx ::tn7-uau1
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg  xxxg72xxx ::tn7-ura3
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg::phis1- xxxg72xxx   xxxg72xxx ::tn7-uau1
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg  xxxg72xxx ::tn7-ura3
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg::phis1  xxxg72xxx ::tn7-uau1
ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg his1::hisg  xxxg72xxx ::tn7-ura3
mata ura3-1 leu2-3,112 his3-11 15 trp1-1  xxxg1661xxx -1 can1-100

materials and methods
candida isolates. the candida strains used in this study are described in table 1.
candida cultures were maintained on sabouraud dextrose agar (yeast extract,
peptone, dextrose [1:2:1]) or kept at ⫺80°c for long-term storage.
animals. rats and rabbits were used in this study to compare the abilities of
isogenic strains to form biofilm on catheters and to evaluate the ability of ethanol
to inhibit candida biofilm formation, respectively. specific-pathogen-free female
sprague-dawley rats weighing 400 g (harlan sprague-dawley, indianapolis,
ind.) or female new zealand white rabbits weighing 2.5 to 3.0 kg (covance inc.,
kalamazoo, mich.) were used. the animals were housed in an environmentally

67
this study
this study
this study
27

controlled room with a 12-h light-dark cycle and were maintained on a standard
ad libitum rat diet. animal studies with rats were in accordance with the american association for accreditation of laboratory care criteria and approved by
the animal research committee of the william s. middleton memorial veterans administration hospital, madison, wisconsin. all studies with rabbits were
performed in accordance with the guidelines for animal health and welfare
required by the institutional animal care and use committee at case western
reserve university school of medicine, cleveland, ohio.
biofilm formation in vitro. candida biofilms were formed and quantified as
described previously (7). briefly, c. albicans cells were grown overnight at 37°c
in yeast nitrogen base (ynb) medium (difco laboratories, detroit, mi) supplemented with 50 mm glucose. a standardized cell suspension was prepared
from this culture by adjusting the cell density to 1 ⫻ 107 cells/ml. silicone
elastomer disks (1.5-cm diameter; cardiovascular instrument corp., wakefield,
ma) were placed in 12-well tissue culture plates and incubated in fetal bovine
serum for 24 h at 37°c on a rocker. next, the disks were immersed in 3 ml of the
standardized cell suspension (1 ⫻ 107 cells/ml) and incubated for 90 min at 37°c.
subsequently, the disks were immersed in ynb medium with 50 mm glucose and
incubated for different times at 37°c on a rocker. fungal biofilms were quantified
as described previously (7) by measuring their biomass and metabolic activity
using dry-weight determination and tetrazolium dye [2,3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro5-sulfophenyl)-2h-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide] (xtt) reduction assays (by
measuring absorbance at 492 nm), respectively. assays were carried out in four
replicates on different days.
protein extraction. candida biofilms are characterized by the presence of cell
wall glycoprotein-rich ecm (7, 8, 36). therefore, we hypothesized that proteins
associated with the fungal cell wall play a critical role in biofilm development. to
test this hypothesis, c. albicans was grown as biofilm to the early phase (6 h) and
as planktonic cells using our in vitro model. total proteins were extracted and
fractionated into different cellular fractions using a modification of the method
previously described for candida cells (48). similar sodium  xxxd3215xxx 
(sds) extraction-based methods have routinely been used by our group and
other investigators to separate the soluble and insoluble components of c.
albicans cell wall proteins (17, 48, 57). briefly, biofilms and planktonic cells were
harvested, washed with prechilled phosphate-buffered saline (pbs), and homogenized with glass beads (0.45-mm diameter; sigma) in buffer a (10 mm sodium
acetate, ph 5.0, 1 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). the resulting lysate was
centrifuged to remove cytoplasmic material, and the cell wall pellet was incubated with buffer b (10 mm tris-cl, ph 7.8, 2% sds, 100 mm edta, 40 mm
␤- xxxd26xxx ) for 10 min at 100°c to release sds-soluble cell wall (cws)
proteins into the mixture. these released cws proteins were collected, after
a brief centrifugation step, in the supernatant and processed for proteomic
analyses.
proteomic analysis. proteomic analyses of the cws samples isolated from c.
albicans biofilm or planktonic cells were performed as described previously (23,
43). a brief description is given below.
(i) cy dye labeling. the fractionated cws protein samples were precipitated
by using a clean-up kit (ge healthcare). precipitates were solubilized in lysis
buffer (7 m urea, 2 m thiourea, 4% chaps {3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate}, 30 mm tris), and the concentration was measured by using a 2d quant kit (ge healthcare). a 250-␮g biofilm sample was
labeled with 400 pmol of cy3, and a 250-␮g planktonic sample was labeled with
400 pmol of cy5. labeling was performed for 30 min on ice in the dark, after
which the reactions were quenched with the addition of 1 ␮l of 10 mm lysine.
the quenched 250-␮g cy3- and cy5-labeled samples for biofilm and planktonic
c. albicans were then combined and mixed together, after which an equal volume
of 2⫻ rehydration buffer (7 m urea, 2 m thiourea, 4% chaps, 4 mg/ml dithio-

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

to candida biofilm formation in vitro; (iii) move our studies
closer to the clinical setting by showing that a correlation exists
between the ability of isogenic c. albicans strains to form
biofilm in vitro, in an engineered human oral mucosa (ehom)
model, and in a rat model of catheter-associated candida biofilm; and (iv) determine the mechanism by which the identified
protein modulates c. albicans biofilm formation.
in this study, using a proteomic approach, we demonstrate
that  xxxg110xxx  (adh1p) expression is reduced in
candida biofilm relative to planktonic cells (grown in suspension). targeted disruption of  xxxg72xxx  or inhibition of the enzyme using specific inhibitors resulted in thicker biofilm in
vitro than those of the parent and revertant strains. the effect
of adh1p was also tested in an in vivo-like ehom model.
ehom tissues infected with the  xxxg72xxx  mutant exhibited increased biofilm formation, tissue damage, and penetration of
tissue layers compared to tissues infected with the parent and
revertant c. albicans strains. to demonstrate the in vivo relevance of the role of adh1p in biofilm formation, we tested the
ability of an  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain to form biofilm in a rat model
of intravenous-catheter-associated candida biofilm. we found
that the  xxxg72xxx  mutant formed more biofilm than the isogenic
parental strain, demonstrating that deletion of  xxxg72xxx  results in
increased biofilm formation in vivo. since adh1p catalyzes the
conversion of acetaldehyde to ethanol, we measured the
amounts of these two substances in biofilms and showed a
significant increase and decrease in their levels, respectively.
furthermore, we used in vitro and in vivo assays to demonstrate that ethanol inhibits biofilm formation and that the biofilm-inhibitory activity of adh1p is mediated by its enzymatic
activity.
this is the first report that identifies a specific regulator of
fungal biofilm, demonstrating its in vivo relevance and associated mechanism. our findings have important implications for
biofilm formation and the coexistence of microbes in a mixedspecies environment, as well as wide-ranging clinical implications.

reference

3806

mukherjee et al.

insertion mutant strains were constructed by random-transposon mutagenesis
with the uau1 cassette, as described previously (16). c. albicans strains were
grown in ypd plus uridine (1% yeast extract, 2% bacto peptone, 2% dextrose,
and 80 ␮g uridine ml⫺1) at 30°c. following transformations, selection was done
on synthetic medium (2% dextrose, 6.7% yeast nitrogen base plus ammonium
sulfate and the auxotrophic requirements).
gene complementation. the open reading frame (orf) of the  xxxg72xxx 
(orf19.3997) gene was identified through the stanford c. albicans genome database (http://www-sequence.stanford.edu/group/candida). pcr was used to produce a fragment of  xxxg72xxx  from approximately 1,000 bp upstream of the atg to
approximately 500 bp downstream of the stop codon of the orf. the primer
sequences used were as follows: forward, 5⬘-ggtcatagtttcatttgcccc
cg-3⬘; reverse, 5⬘-ccacaacaacaaatactcttctacagga-3⬘. this
fragment was inserted into the pgemt-easy vector (promega), which contains
noti or alwni and ngomiv sites flanking the insertion. the insert was then
released with alwni and ngomiv and integrated into noti-digested pddb78,
a trp1 his1 vector (65), by in vivo recombination using saccharomyces cerevisiae w303 (27), a trp1⫺ strain (amp 1411). the recombination within the w303
strain generated plasmid posa107 containing the complementing  xxxg72xxx  insert
within the pddb78 backbone, suitable for integration into the his1 locus of c.
albicans. the revertant strain (osa108) was constructed by transforming
osa101 (tadh1 7.4 5), the  xxxg72xxx / xxxg72xxx  homozygous insertion mutant, to histidine prototrophy with the nrui-digested plasmid posa107. the unique nrui
site in these plasmids lies in his1 sequences; nrui digestion thus directs integration to the his1 locus. for comparison to the complemented strains, the
mutant strains were made his⫹ by transforming each mutant to histidine prototrophy with nrui-digested plasmid pddb78. strain osa114 (pddb78 7.4 5)
was derived from mutant osa101 (tadh1 7.4 5). disruption and reintroduction
of the  xxxg72xxx  gene was confirmed by pcr analyses of the isogenic strains using
the primers mentioned above.
phenotypic characterization of constructed isogenic strains. the growth and
germination abilities of the constructed isogenic strains were determined as
described previously (14, 25, 42). briefly, growth of the strains was followed at
2-h intervals until the stationary phase of growth was attained. for germination
assays, cells were grown in ynb medium overnight. these freshly grown cells
were adjusted to a standardized suspension (5 ⫻ 107 cells in 50 ␮l pbs) and then
incubated with 10% fetal bovine serum for 180 min. after the incubation period,
10-␮l samples were withdrawn for each strain, a wet mount from each sample
was prepared, and the number of yeasts that had germ tubes at least 1 blastospore diameter in length was determined microscopically. the percentage of
germinating cells for each isogenic strain was determined compared to the total
number of cells counted.
confocal scanning laser microscopy (cslm) of candida biofilms. to determine the effect of adh1p inhibitor or disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene on the
morphology and architecture of candida biofilms, confocal analyses of the biofilms were performed as described previously (7). briefly, at various time points
during biofilm formation, silicone elastomer disks on which biofilms were developing were transferred to a 12-well plate and incubated for 45 min at 37␱c in 4
ml pbs containing the fluorescent stains  xxxg398xxx  (10 ␮m) and  xxxd2620xxx 
(cona)–alexa fluor-488 conjugate (cona, 25 ␮g/ml).  xxxg398xxx  (excitation wavelength, 543 nm; emission, 560-nm long-pass filter) is converted to orange-red
cylindrical intravacuolar structures by metabolically active cells, while cona
(excitation wavelength, 488 nm; emission, 505-nm long-pass filter) binds to glucose and mannose residues of cell wall polysaccharides with green fluorescence.
after incubation with the dyes, the silicone elastomer disks were placed on a
35-mm glass-bottom petri dish (mattek corp., ashland, ma) and observed with
a zeiss lsm510 confocal scanning laser microscope (carl zeiss, inc.).
ehom model. to move our study closer to the clinical setting, we used an
ehom model and tested the abilities of the isogenic strains to form biofilm and
damage and invade ehom tissue layers. the ehom model was created as
described previously (58). briefly, fibroblasts and epithelial cells were isolated
from human oral biopsy specimens and cultured in a manner allowing the
formation of a complex three-dimensional spatial cellular organization, found in
normal human oral mucosa. specimens of normal palatal mucosae were obtained
from patients who had attended the dental clinic at laval university (school of
dental medicine) to undergo gingival grafts. the sample of normal palatal
mucosa removed from the donor site usually exceeds by a few millimeters the size
needed for the graft. usually the excess tissue is thrown away with the biomedical
waste products. following informed consent, the excess tissue was collected and
used in the study. the epithelium was separated from the lamina propria using
thermolysin treatment. epithelial cells and fibroblasts were isolated, cultured,
and then used to design ehom. the lamina propria was produced by mixing
bovine (skin) type i and type iii collagens (sigma, st. louis, mo) with gingival

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

threitol) supplemented with 2% immobilized ph gradient (ipg) buffer 4-7 (ge
healthcare) was added.
(ii) two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and imaging. the pair-labeled samples for biofilms and planktonic c. albicans (450-␮l final volume) were passively
rehydrated in 24-cm 4-7 ipg strips (ge healthcare) for 2 h at 0 v and 12 h at
30 v, followed by isoelectric focusing using a ipgphor ii (ge healthcare) for a
total of 65.5 kvh (held at 500 v for 1 h, held at 1,000 v for 1 h, and held at 8,000
v for 8 h). the cysteine sulfhydryls were reduced and carbamidomethylated,
while the proteins were equilibrated into the second-dimensional loading buffer
by incubating the focused strips in equilibration buffer (30% glycerol, 6 m urea,
2% sds, 100 mm tris, ph 8.0, trace bromophenol blue) supplemented with
0.5% dithiothreitol for 10 min at room temperature, followed by 4.5% iodoacetamide in fresh equilibration buffer for an additional 10 min of room temperature incubation. ipg strips were then placed on top of 12% homogeneous
polyacrylamide gels that were precast with low-fluorescence glass plates using an
ettan-dalt caster (ge healthcare). the glass plate was presilanized (bindsilane; ge healthcare) to affix the polymerized gel to only one of the glass plates,
thereby preventing gel swelling/shrinkage between data acquisition and protein
excision. the second-dimensional sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(page) was then carried out under the following conditions: 40 ma/gel; ⬃130
v starting voltage for 14 h. the cy3 (biofilm) and cy5 (planktonic) components
of each gel were individually imaged using excitation/emission wavelengths of
532/580 nm for cy3 and 633/670 nm for cy5 using a typhoon 9400 (ge healthcare). after being imaged for cy dye components, the nonsilanized glass plate
was removed, and the gels were fixed in 10% methanol, 7.5% acetic acid overnight and then washed in wash solution (2.94 g of sodium hydrogen carbonate
and 31.8 g of  xxxd3212xxx  in 750 ml water brought to 1 liter with water) for
30 min and then incubated in deep purple solution (ge healthcare; 1 in 250
dilution) in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. this poststain visualizes ca.
95% of the unlabeled protein and ensures accurate protein excision, as the
molecular weights and hydrophobicity of cy dyes can influence protein migration
during sds-page. the deep purple image was acquired on the same imager
using 532/560-nm wavelengths, as well as reimaging postexcision to ensure accurate protein excision.
data analysis. decyder software (ge healthcare) differential in-gel analysis
was used for simultaneous comparison of abundance changes for pairwise comparisons of individual cy3 biofilm and cy5 planktonic samples. the entire signal
from each cy dye channel was normalized prior to the codetection of protein
spot boundaries and the calculation of the volume ratio for each protein spot
pair. the fold change for each protein spot was reported. proteins of interest
were robotically excised in a 96-well plate format using ettan spot picker (ge
healthcare). the gels were dehydrated and digested in gel with trypsin protease,
and tryptic peptides were then extracted from the gel and applied to a matrixassisted laser desorption ionization (maldi) target. peptide mass maps were
acquired using maldi-time of flight/time of flight mass spectrometry performed
on a voyager 4700 (applied biosystems). the spot intensity was quantified with
the spot normalized volume depending on the whole volume of the difference
in-gel electrophoresis (dige) image after scanning the image using a typhoon
scanner. dark-blue spots (cy5 labeled) indicated proteins identified as upregulated in biofilms, while dark-red spots (cy3 labeled) indicated proteins downregulated in biofilms. the data were analyzed using the applied biosystems gps
explorer software with mascot analysis, and a combined peptide mass fingerprinting/tandem mass spectrometry search. an increase in the cy5/cy3 ratio
indicated proteins upregulated in biofilms, while an increase in the cy3/cy5 ratio
indicated upregulated proteins in planktonic c. albicans.
western and northern blotting analyses. to confirm the identity and levels of
adh1p during biofilm development, we performed western and northern blotting analyses as described previously (7, 46). for western blot analyses, 10 ␮g
protein was separated by sds-page and detected using an anti-yeast adh
primary antibody (1:10,000; calbiochem), a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:5,000; calbiochem), and a chemiluminescencebased detection kit (ecl; amersham). for northern analysis, total rna was
extracted from biofilm and planktonic c. albicans, and northern analysis of the
extracted rna was performed using a pcr-amplified  xxxg72xxx -specific probe
(primers: forward, 5⬘-gcaagcttattcagaattttcagaggtgc-3⬘, and
reverse, 5⬘-caactggtgtccaatacgtatctactcaag-3⬘).
disruption and reintroduction of c. albicans  xxxg72xxx  gene. to unequivocally
confirm the contribution of adh1p to candida biofilm formation, we constructed
an isogenic strain pair that differed only in the ability to produce adh1p and a
revertant strain in which a functional copy of  xxxg72xxx  was reintroduced.
gene disruption. all candida albicans strains used in this study were derived
from strain bwp17 (ura3⌬::␭imm434/ura3⌬::␭imm434 arg4::hisg/arg4::hisg
his1::hisg/his1::hisg) (67) and are listed in table 1. the his⫺ homozygous

infect. immun.

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

ethanol lock treatment of biofilm formed by c. albicans on catheters placed in
rabbits. we examined the efficacy of ethanol lock therapy against biofilms
formed by c. albicans, staphylococcus epidermidis, and staphylococcus aureus in
a rabbit model of catheter biofilm, as described previously (62). this model
allows the administration and withdrawal of nutrients at different time points and
is relevant to the clinical setting of biofilm formation. briefly, silicone catheters
were surgically placed in new zealand white rabbits. three groups of 10 rabbits
each were infected with c. albicans, s. epidermidis, or s. aureus, respectively.
after catheter placement, a standard 300-␮l inoculum consisting of 1 ⫻ 107 cfu
of microorganisms and 100 u of heparin (abbott laboratories, north chicago,
ill.) was “locked” in the internal lumen of the catheter and allowed to dwell for
24 h. the inoculum was removed, and the catheter was flushed daily with 300 ␮l
of heparinized saline (100 u) or 50% ethanol. daily heparin flushes were performed for the first 3 days. five animals in each group were treated with 300 ␮l
of 50% ethanol locked in the catheter lumen for 30 min/day for 7 days. the
remaining 5 animals in each group were treated with daily heparin flushes. at the
end of the treatment period, the rabbits were anesthetized, and 5 ml of blood was
obtained for blood culture (bd bactec; becton dickinson) through the catheter
and via cardiac puncture. the animals were euthanized with an intracardiac
injection of pentobarbital. next, using sterile technique, the catheter was removed and divided into proximal (subcutaneous tunnel) and distal (intravenous)
4-cm segments. each segment was evaluated by sem.
statistical analysis. all statistical analyses were performed using statview
version 5.0.1 software (sas institute inc., cary, nc). for paired comparisons,
students t test was used, while analysis of variance was performed for comparisons involving more than two groups. a p value of ⬍0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

results
proteomic analysis demonstrated that  xxxg110xxx  is downregulated in candida biofilm. studies performed
with whole-cell proteins result in high background and also
make it difficult to detect proteins with low abundance (17, 57).
to avoid these limitations, and to identify differentially expressed proteins in early-phase candida biofilms, we performed fractionation of crude lysates from biofilm and planktonically grown cells to obtain proteins enriched in different
cellular components (cell wall, membranes, and cytoplasm).
since candida biofilms are characterized by the presence of
polysaccharide-rich ecm, which is commonly associated with
fungal cell walls (7, 47), in this study we focused on the cell
wall-enriched fraction of c. albicans biofilm proteins. crude
lysates of biofilm and planktonic c. albicans grown to 6 h were
separated by differential centrifugation and detergent fractionation, resulting in a cws fraction. using two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis, we found that 33 spots were downregulated
while 38 spots were upregulated in biofilms. mass spectrometry
revealed the identities of 24 proteins, with molecular masses
ranging from 19 kda to 86 kda and isoelectric points ranging
from 4 to 7 (fig. 1; see table s1 in the supplemental material).
the differentially expressed proteins included  xxxg110xxx  (adh1p), which was downregulated in biofilms. this
protein is known to catalyze the reversible conversion of acetaldehyde to ethanol (4). our results showed that the level of
adh1p in c. albicans biofilm was ⱖ1.5-fold lower than in
planktonic cells grown to 6 h (see table s1 in the supplemental
material). next, we performed western blotting analyses and
found that adh1p levels were lower in biofilm than in planktonic cells at all time points (fig. 2a). additionally, northern
blot analysis also revealed that as biofilm formation progressed
through developmental phases, the level of  xxxg72xxx  expression
decreased in c. albicans biofilms compared to planktonically
grown cells (fig. 2b). these results confirmed the identity of
adh1p, as well as its reduced expression in c. albicans biofilm.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fibroblasts and then cultured in fetal calf serum-supplemented culture medium
for 4 days. the lamina propria was then seeded with gingival epithelial cells to
obtain the ehom. the tissues were grown under submerged conditions until the
total surface of the lamina propria was covered with epithelial cells. to produce
a stratified epithelium, the ehom was raised to an air-liquid interface for five
more days to allow the organization of the epithelium into its different strata,
including the stratum corneum. to test the abilities of the isogenic candida
strains to form biofilm on ehom tissue, the oral mucosae were infected with
1 ⫻ 106 cells/cm2 of (i) wild-type c. albicans, (ii) the  xxxg72xxx  mutant, or (iii) the
revertant strain. tissues treated with no candida cells served as uninfected
controls for 24 h. the tissues were collected, stained with masson trichrome,
observed with an optical microscope, and photographed.
quantitation of biofilms formed on ehom tissues. to quantitatively assess
the difference between biofilm formations by the different c. albicans strains, we
collected multiple biopsy specimens from each infected ehom and stained them
with hematoxylin and eosin. all slides were assigned a number, and measurements were made independently by two different observers. the blinded observer
measured the thickness of c. albicans biofilms at regular intervals using a calibrated image analysis system (image  xxxd404xxx  software; media cybernetics, md)
as previously described by chakir et al. (6). ten measurements were performed
on the unfolded area of each slide. the thicknesses of biofilms formed on
ehom tissues infected with the  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain were compared with those
of biofilms formed by the wild-type and revertant strains. a p value of ⬍0.05 was
considered statistically significant.
rat model of intravenous-catheter-associated candida biofilm. the ability of
the  xxxg72xxx  mutant to form biofilm in vivo was tested using a rat model of intravenous-catheter-associated candida biofilm formation (1), which allows rapid
screening of candida mutants for the ability to form biofilm. the catheter
diameter was chosen in an attempt to permit blood flow around the extraluminal
catheter surface. to mimic material used in patients, polyethylene tubing (inner
diameter, 0.76 mm; outer diameter, 1.52 mm) was chosen. specific-pathogen-free
sprague-dawley rats weighing 400 g were used. a heparinized (100-u/ml) catheter was surgically inserted into the external jugular vein and advanced to a site
above the right atrium (2-cm length). the catheter was secured to the vein, and
the proximal end was tunneled subcutaneously to the midscapular space and
externalized through the skin. the catheters were placed 24 h prior to infection
to allow a conditioning period for deposition of host protein on the catheter
surface. infection was achieved by intralumenal instillation of 500 ␮l c. albicans
cells (106 cells/ml). after a dwelling period of 4 h, the catheter volume was
withdrawn and the catheter was flushed with heparinized 0.15 m nacl.
the catheters were removed from two animals 24 h after c. albicans infection
to determine biofilm development on the internal surfaces of the intravascular
devices. the distal 2 cm of the catheter was cut from the entire catheter length
for biofilm imaging using both confocal and scanning electron microscopy
(sem). the distal 2 cm of catheter was transected perpendicular to the catheter
length into 2-mm-long circular segments.
sem of catheters inserted in rats. sem analysis of catheters placed intravenously in rats was performed as described previously by andes et al. (1). briefly,
catheter segments were washed with 0.1 m phosphate buffer, ph 7.2, and placed
in fixative (1% glutaraldehyde and 4% formaldehyde). the samples were then
washed with buffer for 5 min, placed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 30 min, and
dehydrated in a series of 10-min ethanol washes (30%, 50%, 70%, 85%, 95%,
and 100%). final desiccation was accomplished by critical-point drying (tousimis, rockville, md.). specimens were mounted on aluminum stubs and sputter
coated with gold. samples were imaged in a scanning electron microscope (jeol
jsm-6100) in the high-vacuum mode  xxxd1891xxx  kv. the images were processed for
display using adobe photoshop 7.0.1.
effects of adh inhibitors on candida biofilm formation in vitro. to determine
whether biochemical inhibition of adh enzyme affects candida biofilm formation, we investigated the effect of treating c. albicans with disulfiram, a specific
inhibitor of this enzyme (40, 41), or  xxxd2148xxx  (21, 63). biofilms were
grown for 48 h in the presence of 200 ␮m disulfiram or 10 mm  xxxd2148xxx .
the metabolic activities and dry biomasses of the biofilms formed were determined by xtt and dry-weight measurements, respectively.
determination of levels of extracellular ethanol and acetaldehyde in c. albicans biofilms. for determining extracellular ethanol and acetaldehyde levels, c.
albicans biofilms were scraped into 4 ml of fresh pbs. the resulting suspension was
centrifuged at 6,000 ⫻ g in a fisher scientific centrifuge, and the supernatant was
retained. the levels of ethanol and acetaldehyde (g/100 ml) present in these supernatants were then determined using commercially available assay kits (boehringer
mannheim/r-biopharm) according to the manufacturers’ instructions.

3807

3808

mukherjee et al.

infect. immun.

molecular and biochemical evidence shows that  xxxg72xxx  restricts the ability of candida to form biofilm. (i) targeted
disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene enhances the ability of c. albicans
to form biofilm in vitro. since adh1p protein levels were lower
in biofilms than planktonic forms of c. albicans, we hypothesized that disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene, which encodes this
protein, would result in increased biofilm formation. to test
this hypothesis and to unequivocally prove the role of adh1p in
c. albicans biofilm formation, we disrupted the c. albicans
 xxxg72xxx  gene using transposon insertion (16). disruption and
reintroduction of the  xxxg72xxx  gene were confirmed by pcr
amplification, which revealed the presence of the expected
1,297-bp product in the wild-type parent strain and the  xxxg72xxx 
revertant strain, but not in the  xxxg72xxx  mutant (fig. 3a). phenotypic characterization of the isogenic  xxxg72xxx  mutant, revertant,
and wild-type parent strains revealed that both growth rate
(fig. 3b) and germ tube formation were similar to those of the
corresponding isogenic parental strains (table 2), demonstrating that disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene affected neither the
growth of c. albicans nor its ability to form hyphae. evaluation
of metabolic activity and dry-weight biomass (xtt optical
density [od]/mg dry weight) showed that the  xxxg72xxx  mutant
formed significantly more biofilm than the isogenic parental c.

albicans strain (fig. 3c) (p ⫽ 0.0046). moreover, confocal
microscopic examination revealed that at both early and mature phases, the  xxxg72xxx  mutant formed thicker biofilm than the
wild-type strain (78 ␮m and 210 ␮m thick for the  xxxg72xxx  mutant
and 48 ␮m and 140 ␮m thick for the parent strain at early [6 h]
and mature [48 h] phases, respectively). the biofilm formed by
the revertant strain was similar to that formed by the isogenic
parental strain (data not shown). these results provided unequivocal genetic evidence that adh1p restricts the ability of c.
albicans to form biofilm.
(ii) downregulation of adh1p enhances the ability of c.
albicans to form biofilm on ehom and mediates invasion and
damage of tissues. to move our studies closer to the in vivo
setting, we determined the effect of adh1p on the ability of c.
albicans to form biofilm in the in vivo-like ehom model,
which mimics the physiologic conditions and complex structure
of the oral mucosa in terms of three-dimensional structure, the
relationship between the different cell types, and secretion of
soluble factors (58). our results revealed that while all the
isogenic strains tested formed biofilms on the ehom layers
and led to disorganization of the tissue layers, the  xxxg72xxx  mutant
caused maximum disruption of ehom layers (fig. 4). importantly, hyphae of the  xxxg72xxx  mutant were observed infiltrating

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fig. 1.  xxxg110xxx  is downregulated in cell walls in the early phase of c. albicans biofilms. two-dimensional dige analysis was
performed with sds-soluble cell wall proteins of c. albicans grown as a (a) biofilm (cy-5 labeled) or (b) planktonic (cy-3 labeled) form, followed
by maldi-time of flight mass spectrometry analysis. (c) merged image (cy5 and cy3 overlap) showing 24 differentially expressed spots, including
adh1p, in c. albicans biofilms. an increase in the cy5/cy3 ratio (dark-blue spots) indicated proteins upregulated in biofilms, while an increase in
the cy3/cy5 ratio (dark-red spots) indicated upregulated proteins in planktonic c. albicans. proteins were identified by mass spectrometry analysis
of the cws fraction of c. albicans biofilm. the spot intensity was quantified with the spot normalized volume depending on the whole volume of
the dige image after scanning the image using a typhoon scanner. sequence information from mass spectrometry analysis was matched with the
online protein database ncbinr using the matrixscience mascot search site (http://www.matrixscience.com). protein scores of greater than 58 were
considered significant (p ⬍ 0.05).

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

into the lamina propria of ehom, indicating invasion of the
tissue layers by the mutant strain (fig. 4d and e), but not by
the isogenic parental and revertant strains. quantitative analysis revealed that biofilms formed by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain on
ehom layers were significantly thicker (p ⬍ 0.05) than those
formed by the parent or revertant strain (fig. 4f). these studies demonstrated that disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene resulted in
increased biofilm-forming ability in c. albicans and enhanced
its ability to invade and damage host mucosal tissues.
(iii) scanning electron microscopy revealed that the c.
albicans  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain forms a confluent biofilm with
dense extracellular matrix on catheters inserted in rats. the
ehom model provides information about biofilm formation
and the penetration and damage induced by c. albicans biofilm. however, the model lacks some in vivo modulatory factors, such as salivary histatins and immunoglobulin a, mucosal
dendritic cells, defensins, and lysozyme, and does not completely mimic an in vivo situation. to determine whether
adh1p affects biofilm formation in an in vivo environment, we
compared the biofilm-forming abilities of the isogenic set of
the  xxxg72xxx  mutant, wild-type, and revertant strains using a recently established rat model of catheter-associated biofilm formation (1). sem examinations revealed that the wild-type and
 xxxg72xxx  revertant c. albicans strains produced mature biofilm by
24 h with adherent yeast and filamentous populations and
matrix (data not shown). although these strains formed biofilms in vivo, several areas of the catheter surface were visible,
indicating nonconfluent and patchy biofilm formation. in contrast, biofilm formed by the  xxxg72xxx  c. albicans mutant was more
extensive and completely covered the catheter surface, with
dense extracellular matrix (data not shown). to confirm that

biofilms formed by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant were thicker than those of
the parent or revertant strain on catheters inserted in rats, we
used cslm to visualize the penetration of cona through the
biofilms formed. we detected cona staining on biofilms
formed by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant on internal surfaces of catheters
obtained from the in vivo rat model (data not shown). moreover, the ecm of these biofilms was very dense, which precluded visualization of individual yeast and hyphal cells and
prevented the stain from reaching the basal surface of the
biofilm adjacent to the catheter surface (data not shown). in
contrast, cona penetrated biofilms formed by c. albicans parent and revertant strains, which exhibited both yeast and filamentous forms, suggesting that the dye penetrated to the basal
biofilm layer on the catheter surface (data not shown) and
indicating that biofilms formed by the parent and revertant
strains were not as thick as those formed by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant.
these results correlate well with our in vitro quantitative and
microscopy analyses, as well as ehom results, which revealed
that the  xxxg72xxx  mutant forms thicker biofilms than the wild-type
and revertant c. albicans strains. taken together, our studies
demonstrated that disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene increased the
ability of c. albicans to form biofilm in an in vivo-like ehom
in vitro, and in vivo models, thereby unequivocally proving that
adh1p restricts the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm.
(iv) biochemical inhibition of adh enhances its ability to
form biofilm. having shown that disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene
enhances the ability of c. albicans to form biofilms, we examined whether inhibiting the enzymatic activity of adh1p with a
known adh inhibitor, disulfiram (a zinc-chelating agent) (40,
41), modulates the biofilm-forming ability of this organism.
although disulfiram is known to inhibit adh, it also inhibits
aldehyde dehydrogenase (29). therefore, we included  xxxd2148xxx , which inhibits adh specifically by binding to the
active-site zinc of the enzyme and to the enzyme-cofactor complex (20, 21, 63), in our studies to test the effect of specific
adh inhibition on biofilm formation. our data showed that
upon incubation, c. albicans formed significantly more biofilm
in the presence of disulfiram than in its absence (xtt od/mg
dry biomass, 183.4 ⫾ 6.09 and 79.895 ⫾ 5.8, respectively; p ⬍
0.05). a similar pattern of biofilm formation was observed for
biofilm formed in the presence of  xxxd2148xxx  (xtt
od/mg dry biomass, 107.692 ⫾ 13.3988) compared to that
formed in its absence (xtt od/mg dry biomass, 79.895 ⫾ 5.8;
p ⫽ 0.034). next, we used cslm to examine whether adh
inhibitors affect the morphology and architecture of c. albicans
biofilm. cslm analysis showed that disulfiram treatment resulted in biofilm that was thicker (⬃600 ␮m) than untreated
control biofilm (120 ␮m) (fig. 5a and b). moreover, biofilms
formed in the presence of disulfiram had a complex architecture with an elaborate network of c. albicans hyphae enmeshed in a carbohydrate-rich ecm. taken together, these
studies provide biochemical confirmation that adh1p restricts
the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm.
 xxxg72xxx  downregulates candida biofilm formation through an
 xxxd102xxx dependent mechanism. (i) deletion of the  xxxg72xxx  gene
and inhibition of the adh enzyme decrease ethanol production and increase the acetaldehyde levels in c. albicans biofilm.
since disulfiram and  xxxd2148xxx  target adh enzyme
activity, we hypothesized that the role of adh1p in c. albicans
biofilm formation is mediated by its enzymatic activity. adh1p

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fig. 2. correlation between protein and mrna level expressions
of adh1p and its corresponding gene in c. albicans biofilms grown to
different developmental phases. temporal expression of  xxxg72xxx  in c.
albicans biofilm during development was determined by (a) western
and (b) northern blot analyses. as can be seen in panel a, adh1p
protein levels were lower in biofilms than in planktonic cells. (b) levels of  xxxg72xxx  mrna decrease in c. albicans biofilms with time, with no
signal detected in mature biofilm.

3809

3810

mukherjee et al.

infect. immun.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ
fig. 3. disruption of the c. albicans  xxxg72xxx  gene increases the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm in vitro. (a) disruption of  xxxg72xxx  gene.
(b) effect of disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene on the growth curve of planktonic c. albicans. (c) biofilm formation by the wild-type,  xxxg72xxx  mutant,
and revertant strains of c. albicans. the  xxxg72xxx / xxxg72xxx  mutant strain was constructed from strain bwp17 through use of a tn7-uau1 transposon
insertion in the middle of the  xxxg72xxx /orf19.3997 open reading frame as described by davis et al. (16). the complemented strain was created by
cloning the  xxxg72xxx  orf, along with 1,000 bp of 5⬘ flanking sequence and 500 bp of 3⬘ flanking sequence, in the his1 vector pddb78. the resulting
plasmid was transformed into the  xxxg72xxx / xxxg72xxx  mutant with selection for his⫹ complementation. disruption and reintroduction of the  xxxg72xxx  gene
were confirmed by pcr amplification, which revealed the presence of the expected 1,297-bp product in the wild-type parent strain and the  xxxg72xxx 
revertant strain, but not in the  xxxg72xxx  mutant. biofilm formation by the isogenic strains was quantified as xtt od/mg (dry weight) (biomass) of
biofilm formed. growth curve studies were performed twice, and a representative set of graphs is shown in panel b. the error bars represent
standard deviations.

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

table 2. effects of disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene on the
germination ability of c. albicans
strain

mean
germinationa (%)

sd

p valueb

wild-type parent
 xxxg72xxx  mutant
revertant

93.25
92.25
91.50

2.21
1.71
0.57

0.572
0.319

a

is known to catalyze the reversible conversion of acetaldehyde
to ethanol (4). to determine whether this reaction is also
catalyzed by adh1p in c. albicans biofilm, we compared the
levels of ethanol and acetaldehyde in biofilms formed by the

 xxxg72xxx  mutant, wild-type, and revertant strains. biofilms formed
by the mutant strain produced significantly smaller amounts of
ethanol, with concomitantly larger amounts of acetaldehyde
(18- to 20-fold higher), than biofilms formed by the parent and
revertant strains (p ⬍ 0.0001 for both comparisons) (fig. 6a).
these results suggested that the effect of adh1p on biofilm
formation is mediated by its enzymatic activity and not by a
general change in cellular metabolism. to further confirm this
observation, we determined the effect of inhibition of adh on
ethanol levels in wild-type and  xxxg72xxx  mutant strains of c. albicans. inhibiting the enzyme activities of biofilms formed by the
parent strain (using the specific inhibitors) resulted in significant reduction in ethanol levels (p ⬍ 0.001, fig. 6b and c).
however, such reduction was not detected in biofilms formed
by the  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain (p ⬎ 0.05) (fig. 6b and c), which
was expected, since the mutant strain lacks a functional adh
enzyme. these studies demonstrated that in c. albicans bio-

fig. 4. effect of disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene on the ability of c. albicans to form biofilms on ehom tissue layers. histological features of
ehom following exposure to isogenic c. albicans strains are shown. ehom tissue was infected with (a) no candida cells (uninfected control),
(b) the parental c. albicans strain, (c) the revertant strain, or (d) the  xxxg72xxx  mutant strain. (e) hyphae of the  xxxg72xxx  mutant infiltrating into the
lamina propria of ehom (arrow). (f) quantitative assessment of the thickness of biofilm formed on ehom tissues. representative photographs
of three different experiments are shown (two ehoms per experiment). magnification, ⫻250 for panel a, ⫻200 for panels b to d, and ⫻500 for
panel e. ⴱ and #, p ⬍ 0.0001 compared to the wild-type or revertant c. albicans strain, respectively. the error bars represent standard deviations.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

percent germination was determined by counting the number of germinating
candida cells for each isogenic strain incubated in 10% fetal bovine serum for
180 min.
b
p values were determined by student’s t test, compared to the  xxxg72xxx  mutant
strain. a p value of ⬍0.05 was considered statistically significant.

3811

3812

mukherjee et al.

infect. immun.

film, adh1p catalyzes the production of ethanol, suggesting
that the mechanism by which adh1p modulates c. albicans
biofilm formation is mediated by its enzymatic activity.
(ii) ethanol inhibits the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm
in vitro and in vivo. since disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene and
inhibition of the adh1p enzyme resulted in significantly increased biofilm formation with a concomitant decrease in ethanol levels, we hypothesized that ethanol inhibits c. albicans
biofilm formation. to test this hypothesis, using the xtt metabolic-activity assay, we evaluated the effects of different concentrations of ethanol (10% to 80%) on the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm in vitro. fluorescence microscopy analysis
of biofilms formed in the presence of ethanol (and subsequently stained with the fluorescent dye calcofluor white)
revealed distinct changes in biofilm morphologies in the presence of ethanol at concentrations of ⬎10% (data not shown).
only remnants of ecm were detected in biofilm incubated
with 20% ethanol, while biofilm structures appeared shriveled
and thin in the presence of 50% ethanol. in the presence of
80% ethanol, the biofilm was completely dehydrated, and no
ecm was detected (data not shown). as shown in fig. 7,
quantitative analyses of metabolic activity and dry biomass
revealed that while 2% ethanol had no effect on biofilm formation, there was a significant decrease in both the xtt activity and dry weight of candida biofilm grown in the presence
of 10% ethanol compared to control biofilms (grown in the
absence of ethanol), and interestingly, even in the presence of
80% ethanol, which may be due to residual cells and ecm
remnants that contain no viable cells. the metabolic activity of
biofilms reached a significantly reduced basal level in the presence of 20% ethanol and remained at this basal level in the
presence of higher concentrations of ethanol (50% and 80%).
while 20% to 80% ethanol also induced a significant decrease
in the dry weights of biofilms, the biomasses of these biofilms
were not significantly different from that of biofilm grown in
the presence of 10% ethanol (fig. 7). these studies indicated
that 10% ethanol can significantly decrease the biofilm-forming ability of c. albicans.

to determine whether our in vitro findings were relevant to
biofilm inhibition in vivo, we used a rabbit model of c. albicans
catheter biofilm (62) to determine whether ethanol inhibits
biofilms formed in vivo by c. albicans. we used staphylococcus
epidermidis and s. aureus as controls. staphyloccus species were
selected as controls for two reasons: (i) unlike its effect on
candida biofilms, ethanol is known to enhance the production
of staphylococcus biofilm (10–12, 32–34), and (ii) in contrast to
candida biofilm,  xxxg72xxx  expression is known to be upregulated
in staphylococcus biofilms (3, 22). the rabbit model was used
in these studies because the model has been used to screen the
antibiofilm activities of antifungal agents (24, 61) and has been
shown to be clinically relevant (5). our data showed that lock
therapy with 50% ethanol inhibited biofilms formed by c.
albicans on in vivo catheters but had no effect on the biofilmforming ability of s. epidermidis or s. aureus (table 3). in
contrast, in vitro studies showed that planktonically grown c.
albicans and staphylococcus were completely inhibited when
grown in the presence of 50% ethanol (data not shown). taken
together, these studies demonstrated that (i) ethanol inhibits
biofilm formation by c. albicans in vitro and in vivo, (ii) planktonic forms of both c. albicans and s. aureus are susceptible to
the inhibitory effect of ethanol, and (iii) the effect of ethanol on
in vivo biofilms is specific to c. albicans, and it does not affect
staphylococcus biofilms.
discussion
in this study, we used a proteomic approach and showed that
24 proteins are differentially expressed in early-phase c. albicans biofilms. our data are similar to those reported for bacterial biofilms, where a number of proteins were shown to be
differentially expressed. oosthuizen et al. (51) showed that four
proteins were uniquely present in biofilm formed by bacillus
cereus, while seven proteins were absent. in a subsequent study
using a different b. cereus strain, the same group (52) reported
that 15 unique proteins were detected in early-phase biofilm,
while seven proteins were overexpressed in the mature biofilm.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fig. 5. effect of adh inhibitor on c. albicans biofilms. cslm analysis of biofilm formed in the (a) absence or (b) presence of disulfiram. side
view reconstructions of cslm images revealed that incubation of biofilm with the inhibitor increased the thickness of mature-phase biofilm from
(a) 120 ␮m to (b) 600 ␮m. metabolically active fungal biofilm is indicated in red (due to  xxxg398xxx  conversion), while polysaccharide-rich cell wall
and matrix are shown in green (due to cona binding). the yellow regions in both panels represent merged red and green channels of the
cslm-derived images. the bars represent 50 ␮m in panels c and d (magnification, ⫻19.5).

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

3813

in a separate study, sauer and camper (60) reported that 15
proteins were upregulated following bacterial adhesion and 30
proteins were downregulated in biofilm formed by the plant
saprophyte pseudomonas putida on a silicone surface.
one of the proteins found to be downregulated in our analysis was adh. we focused on adh because it is differentially
expressed in bacterial biofilms (3, 22), has been shown to have
immunogenic properties (45, 55), and may have a role in fungal-host cell interactions mediated by its ability to bind host
structural proteins (e.g., plasminogen and integrins) (13, 31).
in contrast to our finding with candida biofilm, where we
showed adh is downregulated, becker et al. (3) reported that
 xxxg72xxx  was upregulated in s. aureus biofilms. such differential
roles of the same enzyme in different microbial biofilms may
have implications for the interactions between c. albicans and
bacteria in a mixed-species milieu. for example, it is likely that
bacteria, by overexpressing adh, will enhance their ability to
form biofilm while at the same time inhibiting candida biofilm
formation. in this regard, preliminary studies by our group
showed that addition of exogenous bacterial adh to candida
reduced its ability to form biofilm on a catheter surface (m. a.
ghannoum and p. k. mukherjee, unpublished data).
molecular and biochemical evidence presented in this study
showed that adh1p restricts the ability of candida to form

biofilm, as revealed by enhanced biofilm formation in response
to disruption of the  xxxg72xxx  gene or biochemical inhibition of
the enzyme. in contrast to our finding with candida biofilm,
finelli et al. (22) showed that disruption of a putative p. aeruginosa  xxxg110xxx  had no effect on planktonic
growth but caused defects in biofilm formation in static and
flowing systems. in the same study, competition experiments
showed that the corresponding mutant demonstrated reduced
fitness compared with the parent strain. the differences in the
contributions of adh to biofilm formation by p. aeruginosa
and c. albicans make it tempting to speculate that the enzyme
may be involved in the bacterial-fungal interactions that exist
in the environment. in this regard, hogan and kolter (28)
suggested a link between biofilm formation and the activities of
some eukaryotic specific virulence factors toward fungal cells
and that antagonism between bacteria and fungi may contribute to the evolution and maintenance of many pathogenesisrelated genes.
our studies extended investigation of the role of adh1p in
candida biofilm formation from the in vitro to the in vivo
setting, where we used an in vivo-like ehom model, as well as
a catheter-associated biofilm rat model, and confirmed that
adh1p restricts the ability of candida to form biofilms. this
investigation is the first to demonstrate a correlation between

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fig. 6. adh1p catalyzes ethanol production in c. albicans biofilm. ethanol levels in biofilms incubated with inhibitors were calculated as
percentages of ethanol levels in biofilm formed in the absence of ethanol, which were considered as 100%. supernatants (4 ml each) were collected
from biofilms grown to mature phase and then used as samples to determine the ethanol and acetaldehyde levels using specific assay kits according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. the levels of ethanol and acetaldehyde were expressed as g/100 ml of sample. experiments were repeated in
triplicate (n ⫽ 3). the error bars represent standard deviations.

3814

mukherjee et al.

infect. immun.

the activity of a protein and biofilm formed in vitro and in vivo
and brings us closer to the clinical setting. the observation that
an  xxxg72xxx  mutant of c. albicans formed increased biofilm and
could invade the lamina propria of ehom suggests that biofilm plays a role in the ability of candida to invade host tissues.
it is likely that having the ability to form biofilm in the gastrointestinal tract allows candida to transmigrate across the gastrointestinal submucosa and cause systemic infection. in the
nonbiofilm (planktonic) form of c. albicans, adh1p has been
suggested to have multiple roles, including interactions with
the host immune system (55) and binding host proteins (31).
crowe et al. (13) used a proteomics-based approach to identify
adh1p as one of eight c. albicans cell wall proteins that were
able to bind plasminogen and that activated plasmin release.
since plasmin is known to have proteolytic activity, these authors suggested that adh1p may also contribute to fungal invasion of host tissues. since our studies showed that the  xxxg72xxx 
mutant had greater ability to penetrate ehom layers, one
mechanism of action of adh1p in biofilm formation may be

table 3. effects of ethanol on biofilm formation in vivo in the
rabbit catheter model of candida biofilmsa
organism

c. albicans
s. epidermidis
s. aureus

quantitative catheter culture
(log10cfu/catheter segment) (mean ⫾ sd)
untreated

50% ethanol

2.191 ⫾ 1.008
3.005 ⫾ 1.553
3.429 ⫾ 2.468

0.000 ⫾ 0.000
2.761 ⫾ 2.380
3.101 ⫾ 1.898

a
lock therapy with 50% ethanol resulted in complete clearance of the c.
albicans biofilm formed on catheters inserted in rabbits but not of the biofilm
formed by staphylococcus spp.

modulating host tissue invasion by candida biofilm. this aspect of the mechanism of action of adh1p in candida biofilm
formation remains to be investigated.
the mechanism by which adh1p regulates biofilm formation
is unknown. our studies showed that adh1p catalyzes the
production of ethanol in candida biofilm and that deletion of
the c. albicans  xxxg72xxx  gene resulted in a decrease in ethanol
and an increase in acetaldehyde levels. similarly, inhibition of
adh1p with specific inhibitors also increased the ability of c.
albicans to form biofilms. these results suggested that the
effect of adh1p on biofilm formation is mediated by the activity of the adh enzyme itself and is not due to changes in
metabolism, but is specific. ethanol is a general disinfectant
(30) and has been shown to have additional roles, e.g., mediation of microbial synergy and signaling (9, 18, 64). our studies
showed that ethanol inhibited candida biofilm formation both
in vitro and in vivo, indicating that adh downregulates candida biofilm formation through an  xxxd102xxx dependent mechanism. one possible explanation for the role of adh in c.
albicans biofilm formation could be based on the concept that
ethanol is an inhibitory end product of metabolism in this
pathogenic yeast. under conditions of waste product inhibition, adh may be downregulated as a way of avoiding ethanol
toxicity.
our observation that ethanol lock therapy did not affect
bacterial biofilms while inhibiting candida biofilm, but had an
inhibitory effect on the growth of planktonic cells (candida as
well as bacteria), suggests that the inhibitory effect of ethanol
on biofilm formation is specific to c. albicans and is not related
to its antiseptic activity per se. our finding that ethanol has no
effect on staphylococcus biofilms in vivo is consistent with previous findings showing that ethanol enhances biofilm forma-

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

fig. 7. effects of ethanol on the ability of c. albicans to form biofilm in vitro and in vivo. in vitro biofilm formation in the presence of ethanol
was quantitated as metabolic activity (xtt activity) and dry biomass (g) (mean plus standard deviation). medium containing ethanol at the
indicated concentration was added to adhered c. albicans cells, and a biofilm was allowed to form. significant reduction in candida biofilm
formation was observed in vitro in the presence of 10% ethanol, while biofilm formation was completely inhibited at ethanol concentrations of
ⱖ15%. ⴱ, p ⬍ 0.001; #, p ⬍ 0.05 compared to biofilm formed in the absence of ethanol (0% ethanol control).

vol. 74, 2006

deletion of adh results in increased biofilm formation

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

acknowledgments
we acknowledge the technical assistance provided by guangyin
zhou, jian li for assistance in biofilm formation, and jeniel nett for
technical help in collection of in vivo biofilm images.
this work was supported by funds from the nih (1r01 de1393201a1), a bristol myers squibb freedom to discover award to m.a.g.,
and american heart association (sdg 0335313n) and nih/sdrc
pilot and feasibility award (p30-ar-39750) funds to p.k.m. the
assistance of the confocal scanning laser microscopy core facility
(nci grant p30ca43703-12) at case western reserve university is
gratefully acknowledged.
references
1. andes, d., j. nett, p. oschel, r. albrecht, k. marchillo, and a. pitula. 2004.
development and characterization of an in vivo central venous catheter
candida albicans biofilm model. infect. immun. 72:6023–6031.
2. arevalo-ferro, c., m. hentzer, g. reil, a. gorg, s. kjelleberg, m. givskov,
k. riedel, and l. eberl. 2003. identification of quorum-sensing regulated
proteins in the opportunistic pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa by proteomics. environ. microbiol. 5:1350–1369.
3. becker, p., w. hufnagle, g. peters, and m. herrmann. 2001. detection of
differential gene expression in biofilm-forming versus planktonic populations
of staphylococcus aureus using micro-representational-difference analysis.
appl. environ. microbiol. 67:2958–2965.
4. bertram, g., r. k. swoboda, g. w. gooday, n. a. gow, and a. j. brown.
1996. structure and regulation of the candida albicans  xxxg72xxx  gene encoding
an immunogenic  xxxg110xxx . yeast 12:115–127.
5. castagnola, e., m. g. marazzi, a. tacchella, and r. giacchino. 2005.
broviac catheter-related candidemia. pediatr. infect. dis. j. 24:747.
6. chakir, j., m. laviolette, m. boutet, r. laliberte, j. dube, and l. p. boulet.
1996. lower airways remodeling in nonasthmatic subjects with allergic
rhinitis. lab. investig. 75:735–744.
7. chandra, j., d. m. kuhn, p. k. mukherjee, l. l. hoyer, t. mccormick, and
m. a. ghannoum. 2001. biofilm formation by the fungal pathogen candida
albicans—development, architecture and drug resistance. j. bacteriol. 183:
5385–5394.
8. chandra, j., p. k. mukherjee, s. d. leidich, f. f. faddoul, l. l. hoyer, l. j.
douglas, and m. a. ghannoum. 2001. antifungal resistance of candidal
biofilms formed on denture acrylic in vitro. j. dent. res. 80:903–908.
9. chen, j., d. l. clemens, a. i. cederbaum, and b. gao. 2001. ethanol inhibits
the jak-stat signaling pathway in freshly isolated rat hepatocytes but not
in cultured hepatocytes or hepg2 cells: evidence for a lack of involvement
of ethanol metabolism. clin. biochem. 34:203–209.
10. conlon, k. m., h. humphreys, and j. p. o’gara. 2002. icar encodes a

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

transcriptional repressor involved in environmental regulation of ica operon
expression and biofilm formation in staphylococcus epidermidis. j. bacteriol.
184:4400–4408.
conlon, k. m., h. humphreys, and j. p. o’gara. 2004. inactivations of rsbu
and sara by is256 represent novel mechanisms of biofilm phenotypic variation in staphylococcus epidermidis. j. bacteriol. 186:6208–6219.
conlon, k. m., h. humphreys, and j. p. o’gara. 2002. regulation of icar
gene expression in staphylococcus epidermidis. fems microbiol. lett. 216:
171–177.
crowe, j. d., i. k. sievwright, g. c. auld, n. r. moore, n. a. gow, and n. a.
booth. 2003. candida albicans binds human plasminogen: identification of
eight plasminogen-binding proteins. mol. microbiol. 47:1637–1651.
cutler, j. e. 1991. putative virulence factors of candida albicans. annu. rev.
microbiol. 45:187–218.
dannenberg, c., u. bierbach, a. rothe, j. beer, and d. korholz. 2003.
 xxxd102xxx lock technique in the treatment of bloodstream infections in pediatric oncology patients with broviac catheter. j. pediatr. hematol. oncol.
25:616–621.
davis, d. a., v. m. bruno, l. loza, s. g. filler, and a. p. mitchell. 2002.
candida albicans mds3p, a conserved regulator of ph responses and virulence identified through insertional mutagenesis. genetics 162:1573–1581.
de groot, p. w. j., a. d. de boer, j. cunningham, h. l. dekker, l. de jong,
k. j. hellingwerf, c. de koster, and f. m. klis. 2004. proteomic analysis of
candida albicans cell walls reveals covalently bound carbohydrate-active
enzymes and adhesins. eukaryot. cell 3:955–965.
domenicotti, c., d. paola, a. vitali, m. nitti, d. cottalasso, g. poli, m. a.
pronzato, and u. m. marinari. 1999. primary role of  xxxg110xxx 
pathway in acute  xxxd102xxx induced impairment of protein kinase c-dependent signaling system. adv. exp. med. biol. 463:321–330.
douglas, l. j. 2003. candida biofilms and their role in infection. trends
microbiol. 11:30–36.
eklund, h., b. v. plapp, j. p. samama, and c. i. branden. 1982. binding of
substrate in a ternary complex of horse liver  xxxg110xxx . j. biol.
chem. 257:14349–14358.
eklund, h., j. p. samama, and l. wallen. 1982.  xxxd3045xxx  binding in crystalline binary and ternary complexes with liver  xxxg110xxx . biochemistry 21:4858–4866.
finelli, a., c. v. gallant, k. jarvi, and l. l. burrows. 2003. use of in-biofilm
expression technology to identify genes involved in pseudomonas aeruginosa
biofilm development. j. bacteriol. 185:2700–2710.
friedman, d. b., s. hill, j. w. keller, n. b. merchant, s. e. levy, r. j.
coffey, and r. m. caprioli. 2004. proteome analysis of human colon cancer
by two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry.
proteomics 4:793–811.
ghannoum, m., l. a. long, h. g. kim, r. munyon, v. rotondo, j. chandra,
and p. k. mukherjee. 2005.  xxxd164xxx  lipid complex ( xxxd164xxx ) antifungal lock therapy (aflt) is effective in the treatment of candida albicans
catheter-associated biofilm infections. presented at the 45th interscience
conference on antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy.
ghannoum, m. a., s. g. filler, a. s. ibrahim, y. fu, and j. e. edwards, jr.
1992. modulation of interactions of candida albicans and endothelial cells by
fluconazole and  xxxd164xxx . antimicrob. agents chemother. 36:2239–
2244.
gotz, f. 2002. staphylococcus and biofilms. mol. microbiol. 43:1367–1378.
hirsch, j. p., c. dietzel, and j. kurjan. 1991. the carboxyl terminus of scg1,
the g  xxxg216xxx  involved in yeast mating, is implicated in interactions
with the pheromone receptors. genes dev. 5:467–474.
hogan, d. a., and r. kolter. 2002. pseudomonas- candida interactions: an
ecological role for virulence factors. science 296:2229–2232.
jornvall, h., j. hempel, and b. vallee. 1987. structures of human alcohol
and aldehyde dehydrogenases. enzyme 37:5–18.
kampf, g., and a. kramer. 2004. epidemiologic background of hand hygiene and evaluation of the most important agents for scrubs and rubs. clin.
microbiol. rev. 17:863–893.
klotz, s. a., m. l. pendrak, and r. c. hein. 2001. antibodies to ␣5␤1 and
␣vb3 integrins react with candida albicans  xxxg110xxx . microbiology 147:3159–3164.
knobloch, j. k., k. bartscht, a. sabottke, h. rohde, h. h. feucht, and d.
mack. 2001. biofilm formation by staphylococcus epidermidis depends on
functional rsbu, an activator of the sigb operon: differential activation
mechanisms due to ethanol and salt stress. j. bacteriol. 183:2624–2633.
knobloch, j. k., m. a. horstkotte, h. rohde, p. m. kaulfers, and d. mack.
2002. alcoholic ingredients in skin disinfectants increase biofilm expression
of staphylococcus epidermidis. j. antimicrob. chemother. 49:683–687.
knobloch, j. k., s. jager, m. a. horstkotte, h. rohde, and d. mack. 2004.
rsbu-dependent regulation of staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm formation
is mediated via the alternative sigma factor ␴b by repression of the negative
regulator gene icar. infect. immun. 72:3838–3848.
kojic, e. m., and r. o. darouiche. 2004. candida infections of medical
devices. clin. microbiol. rev. 17:255–267.
kuhn, d. m., j. chandra, p. k. mukherjee, and m. a. ghannoum. 2002.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

tion by these bacterial species (10–12, 26, 32–34, 44). our
results are likely to have important clinical implications, especially since some previous studies have suggested the use of
ethanol lock therapy to treat central venous line infections in
the adult and pediatric populations (15, 54, 59). although the
focus of our study was not to test the efficacy of ethanol as a
therapeutic alternative in the treatment of catheter-associated
infections, the fact that ethanol does not affect bacterial biofilm
formed on catheters in vivo suggests caution in the random use
of ethanol lock therapy. such use of ethanol can result in
enhanced bacterial biofilm formation on intravenous catheters,
similar to that resulting from the use of  xxxd102xxx based skin
disinfectants, which can induce increased biofilm formation by
s. epidermidis (33).
in conclusion, our studies revealed that adh1p contributes
to the ability of c. albicans to form biofilms in vitro and in vivo
and that the protein restricts the ability of candida to form
biofilms through an  xxxd102xxx dependent mechanism. our findings provide insight not only into candida biofilms, but also
into the interactions between fungi and bacteria in mixedspecies environments. these results are clinically relevant and
have important implications for understanding the formation
of candida biofilms on medical devices and the mechanism of
c. albicans-mediated host tissue damage and may point to
novel treatment strategies for these infections.

3815

3816

37.

38.
39.
40.
41.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

comparison of biofilms formed by candida albicans and candida parapsilosis
on bioprosthetic surfaces. infect. immun. 70:878–888.
kuhn, d. m., t. george, j. chandra, p. k. mukherjee, and m. a. ghannoum.
2002. antifungal susceptibility of candida biofilms: unique efficacy of  xxxd164xxx  lipid formulations and echinocandins. antimicrob. agents chemother.
46:1773–1780.
kuhn, d. m., and m. a. ghannoum. 2004. candida biofilms: antifungal
resistance and emerging therapeutic options. curr. opin. investig. drugs
5:186–197.
kumamoto, c. a. 2002. candida biofilms. curr. opin. microbiol. 5:608–611.
langeland, b. t., and j. s. kinley-mckee. 1996. the effects of disulfiram on
equine hepatic  xxxg110xxx  and its efficiency against alcoholism:
vinegar effect. alcohol 31:75–80.
langeland, b. t., and j. s. mckinley-mckee. 1997. the effects of disulfiram
and related compounds on equine hepatic  xxxg110xxx . comp.
biochem. physiol. c 117:55–61.
leidich, s. d., a. s. ibrahim, y. fu, a. koul, c. jessup, j. vitullo, w. fonzi,
f. mirbod, s. nakashima, y. nozawa, and m. a. ghannoum. 1998. cloning
and disruption of caplb1, a phospholipase b gene involved in the pathogenicity of candida albicans. j. biol. chem. 273:26078–26086.
lilley, k. s., and d. b. friedman. 2004. all about dige: quantification
technology for differential-display 2d-gel proteomics. exp. rev. proteomics
1:401–409.
lim, y., m. jana, t. t. luong, and c. y. lee. 2004. control of glucose- and
nacl-induced biofilm formation by rbf in staphylococcus aureus. j. bacteriol.
186:722–729.
martinez, j. p., m. l. gil, j. l. lopez-ribot, and w. l. chaffin. 1998.
serologic response to cell wall mannoproteins and proteins of candida
albicans. clin. microbiol. rev. 11:121–141.
mukherjee, p. k., j. chandra, d. m. kuhn, and m. a. ghannoum. 2003.
mechanism of azole resistance in candida albicans biofilms: phase-specific
role of efflux pumps and membrane sterols. infect. immun. 71:4333–4340.
mukherjee, p. k., s. mohamed, j. chandra, m. k. schinabeck, and m. a.
ghannoum. 2003. proteomic identification of phase-specific cell wall proteins expressed during candida albicans biofilm formation, abstr. m-381.
abstr. 43rd intersci. conf. antimicrob. agents chemother. american society for microbiology, washington, d.c.
mukherjee, p. k., and r. prasad. 1998. purified arginine permease of candida albicans is functionally active in a reconstituted system. yeast 14:335–
345.
nucci, m., and e. anaissie. 2002. should vascular catheters be removed from
all patients with candidemia? an evidence-based review. clin. infect. dis.
34:591–599.
ojha, a., m. anand, a. bhatt, l. kremer, w. r. jacobs, jr., and g. f.
hatfull. 2005. groel1: a dedicated chaperone involved in mycolic acid
biosynthesis during biofilm formation in mycobacteria. cell 123:861–873.
oosthuizen, m. c., b. steyn, d. lindsay, v. s. brozel, and a. von holy. 2001.
novel method for the proteomic investigation of a dairy-associated bacillus
cereus biofilm. fems microbiol. lett. 194:47–51.
oosthuizen, m. c., b. steyn, j. theron, p. cosette, d. lindsay, a. von holy,

editor: a. casadevall

infect. immun.

53.
54.
55.

56.
57.

58.
59.
60.
61.

62.

63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

and v. s. brozel. 2002. proteomic analysis reveals differential protein expression by bacillus cereus during biofilm formation. appl. environ. microbiol. 68:2770–2780.
pappas, p. g., j. h. rex, j. d. sobel, s. g. filler, w. e. dismukes, t. j.
walsh, and j. e. edwards. 2004. guidelines for treatment of candidiasis.
clin. infect. dis. 38:161–189.
pennington, c. r., and a. d. pithie. 1987. ethanol lock in the management
of catheter occlusion. jpen j. parenter. enteral. nutr. 11:507–508.
pitarch, a., j. abian, m. carrascal, m. sanchez, c. nombela, and c. gil.
2004. proteomics-based identification of novel candida albicans antigens for
diagnosis of systemic candidiasis in patients with underlying hematological
malignancies. proteomics 4:3084–3106.
pitarch, a., m. sanchez, c. nombela, and c. gil. 2003. analysis of the
candida albicans proteome. i. strategies and applications. j. chromatogr. b
787:101–128.
pitarch, a., m. sanchez, c. nombela, and c. gil. 2002. sequential fractionation and two-dimensional gel analysis unravels the complexity of the dimorphic fungus candida albicans cell wall proteome. mol. cell. proteom. 1:967–
982.
rouabhia, m., and n. deslauriers. 2002. production and characterization of
an in vitro engineered human oral mucosa. biochem. cell biol. 80:189–195.
salzman, m. b., h. d. isenberg, and l. g. rubin. 1993. use of disinfectants
to reduce microbial contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. j. clin.
microbiol. 31:475–479.
sauer, k., and a. k. camper. 2001. characterization of phenotypic changes
in pseudomonas putida in response to surface-associated growth. j. bacteriol.
183:6579–6589.
schinabeck, m. k., m. d’angelo, j. chandra, p. k. mukherjee, and m. a.
ghannoum. 2004. anidulafungin inhibits candida albicans biofilms in vitro.
presented at the 44th interscience conference on antimicrobial agents and
chemotherapy.
schinabeck, m. k., l. a. long, m. a. hossain, j. chandra, p. k. mukherjee,
s. mohamed, and m. a. ghannoum. 2004. rabbit model of candida albicans
biofilm infection:  xxxd164xxx  antifungal lock therapy. antimicrob. agents chemother. 48:1727–1732.
sigman, d. s. 1967. interactions of substrates, inhibitors, and coenzymes at
the active site of horse liver  xxxg110xxx . j. biol. chem. 242:3815–
3824.
smith, m. g., s. g. des etages, and m. snyder. 2004. microbial synergy via
an  xxxd102xxx triggered pathway. mol. cell. biol. 24:3874–3884.
spreghini, e., d. a. davis, r. subaran, m. kim, and a. p. mitchell. 2003.
roles of candida albicans dfg5p and dcw1p cell surface proteins in growth
and hypha formation. eukaryot. cell. 2:746–755.
vilain, s., p. cosette, m. hubert, c. lange, g. a. junter, and t. jouenne.
2004. comparative proteomic analysis of planktonic and immobilized
pseudomonas aeruginosa cells: a multivariate statistical approach. anal. biochem. 329:120–130.
wilson, r. b., d. davis, and a. p. mitchell. 1999. rapid hypothesis testing
with candida albicans through gene disruption with short homology regions.
j. bacteriol. 181:1868–1874.

downloaded from http://iai.asm.org/ on april 15, 2015 by georgian court univ

42.

mukherjee et al.

