journal of intensive
care medicine
http://jic.sagepub.com/

antidote use in the critically ill poisoned patient
david p. betten, rais b. vohra, matthew d. cook, michael j. matteucci and richard f. clark
j intensive care med 2006 21: 255
doi: 10.1177/0885066606290386
the online version of this article can be found at:
http://jic.sagepub.com/content/21/5/255

published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

additional services and information for journal of intensive care medicine can be found at:
email alerts: http://jic.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
subscriptions: http://jic.sagepub.com/subscriptions
reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsreprints.nav
permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalspermissions.nav
citations: http://jic.sagepub.com/content/21/5/255.refs.html

>> version of record - aug 31, 2006
what is this?

downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

analytic reviews

antidote use in the critically ill
poisoned patient
david p. betten, md*
rais b. vohra, md†
matthew d. cook, do†
michael j. matteucci, md† ‡
richard f. clark, md†
the proper use of antidotes in the intensive care setting
when combined with appropriate general supportive care
may reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with
severe poisonings. the more commonly used antidotes
that may be encountered in the intensive care unit
( xxxd68xxx , ethanol,  xxxd2148xxx , physostigmine,
naloxone, flumazenil, sodium bicarbonate, octreotide,
pyridoxine, cyanide antidote kit, pralidoxime, atropine,
digoxin immune fab, glucagon,  xxxd409xxx  and
chloride,  xxxd1824xxx ,  xxxd2941xxx , botulism antitoxin,  xxxd2610xxx , and crotaline snake antivenom)
are reviewed. proper indications for their use and knowledge of the possible adverse effects accompanying antidotal therapy will allow the physician to appropriately
manage the severely poisoned patient.
key words: antidote, poisoning, overdose

the use of antidotes for poisonings has been
explored for thousands of years. the vast majority
from *department of emergency medicine, sparrow health
system, michigan state university college of human medicine,
lansing, michigan, †university of california, san diego, california
poison control system, san diego, california, and ‡department of
emergency medicine, naval medical center, san diego, california.
received sep 30, 2005, and in revised form feb 24, 2006.
accepted for publication mar 1, 2006.
address correspondence to david p. betten, md, department
of emergency medicine, sparrow health system, michigan state
university college of human medicine, 1215 e. michigan ave,
lansing, mi 48912-1811, or e-mail: peckb73@hotmail.com.
betten dp, vohra rb, cook md, matteucci mj, clark rf. antidote
use in the critically ill poisoned patient. j intensive care med.
2006;21:255-277.
this review was co-written by lcdr michael j. matteucci, mc,
usn, while a fellow at ucsd medical center training in medical
toxicology. the views expressed in the article are those of the
authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
department of the navy, department of defense, nor the us
government.
doi: 10.1177/0885066606290386

of these treatments have long since fallen out of
favor because they were found to offer little or no
benefit and in many cases produce significant detrimental effects. strychnine, cocaine, and other stimulants, for example, were commonly used in the
1920s and 1930s for barbiturate overdoses. their
inherent toxicity and the low mortality rate associated with barbiturate poisonings treated with supportive care alone led to their eventual dismissal [1].
antidotes commonly used today, when administered in conjunction with aggressive supportive
care, are often able to decrease the severity and
duration of symptoms while possessing safety profiles more benign than their predecessors. in certain
circumstances, when used promptly and appropriately, their use may be life saving.
the infrequent presentation of individuals
requiring particular antidotes and the relatively high
cost of antidotes has resulted in many hospitals carrying inadequate quantities of some of the more
commonly used antidotes [2,3]. antidote stocking
guidelines were recently established by a multidisciplinary panel of 12 health care professionals.
sixteen antidotes were unanimously identified by
the consensus panel for stocking (table 1) [4].
hospitals not possessing these antidotes should at
the minimum have pre-identified neighboring
health care centers that will readily be able to transport these antidotes on an emergency basis.
the following is a brief review of some of the
more commonly used antidotes that may be used in
the intensive care setting. given the complexity of
management of severely poisoned patients and
subtleties in the use of many antidotes, further consultation with a medical toxicologist or poison center (national poison center hot line: 1-800-222-1222)
should be considered. the management of acute
and chronic heavy metal poisonings (arsenic, lead,
mercury, etc) is not addressed, and the reader is
referred to several excellent reviews pertaining to
255

copyright © 2006 sage publications
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

betten et al

table 1. consensus stocking guidelines of 20 commonly encountered antidotes for hospitals that accept
emergency admissions as determined by an expert multidisciplinary panel [4]
recommended for stocking
 xxxd68xxx 
crotalid snake antivenin
 xxxd409xxx /chloride
sodium bicarbonate
cyanide antidote kit
 xxxd1824xxx 
digoxin immune fab
dimercaprol
atropine
ethanol
 xxxd2148xxx 
glucagon
 xxxd2610xxx 
naloxone
pralidoxime
pyridoxine

consensus not reached
for routine stocking
flumazenil
physostigmine

appropriate indications for treatment and methods
of administration of common chelation agents [5-9].

acetaminophen poisoning
acetaminophen misuse is responsible for more hospitalizations following overdose than any other
common pharmaceutical agent. although acetaminophen possesses an outstanding safety profile at
therapeutic doses, a rapid course of progressive
hepatic failure leading to death may occur following
large overdoses when treatment is delayed. it has
been estimated that 450 deaths annually and nearly
40% of all cases of acute liver failure in the united
states are secondary to the inappropriate use of
acetaminophen [10,11]. toxicity occurs as a result of
acetaminophen’s metabolism via cytochrome p450
to n-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (napqi). at therapeutic doses of acetaminophen, napqi is detoxified
by glutathione to nontoxic conjugates; however,
with excess dosing and exhaustion of glutathione
reserves, napqi accumulates, initiating a cascade of
events capable of producing hepatocyte damage and
fulminant hepatic failure.

 xxxd68xxx 
 xxxd68xxx  (nac) prevents napqi-induced
hepatoxicity through several mechanisms: (1) nac
functions as a glutathione (gsh) precursor that may
increase gsh availability as well as provide inorganic
256

not recommended
for routine stocking
black widow antivenin
ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid

sulfate that promotes acetaminophen metabolism
through the nontoxic sulfation pathway. (2) nac
directly converts napqi to nontoxic cysteine and
mercaptate conjugates. (3) nac reduces napqi back
to acetaminophen, where it may be further eliminated by other nontoxic routes. in the setting of progressive hepatic failure, nac may offer further
benefit as a result of its nonspecific antioxidant
effects and free radical scavenging properties in addition to nac-mediated improvement in microvascular
perfusion [12,13].
when administered early (<8 hours) after acute
ingestion, nac is almost completely effective in
preventing significant hepatotoxicity. the benefit of
this antidote is lessened beyond 8 hours following
overdose as glutathione stores become further
depleted [14]. treatment should be initiated immediately for any suspected toxic acetaminophen ingestion beyond 8 hours. current us food and drug
administration (fda)–approved treatment options
include either oral or intravenous nac. oral nac is
administered as a 140 mg/kg loading dose followed
by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours for an additional 17
doses for any patient with a toxic ingestion as plotted on the rumack-matthew nomogram. should
signs of progressive hepatic damage be present
after this 72-hour period, treatment with nac may
still be of some benefit and should be continued
until a definitive clinical and laboratory improvement is noted. success has been demonstrated with
a shortened treatment duration of oral nac in
several studies when administered to appropriate
candidates [15-17]. early nac discontinuation

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

should be considered only after a minimum of at
least 20 hours of oral nac administration when no
further acetaminophen is detectable in the serum
and hepatic transaminases and prothrombin times
are normal.
intravenous nac has been used throughout
europe, canada, australia, and portions of the united
states for more than 2 decades with success demonstrated in treatment durations of 20 to 48 hours [1820]. intravenous nac recently gained fda approval
in the united states for patients treated within 8 to 10
hours following an acute toxic acetaminophen ingestion. it is administered as a 140-mg/kg loading dose
over 15 minutes followed by a 50-mg/kg infusion
over 4 hours, concluding with a 16-hour infusion of
100 mg/kg. when intravenous nac is initiated
beyond 8 to 10 hours postingestion, it should be continued beyond the 20-hour infusion if needed until
acetaminophen is no longer measurable and transaminases are normal or returning to normal.
the indication and duration of nac therapy in
chronic acetaminophen poisoning are less clearly
defined. healthy adults can likely tolerate at least 7
g of acetaminophen over 24 hours without risk of
hepatotoxicity. individuals with underlying liver disease, hiv, or malnutrition may be at increased risk
with smaller ingestions. treatment should be considered with greater than 4 g per day in this population
if there is any laboratory evidence of hepatotoxicity
or if serum acetaminophen concentrations are elevated (>10 mg/l). treatment of individuals meeting
these criteria is reasonable given the uncertainty of
the ingestion, the difficulty in predicting who will
develop subsequent hepatic damage, and the lack of
clinical studies that address chronic overdose management [21]. treatment with nac, either orally or
intravenously, should continue until acetaminophen
is not detected and transaminases and prothrombin
time are normal or normalizing.
death following single acute acetaminophen
ingestions in children less than age 5 has not been
reported despite extremely elevated acetaminophen
levels and delays in treatment onset. a predominance of the sulfation pathway (which produces
nontoxic metabolites), increased glutathione
reserves, and improved regenerative capabilities of
young livers are theorized to account for this protective effect [22]. misdosed infants and children
with acute febrile illnesses who experience chronic
acetaminophen poisoning are not afforded a similar
protection and appear to be an at-risk group [23].
those receiving greater than 75 mg/kg/day should
have laboratory evaluation performed and treatment
with nac initiated if transaminase abnormalities are
present or acetaminophen levels are elevated.

 xxxd68xxx  given orally is often poorly tolerated due to its “rotten egg” sulfur smell. high-dose
antiemetics may be needed to prevent emesis. any
nac dose vomited within 1 hour from ingestion
should be readministered. if vomiting is present and
persistent beyond 8 hours following acetaminophen
ingestion, intravenous nac should be strongly considered. intravenous nac has been used effectively
and relatively safely throughout the world for more
than 20 years [19]. anaphylactoid reactions with
intravenous nac may occur as a dose- and raterelated effect; however, these reactions are generally
minor (pruritis, vomiting) and usually respond to
antihistamines and a slowing of the nac infusion
rate [20,24]. major adverse effects and death following intravenous nac administration are exceedingly
rare and are most commonly related to rapid intravenous loading in patients with underlying airway
disease or in the case of nac dosing errors [25,26].

toxic alcohol poisoning
ingestions of methanol and ethylene glycol are inebriating to the central nervous system but are otherwise nontoxic prior to their enzymatic conversion
by  xxxg110xxx  (adh) and aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ald) to their acidic metabolites.
adh and ald convert methanol to formate, a retinal toxin causing visual defects and papilledema
[27-29]. ethylene glycol is metabolized by adh and
ald to  xxxd2219xxx  and later to  xxxd2802xxx , which
precipitates with calcium in renal tubules and other
tissues [30]. each of these metabolites is acidic, and
their accumulation results in a “wide anion gap”
acidosis. this acidosis may be delayed for several
hours after initial ingestion because of delayed
metabolism, especially in the presence of ethanol.
poisoning with other alcohols such as propylene
glycol and isopropanol is intoxicating but does not
require antidotal therapy, because their metabolites
generally do not lead to irreversible organ toxicity.

 xxxd2148xxx /ethanol
the goal of antidotal therapy in toxic alcohol poisoning is to prevent metabolism of the parent compounds to their toxic metabolites. competitive
inhibition of adh can be achieved by administration of either ethanol or 4-methylpyrrazole ( xxxd2148xxx ) (fig 1). when given early following methanol
or ethylene glycol ingestion, these antidotes are
completely protective against metabolic conversion;
however, once metabolism has occurred, supportive

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

257

betten et al

 xxxd2148xxx /
ethanol
ethylene glycol

methanol

 xxxg110xxx 

 xxxg110xxx 

glycoaldehyde

formaldehyde

aldehyde dehydrogenase

aldehyde dehydrogenase

 xxxd2219xxx 

 xxxd2154xxx 
 xxxd2146xxx 

glycoxylic acid
h2o + co2

mg2+, pyryidoxine

thiamine
alpha-hydroxy- beta
-ketoadipic aicd

 xxxd2802xxx 

hipurric acid

fig 1. competitive enzymatic inhibition of  xxxg110xxx  by  xxxd2148xxx  and ethanol prevents metabolism of
methanol and ethylene glycol to toxic metabolites (bold type). enzymatic cofactor supplementation (boxes) may offer
greater rate of metabolism to nontoxic metabolites.

care, treatment of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate,
and enhancement of elimination of the toxic
metabolites with hemodialysis are required to attenuate injury [29,31,32].
because serum levels of methanol and ethylene
glycol are often unavailable immediately, antidotal
therapy for toxic alcohol poisoning is often indicated in the presence of surrogate markers of toxicity. the presence of an unexplained serum osmolar
gap or a high anion gap metabolic acidosis should
prompt the consideration of toxic alcohol poisoning. significant toxic alcohol poisoning may occur
even with a “normal” osmolar gap given the
interindividual variability of baseline osmolar gaps.
this is particularly true with ethylene glycol poisoning. the presence of urinary crystals and urine fluorescence (occasionally seen because of fluorescene
present in many antifreeze products) following ethylene glycol ingestion can aid in the diagnosis when
present but is unreliable and may be absent even
with high-level exposures.
treatment with ethanol or  xxxd2148xxx  should be
administered to all patients with a history concerning for methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion and
those with documented levels of 20 mg/dl or
greater of either agent. treatment should also be
considered in the setting of large anion gap metabolic acidosis or significant osmolar gaps of uncertain etiology. antidotal treatment of toxic alcohol
poisoning should be continued until the levels of
methanol or ethylene glycol are below 20 mg/dl
and clinical symptoms of toxicity are resolving
[28,30]. given the long half lives of methanol (43-54
hours) and ethylene glycol (14-18 hours) during
ethanol and  xxxd2148xxx  administration, hemodialysis should be considered for plasma toxic alcohol
258

levels greater than 50 mg/dl. further indications for
dialysis include deteriorating vital signs despite
intensive supportive care, metabolic acidosis (ph
<7.25) refractory to sodium bicarbonate administration and supportive care, renal failure, and severe
electrolyte derangements. all patients should
receive supplemental cofactors (discussed below).
ethanol is administered as a 10% solution in d5w
and should be infused to maintain a serum concentration of 100 to 150 mg/dl. the loading dose is 600
to 700 mg/kg over 30 minutes, followed by a maintenance infusion of 66 mg/kg/h (for nondrinkers) to
154 mg/kg/h (for chronic drinkers) [33]. hourly
serum ethanol concentrations are required to titrate
the infusion rate for the desired level. during dialysis, the maintenance dose of ethanol should be
increased to 169 to 257 mg/kg/h (higher rates for
chronic ethanol abusers) because ethanol will also
be removed. oral dosing with ethanol can be initiated in the rare circumstance that neither intravenous ethanol nor  xxxd2148xxx  is available; the
suggested initial oral loading dose is 4 ounces of 80proof whiskey (40% ethanol by volume) [28,30].
 xxxd2148xxx  is a potent adh inhibitor, displaying
an affinity that is 500 times that of ethanol and 5000
to 10 000 times that of methanol and ethylene glycol [32].  xxxd2148xxx  is more expensive than ethanol
but offers a more desirable side effect profile [34]. it
does not cause inebriation, hypoglycemia, hyperosmolarity, or vasodilation. it is not metabolized and
therefore will not further deplete reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides (nadh) or generate
more acid as the metabolism of ethanol would. no
serum levels of  xxxd2148xxx  are necessary to guide
dosing [31]. the loading dose is 15 mg/kg, followed
by 4 maintenance doses  xxxd1891xxx  mg/kg. thereafter, the

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

maintenance dose should be increased to 15 mg/kg
to offset an increased rate of degradation of  xxxd2148xxx  [35,36]. hemodialysis removes a significant proportion of circulating  xxxd2148xxx , necessitating a
decrease in the maintenance-dosing interval to 4
hours during the procedure [27,33]. alternatively, a
continuous infusion of 1.5 mg/kg/h has been
reported to achieve a therapeutic level of  xxxd2148xxx  during hemodialysis [28,30].
following toxic alcohol poisoning, certain vitamins can function as cofactors, potentially maximizing degradation of the alcohol to nontoxic
metabolites (fig 1). for methanol toxicity,  xxxd2146xxx 
or  xxxd2147xxx  ( xxxd2462xxx ) at a daily dose of 1
mg/kg intravenously (iv) should be given to all
patients [36]. for patients with suspected ethylene
glycol toxicity, administration of pyridoxine (50 mg
iv every 6 hours), thiamine (100 mg daily by oral
or iv routes), and magnesium (usually 2 g daily by
oral or iv routes) is recommended.36 the mechanism by which these cofactors reduce the toxic
effects caused by methanol and ethylene glycol is
not well understood; thus, their use should be considered an adjunctive measure with  xxxd2148xxx ,
ethanol, and, if needed, hemodialysis. sodium
bicarbonate can correct severe acidosis and slow
central nervous system (cns) penetration of the
injurious metabolites but does not stop their generation or enhance elimination.

antimuscarinic poisoning
anticholinergic drugs competitively block muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the cns, in terminal parasympathetic synapses, and on the salivary
and sweat glands. these agents typically produce
the “antimuscarinic toxidrome” characterized by
tachycardia, mydriasis, dry, flushed skin, urinary
retention, dry mucosae, ileus, and confused delirium with mumbling speech, seizures, hallucinations,
and agitation [37,38]. many compounds can induce
the antimuscarinic syndrome, including antihistamines, tricyclic antidepressants (tcas), antiparkinsonian agents, typical and atypical antidepressants,
and atropine-like alkaloids in datura stramonium
and atropa belladonna plant species.39,40,41

physostigmine
reversal of antimuscarinic symptoms is achieved
with the use of physostigmine. physostigmine is a
tertiary carbamate that reversibly disables acetylcholinesterase, increasing levels of acetylcholine in

both central and peripheral sites [39,40,42,43]. in
recent decades, enthusiasm for this agent has
waned because of concerns of precipitating
seizures and reported cardiotoxicity in the setting of
tca overdose [44-48].
diagnostic use of physostigmine can be considered in patients with altered mental status and signs
of antimuscarinic toxicity. complete reversal of signs
and symptoms (particularly altered mental status)
after physostigmine administration suggests the presence of antimuscarinic toxicity. the therapeutic use
of physostigmine is recommended by some authors
to reverse life-threatening tachycardia, hyperthermia,
or severe agitation resulting from antimuscarinic toxicity; however, this agent should be used only as a
therapeutic adjunct to conventional treatments for
these conditions [41].
although in past decades physostigmine had
been administered safely to thousands of tcapoisoned patients, convulsions and dysrhythmias
following physostigmine have been described in
multiple case reports of tca overdose [45,46,47,49].
these reports are difficult to interpret because tcas
are proconvulsants by themselves in overdose.
pentel [44] reported 2 individuals who developed
seizures before, and asystole following, physostigmine administration. both individuals were relatively
bradycardic before administration of physostigmine,
and 1 had a first-degree atrioventricular block.
another case series reported a single convulsion
among 39 patients given diagnostic physostigmine
for varying antimuscarinic substance ingestions; this
patient had also convulsed prior to physostigmine
administration [50]. these and other similar reported
cases suggest that physostigmine-related complications can be avoided through careful selection of
patients without high-risk characteristics, such as
electrocardiographic (ecg) evidence of tca overdose. we suggest that contraindications to the use of
physostigmine include qrs or qtc prolongation,
relative bradycardia or intraventricular conduction
block, a cardiotoxic tca ingestion (generally at least
1 g), or underlying seizure disorder.
in adults, the standard dose of physostigmine is
1 to 2 mg iv given by slow push (1 mg over 1-2
minutes) in a monitored setting. the use of benzodiazepines prior to physostigmine administration is
recommended by some clinicians to reduce the risk
of adverse drug reactions. lack of complete reversal after 4 mg makes antimuscarinic toxidrome an
unlikely cause of altered mental status. the onset of
effect occurs within 5 to 20 minutes, and duration
is 45 minutes to 1 hour. antimuscarinic toxicity
returns often with milder severity once the antidote’s effects wane [42].

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

259

betten et al

the clinician must be prepared to recognize and
treat cholinergic effects that may occur following
physostigmine administration, such as emesis,
hypersalivation, bradycardia, diaphoresis, diarrhea,
bronchorrhea, and bronchospasm. less commonly,
nicotinic effects of fasciculations, weakness, and
paralysis may be present as well. severe bradycardia or bronchorrhea should be treated with
atropine (one-half the physostigmine dose), which
should be readily available. seizures are generally
brief and self-limited and should be treated with
standard doses of benzodiazepines.

opioid poisoning
the term opioids encompasses the naturally occurring opiate compounds from the poppy plant
(papaver somniferum) as well as synthetic and
semisynthetic compounds that have similar clinical
effects [49]. opioids are potent agonists of the µ, kappa,
and delta receptors in the cns [51]. sedation and
hypoventilation are among the most common symptoms of overdose. complications of opioid overdose
include hypoxic injury to virtually any organ system,
rhabdomyolysis, intestinal ileus, nerve compression
injury, intravenous injection-related infectious diseases, and a poorly understood phenomenon of
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema [52-54].

respiratory depression for at least 2 hours after the
last dose of naloxone prior to medical clearance
[51,55,58].
serious adverse events after even high doses of
naloxone are extremely rare. however, naloxone
should be cautiously used in a patient with normal
respirations, even when opioid overdose is suspected. opioid-dependent patients may experience withdrawal after naloxone administration and
become only more agitated and dysphoric [59]. use
of naloxone may also “unmask” the toxicity of
coingestants, such as tcas, and concurrently
abused substances (a popular drug combination is
heroin with cocaine, also termed a “speedball”)
[51]. naloxone has been rarely reported to induce
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema following infusion, but these reports also suggest the possibility
of pre-existing acute lung injury prior to naloxone
administration [51,60].
long-acting opioid antagonists (nalmefene, naltrexone) have similar effects but longer durations of
action (nalmefene 4-6 hours; naltrexone 10-24
hours) than naloxone [51,61]. long-acting opioid
reversal agents are not appropriate first-line antidotes because undesirable withdrawal symptoms
can persist for several hours. furthermore, a prolonged observation period after the last dose may
be necessary because life-threatening effects of opioid toxicity may recur after naltrexone or nalmefene have been metabolized [61].

naloxone
benzodiazepine poisoning
naloxone is a synthetic antagonist of opioid receptors
and reverses apnea in opioid overdose. the onset of
action is almost immediate after intravenous, intramuscular, intranasal, or endotracheal dosing, and the
duration of effect is 1 to 4 hours [55,56].
suspected or known opioid toxicity with demonstrable respiratory depression (rate <8/min) is the
primary indication for naloxone. the smallest dose
that effectively restores respiratory drive should be
administered. the required intravenous dose is
typically 0.04 to 0.4 mg, although administration by
other routes or following overdose of high-potency
synthetic compounds such as fentanyl or propoxyphene may require higher doses [51]. if there
is no increase in respiratory drive after administration of 10 mg of naloxone, a search should continue for alternative etiologies of cns depression.
recurrent or prolonged sedation, such as can be
the case in methadone intoxication, may require
treatment with continuous intravenous infusion of
two thirds of the initial effective dose per hour [57].
patients must be monitored for recurrence of
260

poisoning with benzodiazepine compounds is generally marked by mild to moderate sedation but
most often follows a benign course. however,
when these agents are combined in overdose with
other sedating compounds such as ethanol, they
can cause respiratory arrest and severe morbidity
[62]. symptoms of benzodiazepine poisoning
include decreased responsiveness, hyporeflexia,
hypothermia, hypotension, and respiratory depression. significant derangements in vital signs are not
consistent with benzodiazepine overdose. a paradoxical excitatory reaction may rarely accompany
the therapeutic use of benzodiazepines for procedural sedation [63]. benzodiazepines have a specific
binding site on the gamma- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba)
type a receptor complex in the cns, a chloride
channel that causes neuronal hyperpolarization
[64]. binding of benzodiazepines increases the frequency of channel opening when gaba (the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the cns) binds at a
separate site on the complex [65].

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

table 2. medications commonly associated with qrs
prolongation due to impaired sodium channel influx [4]
tricyclic antidepressants
carbamezapine
diphenhydramine
propoxyphene
cocaine
thioridazine
 xxxd2580xxx 
fluoxetine

quinidine
procainamide
 xxxd2113xxx 
 xxxd1991xxx 
amantadine
quinine

flumazenil
flumazenil is a competitive antagonist at the benzodiazepine site on the gaba-a receptor complex
[66]. by preventing the binding of benzodiazepines,
flumazenil decreases the inward chloride current;
the subsequent neuronal depolarization reverses
cns and respiratory depression [64,66]. it is effective
in reversing sedation of benzodiazepine and nonbenzodiazepines that share activity at the benzodiazepine receptor, such as zolpidem [64,67-69]. it is
also effective in the treatment of paradoxical excitatory reactions to benzodiazepines [63].63 intravenous
flumazenil induces reversal in 5 to 10 minutes and
has a duration of action of 15 to 245 minutes in
healthy adults. patients with hepatic failure may
have a prolonged response to flumazenil [70,71].
repeat doses may be required to treat ingestions of
compounds with prolonged effects.
in adults, the starting dose of flumazenil to
reverse benzodiazepine-induced sedation is 0.2 mg
iv. if the initial dose of flumazenil is ineffective, it
can be followed by 0.3- to 0.5-mg doses every
minute as needed up to a maximum of 3 mg [72].
lack of any response after this dose makes coma
attributable to benzodiazepines highly unlikely. a
continuous flumazenil infusion of 0.1 to 0.5 mg/h
may be needed to prevent resedation in some cases
[73]. following flumazenil discontinuation, patients
should be observed for several hours to ensure that
resedation from longer acting benzodiazepines
does not occur.
flumazenil is well tolerated and effective in
sedated patients with isolated benzodiazepine overdose. in chronic users and those with physical
dependence on benzodiazepines, flumazenil can
precipitate withdrawal symptoms and seizures [74].
flumazenil has caused convulsions in patients with
head injury, those with underlying seizure disorders,
and those who have coingested proconvulsant
drugs, such as tcas, and should be avoided in these
populations [74,75]. should seizures occur following
flumazenil administration, high-dose benzodiazepines

or barbiturates may be needed to stop further seizure
activity. the diagnostic use of flumazenil for coma of
unknown cause must be weighed against the possibility of precipitating seizures or withdrawal symptoms in high-risk patients.

cardiac sodium channel poisoning
tricyclic antidepressants are the classic example of
agents causing toxicity by inhibiting rapid sodium
channel influx in the cardiac conduction system.
cardiac toxicity results from a slowing of cardiac
action potentials by slowing sodium channel influx
in phase 0. this leads to a delay in depolarization
resulting in electrocardiogram qrs and qt prolongation and an increased risk of ventricular dysrhythmias. similar sodium channel blocking effects
on the heart can be seen in overdose with numerous other substances that should be evaluated and
treated in a similar fashion (table 2) [76].

sodium bicarbonate
sodium bicarbonate should be considered for the
management of toxic ingestion of all substances
with sodium channel effects and evidence of cardiac toxicity. the effectiveness of this agent is a
result of both the increased sodium concentration
produced and increased serum alkalinization.
tricyclic antidepressants are weak bases. as a
result, serum alkalinization will increase the proportion of non-ionized drug. the non-ionized tca
form may have a greater distribution throughout tissue, causing a greater proportion of drug to move
away from the cardiac conductive system, resulting
in less sodium channel blockade. alkalinization
also accelerates recovery of sodium channels by
neutralizing the protonation of the drug-receptor
complex [77,78]. this results in a more rapid movement of the neutral form of the drug away from the
sodium channel receptor. a similar benefit of serum
alkalinization can be duplicated with controlled
hyperventilation [79].
increased extracellular sodium concentrations produced by sodium bicarbonate may produce a more
rapid sodium channel influx by way of an increased
sodium concentration gradient [80]. experimental
models testing alkalinization with sodium free buffers
for tca toxicity were not as effective as sodium
bicarbonate in reducing cardiotoxicity. a role for
hypertonic saline administration has been proposed
in the setting of persistent cardiotoxicity and qrs
prolongation when alkalinization has been optimized

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

261

betten et al

(ph 7.45-7.55), although controlled trials supporting
this in humans are lacking [81].
administration of sodium bicarbonate should be
considered in individuals with cardiac conduction
delays, ventricular dysrhythmias, or hypotension
when the ingestion of a sodium channel-blocking
drug is suspected. qrs durations of greater than 160
milliseconds are typically implicated in cases that
progress into ventricular dysrhythmias and in which
seizure activity is most likely to develop [82].
treatment with sodium bicarbonate should be considered with qrs duration greater than 100 to 120
milliseconds, because this affords an ample margin of
safety should an individual quickly decompensate.
an r wave in lead avr greater than or equal to 3 mm
has been found to be equally predictive of individuals who may develop ventricular dysrhythmias [83].
in addition, sodium bicarbonate appears to be of
some benefit in improving blood pressure and cardiac output in hypotensive patients with narrow complex rhythms following tricyclic antidepressant
ingestions [84]. although capable of reversing cardiac
conduction sodium channel effects, sodium bicarbonate is unable to affect other tca properties such
as seizures, anticholinergic toxicity, and alpha-adrenergic
receptor antagonism and thus should be considered
as only part of tca overdose management.
sodium bicarbonate is most typically administered as a 50-ml ampule of 8.4% solution. the
amount of sodium bicarbonate necessary for reversal of cardiotoxicity in these cases may vary. in the
setting of qrs widening or hypotension, 2 ampules
administered over 1 to 2 minutes is an appropriate
starting dose. the serum ph of the patient should
be closely monitored, with a goal of 7.45 to 7.55.
serial blood gas analyses may be needed to guide
further treatment. if qrs widening remains or
recurs, additional sodium bicarbonate ampules
should be infused if the goal ph has not been
exceeded. death from tca toxicity occurs generally within the first 1 to 2 hours, making continuous
infusions of sodium bicarbonate unnecessary in
most situations. in addition, bolus infusions of
sodium bicarbonate may be more appropriate to
rapidly raise extracellular sodium concentrations.
alkalinization can be discontinued with hemodynamic stability and resolution of ecg abnormalities.

oral hypoglycemic poisoning
sulfonylureas and meglitinides are widely used for
treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and together they account for the majority of
cases of drug-induced hypoglycemia. these drugs
262

act similarly by depolarizing pancreatic beta-islet cells,
triggering exocytosis of preformed insulin and
resulting in facilitated end-organ glucose uptake [8587]. in overdose, or in the absence of adequate
food intake, sulfonylureas can cause prolonged,
life-threatening hypoglycemia [88]. onset of
sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia is typically
within 8 hours of ingestion, with hypoglycemic
effects lasting 6 to 72 hours depending on the agent
ingested [89-91]. the shorter acting meglitinides typically take effect in less than 1 hour, with hypoglycemic effects lasting 1 to 4 hours [91,92]. case
reports and animal studies, however, have found prolonged hypoglycemic effects of 6 to 24 hours following meglitinide ingestion [93,94]. although there are
few data on meglitinide overdose, treatment options
are expected to be similar to sulfonylureas.

dextrose
any patient who overdoses with an oral hypoglycemic agent should be observed for a minimum
of 8 hours, during which glucose levels should be
monitored every 1 to 2 hours [90]. patients should
be allowed to eat and drink freely during this observation period. if hypoglycemia occurs, patients
should receive iv dextrose as a bolus (d50w or
d25w) or infusion (d10w or d5w) in order to
maintain euglycemia. overly aggressive dextrose
administration leading to hyperglycemia may result
in further pancreatic insulin release and rebound
hypoglycemia [85,86]. prolonged hypertonic dextrose (>10%) infusion through a peripheral iv site is
not recommended because phlebitis may occur. any
patient with hypoglycemia requiring iv dextrose following sulfonylurea or meglitinide overdose should
be admitted and observed for a minimum of 24
hours [90,92]. patients should be monitored for several hours after discontinuation of iv dextrose to
ensure no recurrence of hypoglycemia.

octreotide
octreotide is a long-acting, synthetic somatostatin
anologue [95]. in the setting of oral hypoglycemic
agent overdose, octreotide potently and selectively
binds to somatostatin receptors on pancreatic betaislet cells, decreasing insulin secretion to near basal
rates and inhibiting rebound hypoglycemia [96-99].
octreotide is well absorbed via subcutaneous or iv
routes and has a duration of action of approximately 6 to 12 hours.  xxxd1868xxx , previously used
with regularity for sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia, is less efficacious and is associated with

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

more frequent adverse side effects (hypotension,
tachycardia, nausea, and vomiting) than octreotide,
and it is now rarely used [95,100].
octreotide is indicated for cases of oral hypoglycemic agent–induced hypoglycemia after initial
control of hypoglycemia with iv dextrose or when
hypoglycemia is refractory to dextrose therapy [91].
adults may receive 50 µg and children 1 µg/kg iv or
subcutaneously every 6 to 12 hours as needed
[90,101]. octreotide has been found to be superior to
iv dextrose and  xxxd1868xxx  in maintaining euglycemia
and has decreased or eliminated the need for iv dextrose in simulated human sulfonylurea overdoses [95].
patients should be monitored for recurrence of hypoglycemia for 24 hours or more after the last octreotide
dose in cases of long- acting sulfonylurea overdose
[98,102]. adverse effects following administration
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, injection site pain, dizziness, fatigue, flushing, headache, and hyperglycemia [103].

isoniazid poisoning
isoniazid ( xxxd2396xxx , inh) has been
used for the treatment and prophylaxis of tuberculosis since 1952 [104]. it is rapidly absorbed after
oral ingestion with peak blood concentrations and
toxic effects occurring within 1 to 6 hours [105].
inh toxicity is a result of its ability to produce a
deficiency of pyridoxal-5-phosphate, the active
form of pyridoxine and a required cofactor for  xxxd2431xxx  decarboxylase (gad). in the absence of
functional gad,  xxxd2431xxx  is unable to be converted to gaba, the primary cns inhibitory neurotransmitter. following inh overdose, decreased
production and activity of gaba on postsynaptic
receptors result in seizures and metabolic acidosis
secondary to seizure-induced lactic acidosis [106].
inh-induced seizures may be prolonged and
refractory to gaba agonists such as benzodiazepines [104,107]. coma is another prominent feature of inh overdose, the exact mechanism of
which is yet to be defined [108,109].

pyridoxine
pyridoxine is a water-soluble essential vitamin that
has no known metabolic effects by itself [110,111].
pyridoxine must be converted to the active
pyridoxal-5-phosphate before it can act as a coenzyme for the decarboxylation of  xxxd2431xxx  to
gaba [110,111]. when administered at appropriate
doses, exogenous pyridoxine is able to replenish

inh-depleted pyridoxine and pyridoxal-5-phosphate
stores and stop further seizures. paradoxically, repletion of pyridoxine stores reverses both the cns
excitatory (seizure) and inhibitory (coma) effects of
inh [112,113].
intravenous pyridoxine is indicated for the treatment of inh-induced seizures and coma. when the
amount of inh ingested is known, 1 g of pyridoxine per gram of inh ingested should be administered immediately. if the amount of inh ingested is
unknown, an empiric dose of 5 g of pyridoxine is
suggested in adults, or 70 mg/kg (maximum 5 g) in
children. should seizures persist, the initial dose
should be repeated every 20 minutes until the
desired effect is achieved [114]. pyridoxine should
be mixed in 50 to 100 ml of 5% dextrose in water
and may be administered at a rate of 0.5 g/min
[114,115]. with appropriate pyridoxine dosage
administration, desired effects should be evident
within minutes [112,113,116]. a prophylactic iv
dose of 5 g of pyridoxine has been suggested for
asymptomatic patients who present within 2 hours
of a significant inh ingestion, but the efficacy of
this therapy has not been studied [107].
pyridoxine hydrochloride for iv administration is
supplied in 1-ml vials containing 100 mg/ml [115].
given the high doses that may be needed and the
manufacturer’s packaging of just 100 mg/vial, 50 to
150 or more vials may be required to adequately
treat inh-poisoned patients. many hospitals lack
adequate iv pyridoxine to treat even 1 severely
intoxicated individual [117]. in the event iv pyridoxine is unavailable, the oral form may be
crushed and administered orally as a slurry at a similar dosage to the iv form [114]. pyridoxine should
be administered concomitantly with benzodiazepines because a synergistic anticonvulsive effect
has been demonstrated in animal studies [118].
pyridoxine may also have an antidotal role in
poisonings by monomethylhydrazine, a structurally
similar substance to inh found in the gyromitra
mushrooms and  xxxd2900xxx  that is capable of producing toxicity similar to inh [104]. large acute (iv)
and chronic (oral) pyridoxine overdoses have been
associated with isolated sensory neuropathies in a
stocking-glove pattern; however, this should not be
of concern in the acute management of the above
poisonings [110,119].

cyanide poisoning
exposure to cyanide occurs through various routes
including inhalation (hydrogen cyanide), ingestion
(sodium and potassium cyanide salts, laetrile,

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

263

betten et al

plant-derived cyanogenic glycosides), and intravenous administration of cyanide-containing medications (nitroprusside). cyanide rapidly diffuses into
tissues and binds to the cytochrome oxidase complex,
disrupting the mitochondrial electron transport
chain. the result is inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation and cellular hypoxia leading to anaerobic
metabolism, metabolic acidosis, seizures, coma, cardiovascular collapse, and death. clinical effects frequently occur rapidly following cyanide exposure;
however, compounds such as acetonitrile and propionitrile may result in delayed toxicity as parent compounds are hepatically converted to cyanide [120-122].

cyanide antidote kit
the current fda-approved antidote kit for cyanide
poisoning consists of  xxxd171xxx , sodium nitrite,
and sodium thiosulfate (taylor pharmaceutical/
akorn inc, decatur, il).123  xxxd171xxx  and sodium
nitrite induce methemoglobinemia by oxidizing
iron in hemoglobin from the ferrous (fe2+) to
the ferric (fe3+) form. this ferric iron rapidly
removes cyanide from cytochrome oxidase forming
cyanomethemoglobin and restoring cellular respiration. cyanomethemoglobin reacts with thiosulfate
to form thiocyanate, a reaction catalyzed by the
enzyme rhodenase. thiocyanate is renally excreted
leaving methemoglobin free to bind more cyanide
[124,125]. whereas both nitrites and thiosulfate are
individually protective in cyanide poisoning, when
used together they appear to have synergistic effects
[124,126]. nitrite-induced vasodilation may improve
end-organ perfusion and has been suggested as an
alternative mechanism contributing to the apparent
effectiveness of the cyanide antidote kit [127].
immediate empiric use of the cyanide antidote kit
should be strongly considered for patients with suspected exposure to cyanide, especially those who are
unresponsive or with significant acidosis. nitrites
should be used cautiously in smoke inhalation
victims because concomitant methemoglobinemia
and carboxyhemoglobinemia may severely worsen
oxygen-carrying capacity [128]. in such cases, sodium
thiosulfate may be safely given without prior nitrite
therapy [129]. it has been suggested that the danger
of sodium nitrite treatment following smoke inhalation is overestimated because carboxyhemoglobin
may clear more rapidly than methemoglobinemia
develops. potential benefits and risks of treatment
should be considered prior to treatment initiation
[130]. rapid (or even recommended) infusion rates of
sodium nitrite may cause hypotension, and vasopressor support may be required [128,131]. prophylactic
264

sodium thiosulfate (10 mg of thiosulfate per 1 mg of
nitroprusside) is recommended during rapid and prolonged nitroprusside infusions (>3 µg/kg/min).132
 xxxd171xxx  pearls may be crushed into gauze
and held near the patient’s mouth and nose or
under the lip of an oxygen mask for inhalation (30
seconds of each minute) while iv access is
obtained. once iv access is established, sodium
nitrite may be administered as 10 ml of 3% solution
(300 mg) for adults, or 0.2 to 0.33 ml/kg (maximum
10 ml) for children at 2.5 ml/min [123,124]. a lower
dose may be necessary in anemic patients to avoid
severe methemoglobin effects [124]. co-oximetry
should be used to monitor and maintain methemoglobin levels below 30% [124]. pulse oximetry readings are inaccurate in methemoglobin-poisoned
patients and will plummet even further following
 xxxd2610xxx  administration. after sodium nitrite
infusion, sodium thiosulfate may be administered iv
as 50 ml of 25% solution (12.5 g) for adults or 1.65
ml/kg (maximum 50 ml) for children [124]. if initial
patient response is inadequate, repeat doses of
sodium nitrite and thiosulfate (half of the initial
doses) may be given 30 minutes later [124].

 xxxd2300xxx , hyperbaric
oxygen, and normobaric oxygen
 xxxd2300xxx , a cobalt-containing cyanide
chelator, has been used safely and effectively in
combination with thiosulfate outside the united
states since 1970 and is reviewed in detail elsewhere
[133]. hyperbaric oxygen therapy for isolated
cyanide toxicity remains an unproven and controversial modality [134]. its use is reserved for cases of
concomitant carbon monoxide and cyanide exposure. normobaric oxygen administration, however,
enhances the antidotal effects of nitrites and thiosulfate in animal studies of cyanide poisoning [134,135].

cholinergic poisoning
cholinergic agents include acetylcholinesterase
(ache) inhibitors such as carbamate and organophosphorus (op) insecticides, and organophosphorus
nerve agents used in chemical warfare (sarin,
soman, tabun, vx). these agents are well absorbed
by ingestion, dermal contact, and inhalation [136].
organophosphorus insecticides and nerve agents
deposit a phosphoryl group at the active site of
ache, binding and disabling this enzyme. the resulting accumulation of acetylcholine (ach) causes
parasympathetic muscarinic (salivation, lacrimation,

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

urinary incontinence, diarrhea, diaphoresis, emesis,
bronchorrhea, bronchoconstriction, bradycardia, and
miosis), parasympathetic nicotinic (muscle weakness, fasciculations, and paralysis), sympathetic nicotinic (tachycardia, mydriasis), and cns (delirium,
seizures, coma) effects [136137]. eventually, opbound ache is spontaneously dealkylated in a
process called “aging,” at which time the op-ache
bond becomes irreversible and regeneration of ache
is required. the aging process takes minutes to
weeks depending on the offending agent but is typically faster with the op nerve agents [138].
carbamate insecticides bind reversibly to ache
through a process called carbamylation and do not
cause aging of the enzyme [136,139]. in addition,
carbamates do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier, thus producing cholinergic symptoms that are
typically less prominent than op poisonings [136].

atropine
atropine reverses the muscarinic effects of cholinergic poisoning. the primary goal and endpoint of
atropine therapy in cholinergic poisoning are reversal of bronchorrhea and bronchoconstriction [140].
atropine competitively antagonizes postsynaptic
muscarinic ach receptors but has no effect at the
nicotinic receptors responsible for muscle weakness, fasciculations, and paralysis [140]. atropine
can terminate seizures in cholinergic-poisoned
patients and should be administered in conjunction
with benzodiazepines for this purpose [141-143].
cholinergic-poisoned adults should receive an
initial iv atropine dose of 1 to 5 mg. this can be
repeated every 2 to 3 minutes until reversal of bronchorrhea and bronchospasm occurs. a continuous
iv infusion may be required in severe poisonings
(0.5-1 mg/h). children should receive 0.05 mg/kg
iv initially, followed by repeat doses every 2 to 3
minutes or continuous infusion (0.025 mg/kg/h) as
needed [136]. atropine therapy should be continued
for at least 24 hours to allow metabolism and excretion of the cholinergic agent [144]. large doses of
atropine may be required in some cases (hundred
to thousands of milligrams), so hospital supplies
may be exhausted with just 1 severely poisoned
patient [145]. overly aggressive atropinization may
cause antimuscarinic delirium, hyperthermia, and
muscle twitching [144,146].

pralidoxime
pralidoxime (2-pam) is the only fda-approved
ache reactivator for op poisoning. if administered

prior to ache aging, pralidoxime can hydrolytically
cleave the op-ache complex, freeing the enzyme
to degrade accumulated ach [147]. unlike atropine,
pralidoxime may help reverse both muscarinic and
nicotinic effects of op poisoning [148]. the clinical
efficacy of oximes remains controversial [149].
pralidoxime is indicated early as adjunctive therapy
to atropine for poisonings with ops [136,137].
because ache aging does not occur with carbamate poisonings, pralidoxime is not expected to
benefit these patients. however, when identification of the offending agent is not possible, concurrent therapy with both atropine and pralidoxime is
recommended [136-150].
suggested dosing regimens for pralidoxime vary.
adults may receive 1 to 2 g and children 25 to 50
mg/kg (maximum 2 g) by iv bolus over 15 to 30
minutes [136,137,151]. the initial bolus may be
repeated in 1 hour if muscle fasciculations or weakness persists [147]. continuous iv infusion may also
be used and will be necessary in severe cholinergic
poisonings [137,151].

the mark-1 kit and benzodiazepines
the mark-1 intramuscular autoinjector kits (meridian
medical technologies, columbia, md), originally
designed for battlefield use by op nerve agent–
exposed soldiers, are now available to civilian emergency medical system responders. these kits are
fda-approved for general use in op poisonings
[140]. the adult kits contain 2 mg of atropine and
600 mg of pralidoxime in separate spring-loaded,
pressure-activated autoinjectors. pediatric autoinjectors containing 0.25 to 1 mg of atropine are also
available. benzodiazepines have demonstrated effectiveness in terminating op-induced seizures and
muscle fasciculations and may increase survival
when coadministered with atropine and pralidoxime
[141-143]. diazepam 10-mg autoinjectors are sold
separately from the mark-1 kits.

 xxxd2799xxx  poisoning
 xxxd2799xxx  toxicity is characterized by cardiac, gastrointestinal, and neurologic dysfunction
[152-154]. digoxin and  xxxd1884xxx  are responsible for
nearly all  xxxd2799xxx  exposures; however,
multiple plant species (lily of the valley, red squill,
oleander, foxglove, yew) and animal species
(colorado river toad) contain structurally similar
glycosides and may result in toxicity following
ingestion or exposure [155].

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

265

betten et al

the various manifestations of toxicity result from
the glycoside binding and inhibition of sodiumpotassium-adenosine triphosphatase (na-k-atpase)
on cellular membranes. clinical effects can include
high-grade atrioventricular (av) block, hyperkalemia,
ventricular irritability with ventricular tachycardia or
fibrillation, bidirectional ventricular tachycardia,
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia with block, sinus bradycardia, confusion, color vision perceptual difficulty,
and vomiting [156,157].

anti-digoxin antibody fragments
(digibind®, digifab®)
anti-digoxin fab fragments consist of sheep-derived
immunoglobulin g (igg) antibodies that are cleaved
and purified to isolate the antigen-binding fragment
(f-ab, or fab) [158]. this fab fragment binds rapidly
to free (unbound) digoxin in the serum and extracellular fluid. this results in a redistribution of
digoxin out of tissue and away from na-k-atpase
on cell membranes [159,160]. improvements in cardiac disturbances, hyperkalemia, and extracardiac
symptoms should be notable within 20 to 90 minutes following administration of the anti-digoxin
antibody [152,156,161]. the digoxin-antibody complex circulates without dissociating until it is renally
eliminated or proteolytically metabolized [161]. up
to 12% of patients may not respond to anti-digoxin
fab fragments because of inadequate dosing, underlying cardiac disease, or irreversible multiple organ
failure at the time of therapy [156,162].
in the setting of  xxxd2799xxx  toxicity, dysrhythmias, electrolyte derangements (especially
hypomagnesemia), and dehydration should be
addressed with standard measures, with a few
notable exceptions. hyperkalemia should be
treated with insulin and dextrose, sodium bicarbonate, and cation exchange resins (sodium polystyrene sulfate) as well as digoxin-specific fab
fragments. intravenous calcium should be cautiously administered, if at all, because intracellular
calcium concentrations are usually elevated from
the na-k-atpase poisoning. further calcium administration has been reported to predispose to cardiac
arrest, but these reports are not well documented or
reproduced experimentally [163]. ventricular irritability should be treated with vaughn-williams
class ib agents such as lidocaine. class ia agents
such as procainamide and quinidine are contraindicated in this setting because they depress contractility and have prodysrhythmic effects. atropine can
be administered at standard doses for bradycardia
or av blockade.
266

indications for the use of anti-digoxin fab fragments include life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmias,
high-grade av blockade, serum potassium greater
than 5 meq/l, acute ingestion of greater than 10 mg
of digoxin in an adult (4 mg in a healthy child), or
steady-state serum concentration of >15 ng/ml
[160]. because unbound digoxin is more easily
bound prior to tissue penetration, the early empiric
use of digoxin-specific fab fragments is recommended if a severe ingestion is suspected [159].
each 40-mg vial of anti-digoxin fab fragments can
bind approximately 0.5 mg of digoxin [159]. when a
known amount is ingested, the total amount of biologically available drug can be calculated assuming a
bioavailability of 80% for digoxin. for example, if 10
mg is ingested, 8 mg needs to be neutralized.
because each vial of digibind® binds 0.5 mg of the
digoxin, a total of 16 vials would be indicated.
if the digoxin steady-state serum concentration is
available (approximately 4-6 hours postingestion),
the number of required vials of anti-digoxin antibody
fragments can be calculated using digoxin’s volume
of distribution of 5 l/kg with the following formula:
vials = [digoxin serum concentration (ng/ml)
× 5 l/kg × patient weight (kg)]
[1000 × 0.5 mg/vial]

empiric treatment recommendations made by drug
manufacturers for suspected ingestions of unknown
digoxin quantities suggest an initial dose of 10 vials
for acute ingestions and 3 vials for chronic toxicity.
the clinical utility of anti-digoxin fab fragments in
poisonings by cardiac glycosides other than digoxin
and  xxxd1884xxx , such as those found in plants like
oleander, has only been studied in animal models
and a few human case reports [164,165]. given the
structural similarity of these related glycoside compounds and their potential toxicity, the administration of 10 to 20 vials of digoxin fab fragments
should be considered in symptomatic cases.
an ultrafiltration-based free digoxin assay must
be used to evaluate the concentration of free (not
fab-bound) digoxin molecules in the serum following therapy with anti-digoxin fab fragments
[156,159,166]. total digoxin levels may be falsely
elevated following digoxin-antibody fab fragment
administration and should not be used as an indication for additional treatment. delayed recrudescence of high free digoxin levels may occur
attributable to late redistribution from the tissue
compartment, but this is rarely of clinical importance. the safety profile for digoxin-specific fab
fragments is well established with less than a 1%
rate of allergic reactions [165,167].

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

beta-adrenergic receptor blockers

calcium channel antagonist poisoning

beta-adrenergic receptor blockers are frequently used
for rate control and hypertension. they act by
blocking receptors of a variety of cell types including myocytes, vascular smooth muscle, and cardiac
pacemaker cells. normally, the binding of the betaagonist stimulates a g-protein to convert adenosine
triphosphate (atp) to cyclic  xxxd81xxx  (camp), which activates phosphokinase a.
this activation causes increased opening of cell
membrane calcium channels, increased release of
calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and
improved function of myofibrillar proteins [168].
blocking of the receptor leads to decreased inotropy
and chronotropy, causing hypotension, bradycardia,
and mental status depression. several antidotes,
including glucagon, calcium, and hyperinsulinemiaeuglycemia, have been used with varying success
for beta-adrenergic receptor blocker poisoning.
whereas glucagon is discussed below, calcium and
hyperinsulinemia-euglycemia will be presented in
the calcium channel blocker poisoning section.

calcium channel antagonists are commonly prescribed for the treatment of hypertension or for rate
control in the setting of atrial fibrillation. they work
by blocking calcium influx into cells, resulting in
decreased contractility, tone, and conduction of
action potentials through the atrioventricular node.
there are 3 classes of calcium channel antagonists:
phenylalkylamines (verapamil) and benzothiazepines (diltiazem) have more cardiac specific
actions, whereas dihydropyridines (amlodipine)
have more peripheral effects [170]. however, specificity is frequently lost with high-dose poisonings.
symptoms of poisoning include bradycardia and
hypotension. antidotal therapies include glucagons,
calcium, and hyperinsulinemia-euglycemia.

glucagon
glucagon is an endogenous polypeptide that has a
role in maintaining plasma glucose levels by acting
as a counterregulatory hormone to insulin [169]. it
is used for hypoglycemia, beta-adrenergic receptor
blocker poisoning, and calcium channel blocker
poisoning. glucagon binds to a specific cell membrane receptor that stimulates the conversion of
atp to camp with the same resultant effects as betaadrenergic receptor agonists [170]. because of its
unique receptor, glucagon can bypass the blocked
beta-adrenergic receptor.
the dose of glucagon required in the treatment
of beta-adrenergic receptor blocker poisoning is much
greater than that needed to treat hypoglycemia. for
these poisonings, glucagon is administered as an
intravenous bolus of 5 to 10 mg in adults (50 µg/kg
in children). the effects may occur within minutes
and last approximately 15 minutes [171]. rebolusing
with higher doses may be required for adequate
clinical response. an intravenous infusion of 1 to 10
mg/h should be started if initial boluses are effective because of glucagon’s short half-life and may
be required for up to 48 hours [168]. the most common side effects of glucagon are nausea and vomiting. both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia can
occur with this therapy, and blood glucose levels
should be closely monitored.

calcium
the administration of calcium salts should be the
first choice in symptomatic calcium channel antagonist poisoning. although human case reports are
conflicting on the efficacy of this therapy, animal
studies are generally supportive of its use [172]. the
relative safety of intravenous calcium infusions is
also favorable compared with other proposed antidotes for these cases.  xxxd409xxx  can be
given via peripheral intravenous access, whereas
calcium chloride requires central venous access for
administration because of its caustic effects.
increased extracellular calcium is thought to lead to
an increased concentration gradient, driving calcium
intracellularly [170]. the effect may be short-lived
and the condition may require additional therapy.
each 10-ml ampule of  xxxd409xxx  (1 g)
contains 90 mg of elemental calcium, whereas 10
ml of calcium chloride (1 g) contains 272 mg of
elemental calcium [173]. usual adult dosing begins
with 30 to 60 ml of  xxxd409xxx  or 10 to 20
ml of calcium chloride with repeated doses every
15 to 20 minutes to keep the serum calcium in the
high- normal range [170]. some toxicologists recommend pushing serum calcium concentrations higher
than normal in refractory cases. hypercalcemia can
occur with overzealous treatment and can lead to
nausea, vomiting, and myocardial depression.

hyperinsulinemia-euglycemia
hyperglycemia in the setting of calcium channel
blocker poisoning is relatively common. calcium

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

267

betten et al

channel blockers have been shown to decrease cellular uptake of glucose and free  xxxd2154xxx  and shift
oxidation from  xxxd2154xxx  to carbohydrates [174].
several animal studies and case series have demonstrated the benefit of insulin in this setting [174177]. intravenous insulin has an onset of action of
approximately 10 to 15 minutes [174]. insulin
improves glucose uptake and myocardial oxygen
delivery in addition to increasing inotropy [175].
this therapy also seems to improve peripheral vascular resistance [176].
hypotension refractory to calcium or glucagon
treatment in the setting of calcium channel blockade or beta-adrenergic receptor blockade warrants
consideration of insulin and glucose therapy. a
bolus dose of insulin, 1 iu/kg iv, may be administered, followed by an insulin infusion at a rate of
0.5 to 1.0 iu/kg/h titrated to effect. capillary blood
glucose should be monitored every 20 minutes for
the first hour and then at hourly intervals [172]. a
10% dextrose infusion should be titrated to keep
the capillary blood glucose in the 150 to 200 mg/dl
range. potassium should also be closely monitored.

iron poisoning
iron poisoning produces a rapidly progressive
course of multiple organ failure. severe poisonings
occur typically with ingestions greater than 60
mg/kg of elemental iron [178]. absorption of excess
iron results predominantly from profound irritant
effects on the gastrointestinal (gi) tract. free iron
can then be absorbed through this damaged gi
mucosa and can produce direct hepatocyte damage, impaired coagulation, iron-mediated cardiac
depressant effects, and renal failure. profuse vomiting, diarrhea, gastrointestinal blood loss (hematemesis, hematochezia), hypotension, and a profound
metabolic acidosis may be seen following large
toxic ingestions.

 xxxd1824xxx 
 xxxd1824xxx  is derived from streptomyces pilosus
and possesses a high affinity and specificity for ferric iron (fe3+). free iron and iron transported
between transferrin and ferritin may be bound or
chelated by  xxxd1824xxx  while having little effect
on iron contained in hemoglobin, hemosiderin, or
ferritin [179].  xxxd1824xxx  administration should
be considered following iron poisoning in the presence of hypotension and signs of progressive
shock, repetitive vomiting, metabolic acidosis,
268

serum iron levels >500 µg/dl, or a general toxic
appearance [180]. because plasma iron absorption
is variable with levels that peak in the first 2 to 6
hours following ingestion, treatment should not be
withheld from individuals with levels <500 µg/dl
with signs of severe toxicity because peak serum
iron levels may be unknown [181]. if free iron is
present in circulation on  xxxd1824xxx  administration, the iron-ferrioxamine complex will be cleared
by the kidneys and will appear as red or “wine” colored urine. the presence of this “vin rose” urine
can then be used as a guide to duration of therapy,
because urine color normalizes as potentially toxic
free iron is removed from the bloodstream.
 xxxd1824xxx  is administered intravenously initially at 5 to 10 mg/kg/h and should be rapidly
titrated up to 15 mg/kg/h. supportive care with intravenous fluids and vasopressors is imperative with
signs of progressive shock because  xxxd1824xxx  is
unable to reverse pretreatment iron-mediated effects.
in addition,  xxxd1824xxx  is able to chelate a relatively small portion of the total unbound plasma iron
following large ingestions. one hundred milligrams
of  xxxd1824xxx  is capable of chelating just 8.5 g of
elemental iron [182]. infusions of greater than 15
mg/kg/h of  xxxd1824xxx  (maximum manufacturerrecommended dose) have been given successfully
but should be done with caution given  xxxd1824xxx -induced hypotension (mediated by histamine
release) that can occur at higher doses in patients
already prone to hypotension [183]. higher dose
 xxxd1824xxx  has also been associated with acute
lung injury when infused for greater than 24 hours
[184].  xxxd1824xxx  discontinuation is recommended by 24 hours with signs of clinical improvement.  xxxd1824xxx  and chronic iron overload, in
addition, have also been implicated in several cases
of yersinia enterocolitica sepsis. this bacterium
requires iron as a growth factor but lacks the ability
to solubilize the element and transport it intracellularly. the combination of excess iron and  xxxd1824xxx  may therefore encourage the growth of
yersinia species given its ability to rapidly proliferate
in this high iron concentration environment. severe
diarrhea and septic-appearing signs and symptoms
beginning several days following  xxxd1824xxx 
treatment should prompt consideration of yersinia
sepsis [185].
discontinuation of  xxxd1824xxx  is appropriate
with resolution of metabolic acidosis, when clinical
improvement is noted, and urine color is returning
to normal [180]. with some laboratory colorimetric
assays, serum iron levels, it should be noted, may
be falsely lowered in the presence of  xxxd1824xxx .
this may limit the usefulness of monitoring iron

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

concentrations as an end point for therapy [186].
 xxxd1824xxx  should not be withheld in pregnancy
because neither iron nor  xxxd1824xxx  will cross
the placenta very well [187]. poor fetal outcomes
following iron poisoning occur in the presence of
maternal hemodynamic compromise [188].

oral anticoagulant poisoning
anticoagulants function by disabling the complex
coagulation pathway resulting in an inability to generate thrombin and subsequent fibrin clot. disruption of the intrinsic pathway (heparin) and the
extrinsic pathway (warfarin and “warfarinlike” substances) may result in potentially life-threatening
complications such as gastrointestinal, intracranial,
and retroperitoneal hemorrhage [189]. oral anticoagulants include short-acting agents, such as warfarin, and the long-acting anticoagulant rodenticides
(laars) or “superwarfarins,” which include difenacoum and brodifacoum. therapeutic misadventures,
drug interactions that inhibit warfarin metabolism,
and intentional rodenticide ingestions result in the
majority of anticoagulant poisoning. intentional overdoses with heparin are rare. cases of heparin toxicity typically involve inappropriately high heparin
dosages administered to hospitalized infants. the
use of the reversal agent protamine may be considered in these rare circumstances and is reviewed
elsewhere [190].

 xxxd2941xxx  (vitamin k1)
vitamin k1 administration is used for xenobioticinduced alterations of the extrinsic coagulation
pathway, typically seen following ingestions of
warfarin or laars. oral anticoagulants irreversibly
inhibit  xxxd3522xxx  reductases, enzymes responsible
for maintaining adequate quantities of  xxxd3522xxx 
 xxxd2299xxx , the active form of  xxxd3522xxx  [191-193].
 xxxd3522xxx   xxxd2299xxx  is a required cofactor for the carboxylation reaction, which produces active forms
of coagulation factors ii, vii, ix, and x. in its
absence, these factors become depleted, evident by
prolonged
prothrombin
times
(pt)
and
international normalized ratio (inr) abnormalities
when falling to 25% of normal values [194].194
vitamin k1 reversal of pt and inr may be evident
after several hours, typically taking 8 to 24 hours to
return to baseline values [195,196]. vitamin k1 is
available for administration as oral and parenteral
(intramuscular, subcutaneous, iv) formulations. oral

vitamin k1 possesses no real adverse effects and
should be considered the route of choice in individuals able to tolerate enteral administration. the
intravenous form of vitamin k1 has a slightly faster
onset of action than oral vitamin k1; however, this
benefit should be weighed against its potential toxicity evident by numerous cases of anaphylactoid
reactions that have been reported even with proper
administration [197]. intramuscular injections may
produce hematomas in highly anticoagulated individuals and should be administered with caution.
the onset of vitamin k1 effect may take several
hours, even with iv vitamin k1; therefore, coadministration of fresh frozen plasma, which contains
active clotting factors, should be strongly considered
with active bleeding or significantly elevated inrs
(>20) for rapid coagulopathy reversal [198].
treatment duration requirements with vitamin k1
are variable. warfarin has a half-life of approximately 35 hours; therefore, treatment with vitamin
k1 will typically be required for at least 3 to 5 days
to maintain adequate stores of clotting factors [198].
laars may need treatment for up to several
months given their prolonged enzyme inhibitory
capabilities [199]. individuals requiring chronic anticoagulation who experience therapeutic errors
make up a special population, because only partial
reversal of a coagulopathy may be necessary to
avoid complications from their underlying medical
problem. consensus guidelines for this patient subset have been established by the american college
of chest physicians [200].
half-lives of exogenously administered vitamin
k1 suggest that dosing may be necessary 3 to 4
times daily to maintain adequate supplies of clotting factors [201]. treatment with 50 to 100 mg
orally 3 to 4 times per day for >6 months has been
needed following large laar ingestions [202].
 xxxg750xxx  levels, which possess the shortest half
life (5 hours) of the affected clotting factors, as well
as the inr, are typically used to guide the duration
and dosage of vitamin k1 needed [194,203].
following rodenticide ingestion, prophylactic treatment is not recommended. inr and pt should be
assessed 2 to 3 days following ingestion to determine if prolonged therapy may be warranted.
prophylactic treatment will not allow this determination to be made until the effects of exogenously
administered vitamin k1 have worn off. small
amounts of ingested laars typically do not require
prolonged treatment. a 1-time ingestion of less than
1 box of rodenticide has been shown to be unlikely
to produce any clinically significant coagulopathy,
even in small children [203,204].

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

269

betten et al

botulism antitoxin

g-6-phosphodiesterase
glucose-6-p

nadp+

 xxxd593xxx 

nadph
methb
reductase

nadph

leukomethylene
blue

 xxxd2610xxx 

methemoglobin
(hbfe3+)

hemoglobin
(hbfe2+)

fig 2. reduction pathway of methemoglobin (methb)
to hemoglobin.  xxxd2610xxx  is nonenzymatically converted to leukomethylene blue, which is dependent on
adequate production of reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotides phosphate (nadph) by the hexose
monophosphate shunt. nadp+ = oxidized nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate.

botulism
botulism is a paralytic illness caused by the toxin
produced by clostridium botulinum. it is primarily
caused by ingestion of foodstuffs contaminated with
the toxin, although it may also result from c botulinum contamination of infections incurred during
subcutaneous injection (“skin-popping”) of illicit
substances [205]. c botulinum toxin is also a potential biological weapon [205]. seven botulinum toxins
have been identified, but only 3 are commonly
implicated in human illness (a, b, and e) [206]. the
toxin acts by blocking the release of acetylcholine at
the neuromuscular junction, leading to flaccid paralysis [205]. signs and symptoms develop within 12 to
36 hours and include nausea and vomiting, difficulty
swallowing, facial weakness, double vision, and
descending muscular weakness and paralysis that
can progress to respiratory failure. the cause of
death is usually respiratory insufficiency. the diagnosis is primarily clinical, but serum assays can be
sent for confirmation.

270

antitoxin acts by binding to free botulinum toxin,
preventing its uptake into the neuron. it needs to
be administered as soon as the diagnosis is considered, because only toxin that has not entered neurons will be bound. treatment with antitoxin within
24 hours of exposure has been shown to reduce
the overall duration of symptoms [207]. waiting for
confirmatory tests may result in severe, otherwise
preventable disease [206,207].
several antitoxin preparations are available from
state health departments or the centers for disease
control and prevention (cdc). the most common
preparations are bivalent (a and b), which have
7500 iu of type a and 5000 iu of type b antitoxin,
and trivalent (a, b, and e), which have 7500 iu of
type a, 5500 iu of type b, and 8500 iu of type e
antitoxin [207]. monovalent (e), pentavalent (a, b,
c, d, and e) and heptavalent (a, b, c, d, e, f, and
g) preparations are also available in special circumstances. once a case of botulism is suspected,
the clinician should first contact the state health
department. if this is not satisfactory, the cdc can
be contacted at 770-488-7100 (24 hours).
the trivalent antitoxin is administered as an initial
dose of 1 vial every 2 to 4 hours for 3 to 5 doses
depending on the severity of symptoms. each vial is
diluted 1:10 in normal saline and infused slowly. the
other preparations are administered in a similar fashion. the antitoxins are immunoglobulin preparations
from horses, and hypersensitivity reactions occur in
approximately 9% of those treated [208]. a skin test
prior to antidote administration is recommended by
some clinicians; however, its use is controversial
given the high rate of false-negative and false-positive
results associated with equine serum skin testing.
despite this relatively high rate of hypersensitivity
reactions, antitoxin should be administered when
reasonable suspicion of botulinum poisoning is present given its potential for significant morbidity and
mortality. diphenhydramine (50 mg iv) should be
administered as pretreatment, and an epinephrine
infusion should be available for immediate use at the
bedside should signs of anaphylaxis occur [207].

methemoglobinemia
methemoglobinemia refers to the oxidation of
hemoglobin  xxxd2385xxx  (fe2+) to ferric iron (fe3+).
the ferric iron does not bind oxygen but increases
the oxygen affinity of the remaining normal heme
groups and shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

curve to the left, leading to cellular hypoxia [209].
in normal healthy individuals, <1% of hemoglobin
is in the fe3+ state. reduction to the ferrous form is
continually taking place via nadh-cytochrome b5
reductase (major pathway) and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides phosphate (nadph)
methemoglobin reductase (minor pathway).
exposure to various oxidizing agents may produce
elevated methemoglobin concentrations, overwhelming the body’s reducing capabilities and
eventually leading to increased methemoglobin
levels and progressive symptomatology.

 xxxd2610xxx 
 xxxd2610xxx  is the standard antidote for methemoglobinemia.  xxxd2610xxx  acts rapidly, reversing methemoglobinemia within 30 minutes of
administration. within red blood cells, nadphmethemoglobin reductase reduces  xxxd2610xxx 
to leukomethylene blue, which then nonenzymatically donates an electron to methemoglobin, reducing the heme molecule (fig 2) [210]. methylene
blue is regenerated in this reaction and is then
acted on again by nadph- methemoglobin reductase. this reaction depends on production of
nadph and may have limited effectiveness in
patients deficient in  xxxg825xxx  (g6pd), a key enzyme in the nadphgenerative monophosphate shunt [211].
the use of  xxxd2610xxx  should be based on the
clinical appearance of the patient.  xxxd2610xxx  is
typically recommended for methemoglobinemia
levels of 20% or greater; however, some individuals
may tolerate levels of 40% or higher. treatment at
lower methemoglobin levels should be initiated in
patients with symptoms of chest pain, anxiety, or
tachycardia or with a history of cardiac, pulmonary,
or cns disease [210].  xxxd2610xxx  is dosed at 1 to
2 mg/kg iv over 5 minutes and may be repeated at
1 mg/kg iv if there is no improvement after 30 minutes [209]. pulse oximetry readings are inaccurate in
methemoglobin-poisoned patients and will plummet
even further following  xxxd2610xxx  administration. certain methemoglobin-producing agents, such
as dapsone, may typically require repeat dosing of
 xxxd2610xxx  because of its prolonged half-life and
methemoglobin-inducing metabolites [212]. in doses
higher than 7 mg/kg or in g6pd individuals,  xxxd2610xxx  can induce hemolysis [213]. treatment with
exchange transfusions may be warranted in these
unusual circumstances. intravenous infusion can be
irritating to the blood vessel, and extravasation of
 xxxd2610xxx  can lead to local tissue damage [210].

snake envenomations
an estimated 8000 snake envenomations occur in
the united states each year. the pit vipers (family
viperidae), including rattlesnakes (crotalidae), cottonmouths (water moccasins), and copperheads
(agkistrodons) account for the vast majority of bites
(95%) and occur in all states with the exception of
maine, alaska, and hawaii [214]. effects of envenomation are divided into 4 categories: (1) local
effects such as pain, swelling, ecchymoses, blistering, and tissue necrosis; (2) hematoxic effects
including thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia,
and hypoprothrombinemia; (3) neurotoxic effects
including paresthesias and fasciculations; and (4)
anaphylaxis, or the rare occurrence of immediate
cardiovascular collapse secondary to presumed
intravascular venom release [215].
despite tremendous amounts of fear surrounding
snake envenomations, death is a very rare occurrence in the united states, with an estimated 5-15
fatal bites occurring each year [216]. rattlesnake
envenomations are generally considered capable of
producing more severe symptoms than cottonmouths and copperheads [217]. antivenoms for the
neurotoxic eastern coral snake and exotic nonnative species are not typically available to most hospitals, and immediate contact with a poison control
center is recommended to locate these products
when necessary. venom is not always injected into
a victim every time a rattlesnake bite occurs.
approximately 20% of bites are “dry bites” in which
no venom is injected into the victim and symptoms
do not occur [218]. these cases require no therapy
other than typical wound care. individuals showing
no evidence of venom effects after 12 hours of
observation are unlikely to develop any subsequent
toxicity, with the exception of those sustaining bites
from the mojave rattlesnake, in which case local
symptoms may be minimal and neurological features may be delayed up to 24 hours from the time
of envenomation [219].

crotalinae polyvalent
immune fab (crofab®)
crofab® is the only currently manufactured snake
antivenom in the united states. this ovine-derived
antivenom is prepared by purifying igg antibody
fragments from sheep inoculated with venom from
the cottonmouth, eastern and western diamondback,
and mojave rattlesnake. the similarity among venom
components of pit vipers allows for cross-reactivity
and neutralization of venom from other north

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

271

betten et al

american species. the elimination of the antigenic
“fc” portion of the igg molecule from the purified
sheep sera with papain leaves a specific fab fragment antivenom and creates a less immunogenic
product. this results in a lower incidence of both
immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions.
crofab® is indicated to treat any local or systemic
signs of envenomation such as pain, swelling, fasciculation, paresthesias, or measured hematologic
abnormalities such as thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinoginemia, or prothrombin time elevations. initial
dosing consists of 4 to 8 vials depending on symptom severity. additional antivenom therapy after this
initial dosing should continue without delay until
swelling progression is halted and pain subsides.
hematological and neurological abnormalities may
be less responsive to antivenom administration especially if administered more than 24 hours after the
envenomation. laboratory evidence of coagulopathy
may persist for several days after the bite and become
refractory to further antivenom administration.
recurrence of symptoms following initial control
with fab antivenom may occur hours to days later
and may require the administration of additional
antivenom [220]. consideration of repeated 2-vial
dosing every 6 hours for 3 additional doses is recommended by the manufacturer to prevent these
recurrent effects; however, the benefit of these prophylactic doses has not been well studied. children
will require antivenom doses equal to those of
adults because total venom inoculation (amount
requiring antivenom neutralization) is independent
of patient size or weight. each vial of crofab®
should be reconstituted with 10 ml of sterile water
and mixed by continuous gentle swirling. this
should be further diluted in 250 ml of 0.9% normal
saline and administered within 4 hours. the initial
dose should proceed slowly over the first 10 minutes at a 25 to 50 ml/h rate with careful observation for any allergic reaction. if no such reaction
occurs, the infusion rate may be increased to the
full 250 ml/h rate until completion.

and western diamondback rattlesnakes, the tropical rattlesnake, and fer-de-lance, the latter 2 being
found in central and south america. because the
product is an equine-derived antivenom consisting
of both the fc and fab portions of the immunoglobulin, the risk of both immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions is higher. treatment with h1and h2-blocking agents, corticosteroids, and subcutaneous or intravenous epinephrine may be needed
if immediate allergic reactions occur and should be
readily available at the time of antivenom initiation.
the routine use of skin testing prior to administration of the equine igg antivenom is advocated by
some authors; however, false-positive and falsenegative skin tests are common [221]. a review of
26 patients treated with equine antivenom therapy
found 23% developing immediate hypersensitivity
reactions, with delayed reactions (serum sickness)
in 50% [222]. because of this high rate of adverse
reactions, crotaline fab antivenom appears to be a
safer alternative for the treatment of all us pit viper
envenomations.

conclusion
the proper use of antidotes in the intensive care setting, when combined with aggressive supportive
care, may significantly reduce the morbidity and
mortality associated with many severe poisonings.
readily available access to these antidotes, a basic
understanding of the indications for their usage, and
knowledge of the potential for adverse effects will
allow the intensivist to appropriately implement
early treatment for many common intentional and
unintentional poisonings. many poisonings are rarely
seen even in academic intensive care units, and
therefore the intensivist is encouraged to consult
with the experienced regional medical toxicologist.

references
1.

crotaline polyvalent antivenom
(antivenin crotalidae polyvalent®)

2.
3.

antivenin crotalidae polyvalent® is an equinederived antivenom that has been used in the united
states since 1954. production of this antivenom has
largely stopped, and its availability is only sporadic
from reserve supplies. this product consists of
whole serum immunoglobulins (igg) derived from
horses immunized with venom from the eastern

272

4.

5.

wax pm. analeptic use in clinical toxicology. a historical
appraisal. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1997;35:203-209.
howland ma, weisman r, sauter d, goldfrank gl.
nonavailability of poison antidotes. n engl j med.
1986;314:927-928.
dart rc, stark y, fulton b, koziol-mclain j, lowenstein sr.
insufficient stocking of poisoning antidotes in hospital
emergency departments. jama. 1996;276:1508-1510.
dart rc, goldfrank lr, chyka pa, et al. combined evidence-based literature analysis and consensus guidelines
for stocking of emergency antidotes in the united states.
ann emerg med. 2000;36:126-132.
kalia k, flora sj. strategies for safe and effective therapeutic measures for chronic arsenic and lead poisoning. j
occup health. 2005;47:1-21.

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

6. kosnett mj. unanswered questions in metal chelation. j
toxicol clin toxicol. 1992;30:529-547.
7. muckter h. are we ready to replace dimercaprol (bal) as
an arsenic antidote. hum exp toxicol. 1997;16:460-465.
8. american academy of pediatrics, committee on drugs:
treatment guidelines for lead exposure in children.
pediatrics. 1995;96:155-160.
9. porru s, alessio l. the use of chelating agents in occupational lead poisoning. occup med. 1996;46:41-48.
10. lee wm. acetaminophen and the u.s. acute liver failure
study group: lowering the risks of hepatic failure.
hepatology. 2004;40:6-9.
11. ostapowicz g, fontana rj, schiodt fv et al. results of a
prospective study of acute liver failure at 17 tertiary care
centers in the united states. ann intern med. 2002;137:
947-954.
12. harrison pm, keays r, bray gp, alexander gj, williams r.
improved outcome of paracetamol-induced fulminant
hepatic failure by late administration of acetylcysteine.
lancet. 1990;335:1572-1573.
13. jones al. mechanism of action of and value of  xxxd68xxx  in the treatment of early and late acetaminophen poisoning: a critical review. j tox clin toxicol. 1998;36:277-285.
14. smilkstein mj, knapp gl, kulig kw, rumack bh. efficacy
of oral  xxxd68xxx  in the treatment of acetaminophen
overdose. analysis of the national multicenter study (1976
to 1985). n engl j med. 1988;319:1557-1562.
15. yip l, dart rc. a 20-hour treatment for acute acetaminophen overdose. n engl j med. 2003;348:2471-2472.
16. woo of, mueller pd, olson kr, anderson ib, kim sy.
shorter duration of oral  xxxd68xxx  therapy for acetaminophen overdose. ann emerg med. 2000;35:363-368.
17. tsai cl, change wt, went ti. fang cc, walson pd. a
patient-tailored  xxxd68xxx  protocol for acute acetaminophen intoxication. clin ther. 2005;27:336-341.
18. prescott lf, illingworth rn, critchley ja, et al. intravenous
 xxxd68xxx : the treatment of choice for paracetamol
poisoning. br med j. 1979;2:1097-1100.
19. smilkstein mj, bronstein ac, linden c, augenstein wl,
kulig kw, rumack bh. acetaminophen overdose: a 48hour intravenous  xxxd68xxx  treatment protocol. ann
emerg med. 1991;20:1058-1063.
20. buckley na, whyte im, o’connell dl, dawson ah. oral or
intravenous  xxxd68xxx : which is the treatment of
choice for acetaminophen (paracetamol) poisoning. j
toxicol clin toxicol. 1999;37:759-767.
21. daly ff, o’malley gf, heard k, bogdan gm, dart rc.
prospective evaluation of repeated supratherapeutic acetaminophen (paracetamol) ingestion. ann emerg med.
2004;44: 393-398.
22. peterson rg, rumack bh. age as a variable in acetaminophen overdose. arch intern med. 1981;141:390-393.
23. rivera-penera t, gugig r, davis j, et al. outcome of acetaminophen overdose in pediatric patients and factors contributing to hepatotoxicity. j pediatr. 1997;130:300-304.
24. kerr f, dawson a, whyte im, et al. the australasian
clinical toxicology investigators collaboration randomized
trial of different loading infusion rates of  xxxd68xxx .
ann emerg med. 2005;45:402-408.
25. appelboam av, dargan pi, knighton j. fatal anaphylactoid
reaction to  xxxd68xxx : caution in patients with
asthma. emerg med j. 2002;19:594-595.
26. bailey b, blais r, letarte a. status epilepticus after a massive intravenous  xxxd68xxx  overdose leading to
intracranial hypertension and death. ann emerg med.
2004;44:401-406.
27. brent j, mcmartin k, phillips s, aaron c, kulig k.
 xxxd2148xxx  for the treatment of methanol poisoning. n
engl j med. 2001;344:424-429.
28. barceloux dg, bond gr, krenzelok ep, cooper h, vale ja.
american academy of clinical toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol poisoning. j toxicol clin
toxicol. 2002;40:415-446.

29. bekka r, borron sw, astier a, sandouk p, bismuth c, baud
fj. treatment of methanol and isopropanol poisoning with
intravenous  xxxd2148xxx . j toxicol clin toxicol. 2001;39:
59-67.
30. barceloux dg, krenzelok ep, olson k, watson w.
american academy of clinical toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. j
toxicol clin toxicol. 1999;37:537-560.
31. baud fj, bismuth c, garnier r, et al.  xxxd2148xxx  may
be an alternative to ethanol therapy for ethylene glycol
intoxication in man. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1986-1987;24:
463-483.
32. borron sw, megarbane b, baud fj.  xxxd2148xxx  in treatment of uncomplicated ethylene glycol poisoning. lancet.
1999; 354:831.
33. wacker we, haynes h, druyan r, fisher w, coleman je.
treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning with  xxxd102xxx .
jama. 1965;194:1231-1233.
34. jacobsen d, sebastian cs, blomstrand r, mcmartin ke. 4methylpyrazole: a controlled study of safety in healthy
human subjects after single, ascending doses. alcohol clin
exp res. 1988;12:516-522.
35. brent j, mcmartin k, phillip s, et al.  xxxd2148xxx  for the
treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. n engl j med. 1999;
340: 832-838.
36. jacobsen d, mcmartin ke. antidotes for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1997;35: 127-143.
37. patel rj, saylor t, williams sr, clark rf. prevalence of
autonomic signs and symptoms in antimuscarinic drug poisonings. j emerg med. 2004;26:89-94.
38. heiser jf, gillin jc. the reversal of anticholinergic druginduced delirium and coma with physostigmine. am j
psychiatry. 1971;127:1050-1054.
39. heiser jf, wilbert de. reversal of delirium induced by tricyclic antidepressant drugs with physostigmine. am j
psychiatry. 1974;131:1275-1277.
40. granacher rp, baldessarini rj. physostigmine. its use in
acute anticholinergic syndrome with antidepressant and
antiparkinsonian drugs. arch gen psych. 1975;32:375-380.
41. nilsson e. physostigmine treatment in various drug-induced
intoxications. ann clin res. 1982;14: 165-172.
42. taylor, p. anticholinesterase agents. in: hardman jg,
limbird le, gilman ag, eds. goodman and gilman’s the
pharmacological basis of therapeutics. 10th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill; 2001:175-192.
43. suchard jr. assessing physostigmine’s contraindication in
antidepressant ingestions. j emerg med. 2003;25:185-191.
44. pentel p, peterson cd. asystole complicating physostigmine treatment of tricyclic antidepressant overdose. ann
emerg med. 1980;9:588-590.
45. tong tg, benowitz nl, becker ce. tricyclic antidepressant
overdose. dicp. 1976;10:712-713.
46. newton rw.  xxxd2940xxx  in the treatment of
tricyclic antidepressant overdose. jama. 1975;231:941-943.
47. vance ma, ross sm, millington wr, blumberg jb. potentiation of tricyclic antidepressant toxicity by physostigmine
in mice. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1977;11:413-421.
48. aquilonius sm, hedstrand u. the use of physostigmine as
an antidote in tricyclic anti-depressant intoxication. acta
anesthesiol scand. 1978;22:40-45.
49. schneir ab, offerman sr, ly bt, et al. complications of
diagnostic physostigmine administration to emergency
department patients. ann emerg med. 2003;42:14-19.
50. howland ma. physostigmine. in: goldfrank lr,
flomenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs,
nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th
ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:544-547.
51. pasternak gw. pharmacological mechanisms of opioid
analgesics. clin neuropharmacol. 1993; 16:1-18.
52. nelson ls. opioids. in: goldfrank lr, flomenbaum ne,
lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:924-928.

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

273

betten et al

53. sporer ka, dorn e. heroin-related noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. chest. 2001;120:1628-1632.
54. sterrett c, brownfield j, korn cs, hollinger m, henderson
so. patterns of presentation in heroin overdose resulting in
pulmonary edema. am j emerg med. 2003;22:32-34.
55. chamberlain jm, klein bl. a comprehensive review of
naloxone for the emergency physician. am j emerg med.
1994;12: 650-660.
56. barton ed, ramos j, colwell c, benson j, baily j, dunn w.
intranasal administration of naloxone by paramedics.
prehosp emerg care. 2002;6:54-58.
57. goldfrank l, weisman rs, errick jk, lo mw. a dosing
nomogram for continuous infusion intravenous naloxone.
ann emerg med. 1986;15:566-570.
58. sporer ka. acute heroin overdose. ann int med. 1999;130:
584-590.
59. osterwalder jj. naloxone—for intoxications with intravenous heroin and heroin mixtures—harmless or hazardous? a prospective clinical study. j toxicol clin toxicol.
1996;34:409-416.
60. prough ds, roy r, bumgarner j, shannon g. acute pulmonary edema in healthy teenagers following conservative
doses of intravenous naloxone. anesthesiology. 1984;60:
485-486.
61. gonzalez jp, brogden rn. naltrexone. a review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic efficacy in the management of opioid dependence.
drugs. 1988;35:192-213.
62. greenblatt dj, allen md, noel bj, shader ri. acute overdosage with benzodiazepine derivatives. clin pharmacol
ther. 1977;21:497-514.
63. rodrigo cr. flumazenil reverses paradoxical reaction with
midazolam. anesth prog. 1991;38:65-68.
64. haefely w. antagonists of benzodiazepines. encephale.
1983;9:143-150.
65. paul sm, marangos pj, skolnick p. the benzodiazepinegaba-chloride ionophore receptor complex: common site
of minor tranquilizer action. biol psych. 1981;16:213-229.
66. hunkeler w, mohler h, pieri l, et al. selective antagonists
of benzodiazepines. nature. 1981;290:514-516.
67. scollo-lavizzari g. first clinical investigation of the benzodiazepine antagonist ro 15-1788 in comatose patients. eur
 xxxd122xxx . 1983;22:7-11.
68. geller e, niv d, rudick v, vidne b. the use of ro 15-1788:
a benzodiazepine antagonist in the diagnosis and treatment
of benzodiazepine overdose. anesthesiology. 1984;6:135.
69. naef mm, forster a, nahory a, danjou p. flumazenil antagonizes the sedative action of zolpidem, a new imidazopyridine hypnotic. anesthesiology. 1989;71(3a):a297.
70. whitwam jg, amrein r. pharmacology of flumazenil. acta
anesthesiol scand suppl. 1995;108:3-14.
71. darragh a, lambe r, brick i, downie ww. reversal of benzodiazepine-induced sedation by intravenous ro 15-1788.
lancet. 1981;2(8254):1042.
72. weinbroum a, rudick v, sorkine p, et al. use of flumazenil
in the treatment of drug overdose: a double-blind and open
clinical study in 110 patients. crit care med. 1996;24:199-206.
73. weinbroum a, halpern p, geller e. the use of flumazenil
in the management of acute drug poisoning- a review.
intensive care med. 1991;17:s32-s38.
74. spivey wh. flumazenil and seizures: analysis of 43 cases.
clin ther. 1992;14:292-305.
75. lheureux p, vranckx m, leduc d, askenasi r. flumazenil in
mixed benzodiazepine/ tricyclic antidepressant overdose: a
placebo-controlled study in the dog. am j emerg med.
1992;10:184-188.
76. wax pm. sodium bicarbonate. in: goldfrank lr, flowenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls,
eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new
york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:519-527.
77. sasyniuk bi, jhamandas v. mechanism of reversal of toxic
effects of amitriptyline on cardiac purkinje fibers by sodium
bicarbonate. j pharmacol exp ther. 1984;231:387-394.

274

78. sasyniuk bi, jhamandas v. experimental amitriptyline
intoxication: treatment of cardiac toxicity with sodium
bicarbonate. ann emerg med. 1986;15:1052-1059.
79. kingston me. hyperventilation in tricyclic antidepressant
poisoning. crit care med. 1979;7:550-551.
80. mccabe jl, menegazzi jj, cobaugh dj, auble te. recovery
from severe cyclic antidepressant overdose with hypertonic
saline/dextran in a swine model. acad emerg med. 1994;1:
111-115.
81. mccabe jl, cobaugh dj, menegazzi mm, fata j. experimental
tricyclic antidepressant toxicity: a randomized, controlled
comparison of hypertonic saline solution, sodium bicarbonate, and hyperventilation. ann emerg med. 1998;32:329-333.
82. boehnert mt, loverjoy fh. value of the qrs duration versus the serum drug level in predicting seizures and ventricular arrhythmias after an acute overdose of tricyclic
antidepressants. n engl j med. 1985;313:474-479.
83. liebelt el. targeted management strategies for cardiovascular toxicity from tricyclic antidepressant overdose: the
pivotal role for alkalinization and sodium loading. pediatr
emerg care. 1998;14:293-298.
84. hoffman jr, mcelroy cr. bicarbonate therapy for dysrhythmia and hypotension in tricyclic antidepressant overdose. west j med. 1981;134:60-64.
85. nelson ty, gaines kl, rajan a, berg m, boyd ae.
increased cytosolic calcium: a signal for sulfonylurea-stimulated insulin release from beta cells. j biol chem.
1987;262:2608-2612.
86. oberwetter jm, boyd ae. high k+ rapidly stimulates ca2+dependent phosphorylation of three proteins concomitant
with insulin secretion from hit cells. diabetes. 1987;36:
864-871.
87. gromada j, dissing s, kofod h, frokjaer-jensen j. effects of
the hypoglycaemic drugs  xxxd3098xxx  and  xxxd2215xxx  on
atp-sensitive potassium-channels and cytosolic calcium
levels in beta tc3 cells and rat pancreatic beta cells.
diabetologia. 1995;38:1025-1032.
88. johnson sf, schade ds, peake gt. chlorpropamideinduced hypoglycemia: successful treatment with  xxxd1868xxx . am j med. 1977;63:799-804.
89. spiller ha, villalobos d, krenzelok ep, et al. prospective
multicenter study of sulfonylurea ingestion in children. j
pediatr. 1997;131:141-146.
90. spiller ha. management of antidiabetic medications in
overdose. drug saf. 1998;19:411-424.
91. kim s. antidiabetic agents. in: olson kr, ed. poisoning &
drug overdose. 4th ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill;
2004:93-96.
92. bosse gm. antidiabetic and hypoglycemic agents. in:
goldfrank lr, flowenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma,
hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:593-605.
93. nakayama s, hirose t, watada h, tanaka y, kawamori r.
hypoglycemia following a  xxxd2702xxx  overdose in a suicide attempt. diabetes care. 2005;28:227-228.
94. mark m, grell w. hypoglycemic effects of the novel antidiabetic agent  xxxd3098xxx  in rats and dogs. br j pharmacol.
1997;121:1597-1604.
95. krentz aj, boyle pj, macdonald lm, schade ds. octreotide:
a long-acting inhibitor of endogenous hormone secretion
for human metabolic investigations. metabolism. 1994;43:
24-31.
96. boyle pj, justice k, krentz aj, nagy rj, schade ds.
octreotide reverses hyperinsulinemia and prevents hypoglycemia induced by sulfonylurea overdose. j clin
endocrinol metab. 1993;76:752-756.
97. krentz aj, boyle pj, justice km, wright ad, schade ds.
successful treatment of severe refractory sulfonylureainduced hypoglycemia with octreotide. diabetes care.
1993; 16:184-186.
98. mclaughlin sa, crandall cs, mckinney pe. octreotide: an
antidote for sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia. ann
emerg med. 2000;36:133-138.

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

99. spiller ha. management of sulfonylurea ingestion. pediatr
emerg care. 1999;15:227-230.
100. koch-weser j.  xxxd1868xxx . n engl j med. 1976;294:1271-1273.
101. howland ma. octreotide. in: goldfrank lr, flowenbaum
ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:611-613.
102. kearney te. octreotide. in: olson kr, ed. poisoning &
drug overdose. 4th ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill;
2004:480-481.
103. katz md, erstad bl. octreotide, a new somatostatin analogue. clin pharm. 1989;8:255-273.
104. lheureux p, penaloza a, gris m. pyridoxine in clinical toxicology: a review. eur j emerg med. 2005;12:78-85.
105. katz be, carver mw. acute poisoning with isoniazid
treated by exchange transfusion. pediatrics. 1956;18:72-76.
106. chin l, sievers ml, herrier he, picchioni al. convulsions
as the etiology of lactic acidosis in acute isoniazid toxicity
in dogs. toxicol appl pharmacol. 1979;49:377-384.
107. boyer ew. antituberculous agents. in: goldfrank lr,
flowenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs,
nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th
ed. new york, ny: mcgraw hill; 2002:655-670.
108. de’ clari f. the paradoxical anticonvulsive and awakening
effect of high-dose pyridoxine treatment for isoniazid
intoxication. arch intern med. 1992;152:2346-2347.
109. brent j, kulig k, rumack bh. in reply. arch intern med.
1992;152:2347.
110. schaumburg h, kaplan j, windebank a, et al. sensory
neuropathy from pyridoxine abuse. a new megavitamin
syndrome. n engl j med. 1983;309:445-448.
111. zempleni j, kubler w. the utilization of intravenously
infused pyridoxine in humans. clin chim acta.
1994;229:27-36.
112. gilhotra r, malik sk, singh s, sharma bk. acute isoniazid
toxicity—report of 2 cases and review of literature. int j
clin pharmacol ther toxicol. 1987;25:259-261.
113. brent j, vo n, kulig k, rumack bh. reversal of prolonged
isoniazid-induced coma by pyridoxine. arch intern med.
1990;150:1751-1753.
114. temmerman w, dhondt a, vandewoude k. acute isoniazid intoxication: seizures, acidosis, and coma. acta clin
belg. 1999;54:211-216.
115. howland ma. pyridoxine. in: goldfrank lr, flowenbaum
ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw hill; 2002:667-670.
116. salkind ar, hewitt cc. coma from long-term overingestion of isoniazid. arch intern med. 1997;157:2518-2520.
117. santucci ka, shah br, linakis jg. acute isoniazid exposures and antidote availability. pediatr emerg care. 1999;
15:99-101.
118. chin l, sievers ml, laird he, herrier rn, picchioni al.
evaluation of diazepam and pyridoxine as antidotes to
isoniazid intoxication in rats and dogs. toxicol appl
pharmacol. 1978;45:713-722.
119. albin rl, albers jw, greenberg hs, et al. acute sensory
neuropathy-neuronopathy from pyridoxine overdose.
neurology. 1987;37:1729-1732.
120. willhite cc, smith rp. the role of cyanide liberation in the
acute toxicity of aliphatic nitriles. toxicol appl pharmacol.
1981;59:589-602.
121. kurt tl, day lc, reed wg, et al. cyanide poisoning from
glue-on nail remover. am j emerg med. 1991;9:271-272.
122. bismuth c, baud fj, djeghout h, astier a, aubriot d.
cyanide poisoning from propionitrile exposure. j emerg
med. 1987;5:191-195.
123. cyanide antidote [package insert]. decatur, ill: taylor
pharmaceuticals/akorn inc; 1998.
124. hall ah, rumack bh. clinical toxicology of cyanide. ann
emerg med. 1986;15:1067-1074.
125. chen kk, rose cl. nitrite and thiosulfate therapy in
cyanide poisoning. j am med assoc. 1952;149:113-119.

126. chen kk, rose cl, clowes gha.  xxxd2610xxx , nitrites,
and sodium thiosulfate against cyanide poisoning. proc
soc exp biol med. 1933;31:250-252.
127. way jl, sylvester d, morgan rl, et al. recent perspectives
on the toxicodynamic basis of cyanide antagonism.
fundam appl toxicol. 1984;4:s231-239.
128. hall ah, kulig kw, rumack bh. suspected cyanide poisoning in smoke inhalation: complications of sodium
nitrite therapy. j toxicol clin exp. 1989;9:3-9.
129. becker ce. the role of cyanide in fires. vet hum toxicol.
1985;27:487-490.
130. kirk ma, gerace r, kulig kw. cyanide and methemoglobin kinetics in smoke inhalation victims treated with the
cyanide antidote kit. ann emerg med. 1993;22:1413-1418.
131. johnson ws, hall ah, rumack bh. cyanide poisoning
successfully treated without therapeutic methemoglobin
levels. am j emerg med. 1989;7:437-440.
132. rindone jp, sloane ep. cyanide toxicity from sodium nitroprusside: risks and management. ann pharmacother.
1992; 26:515-519.
133. hall a, rumack bh.  xxxd2300xxx /sodium thiosulfate as a cyanide antidote. j emerg med. 1987;5:115-121.
134. litovitz tl, larkin rf, myers ra. cyanide poisoning treated
with hyperbaric oxygen. am j emerg med. 1983;1:94-101.
135. burrows ge, way jl. cyanide intoxication in sheep: the
therapeutic value of oxygen or cobalt. am j vet res. 1977;
38: 223-227.
136. clark rf. insecticides: organic phosphorus compounds
and carbamates. in: goldfrank lr, flowenbaum ne,
lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw hill; 2002:1346-1360.
137. karalliedde l, senanayake n. organophosphorus insecticide poisoning. br j anaesth. 1989;63:736-750.
138. marrs tc. organophosphate poisoning. pharmacol ther.
1993;58:51-66.
139. wilson ib, hatch ma, ginsburg s. carbamylation of
acetylcholinesterase. j biol chem. 1960;235:2312-2315.
140. newmark j. therapy for nerve agent poisoning. arch
 xxxd122xxx . 2004;61:649-652.
141. marrs tc. diazepam in the treatment of organophosphorus ester pesticide poisoning. toxicol rev. 2003;22:75-81.
142. mcdonough jh jr, mcmonagle j, copeland t, zoeffel d,
shih tm. comparative evaluation of benzodiazepines for
control of soman-induced seizures. arch toxicol. 1999;73:
473-478.
143. mcdonough jh, zoeffel ld, mcmonagle j, copeland tl,
smith cd, shih tm. anticonvulsant treatment of nerve
agent seizures: anticholinergics versus diazepam in
soman-intoxicated guinea pigs. epilepsy res. 2000;38:1-14.
144. finkelstein y, taitelman u, biegon a. cns involvement in
acute organophosphate poisoning: specific pattern of toxicity, clinical correlates, and antidotal treatment. ital j
 xxxd122xxx  sci. 1988;9:437-446.
145. gerkin r, curry s. persistently elevated plasma insecticide
levels in severe methylparathion poisoning. vet hum
toxicol. 1987;29:483-484.
146. robenshtok e, luria s, tashma z, hourvitz a. adverse
reaction to atropine and the treatment of organophosphate intoxication. isr med assoc j. 2002;4:535-539.
147. rotenberg js, newmark j. nerve agent attacks on
children: diagnosis and management. pediatrics.
2003;112:648-658.
148. kales sn, christiani dc. acute chemical emergencies. n
engl j med. 2004;350:800-808.
149. eddleston m, szinicz l, eyer p, buckley n. oximes in
acute organophosphorus pesticide poisoning: a systematic
review of clinical trials. qjm. 2002;95:275-283.
150. eyer p. the role of oximes in the management of
organophosphorus pesticide poisoning. toxicol rev.
2003;22:165-190.
151. schexnayder s, james lp, kearns gl, farrar hc. the pharmacokinetics of continuous infusion pralidoxime in

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

275

betten et al

152.
153.
154.
155.
156.

157.
158.
159.
160.

161.

162.

163.
164.
165.
166.
167.
168.
169.
170.

171.
172.
173.

174.
175.

276

children with organophosphate poisoning. j toxicol clin
toxicol. 1998;36:549-555.
smith tw, haber e, yeatman l, butler vp jr. reversal of
advanced digoxin intoxication with fab fragments of
digoxin-specific antibodies. n engl j med. 1976;294:797-800.
fisch c. digitalis intoxication. jama. 1971;216:1770-1773.
rosen mr. cellular electrophysiology of digitalis toxicity.
j am coll cardiol. 1985;5(5 suppl a):22a-34a.
hollman a. plants and cardiac glycosides. br heart j.
1985; 54:258-261.
antman em, wenger tl, butler vp, haber e, smith tw.
treatment of 150 cases of life-threatening digitalis intoxication with digoxin-specific fab antibody fragments: final report
of a multi-center study. circulation. 1990;81: 1744-1752.
ordog gj, benaron s, bhasin v, wasserberger j,
balasubramanium s. serum digoxin levels and mortality in
5100 patients. ann emerg med. 1987;16:32-39.
flanagan rj, jones al. fab antibody fragments: some applications in clinical toxicology. drug saf. 2004;27:1115-1133.
allen nm, dunham gd. treatment of digitalis intoxication
with emphasis on the clinical use of digoxin immune fab.
dicp. 1990;24:991-998.
smith tw, butler vp jr, haber e, et al. treatment of lifethreatening digitalis intoxication with digoxin-specific fab
antibody fragments: experience in 26 cases. n engl j med.
1982;307:1357-1362.
smolarz a, roesch e, lenz e, neubert h, abshagen p.
digoxin specific antibody (fab) fragments in 34 cases of
severe digitalis intoxication. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1985;
23:327-340.
hickey ar, wenger tl, carpenter vp, et al. digoxin
immune fab therapy in the management of digitalis intoxication: safety and efficacy results of an observational surveillance study. j am coll cardiol. 1991;17:590-598.
kne t, brokaw m, wax p. fatality from calcium chloride
in a chronic digoxin toxic patient. j toxicol clin toxicol.
1997; 5:505.
clark rf, selden bs, curry sc. digoxin-specific fab fragments in the treatment of oleander toxicity in a canine
model. ann emerg med. 1991;20:1073-1077.
shumaik gm, wu aw, ping ac. oleander poisoning: treatment with digoxin-specific fab antibody fragments. ann
emerg med. 1988;17:732-735.
smith tw. review of clinical experience with digoxin
immune fab (ovine). am j emerg med. 1991;9(2 suppl 1):1-6.
kirkpatrick ch. allergic histories and reactions of patients
treated with digoxin immune fab (ovine) antibody. am j
emerg med. 1991;9(2 suppl 1):7-10.
erdman ar. glucagon. in dart rc, caravati em, mcguigan
ma, et al, eds. medical toxicology. 3rd ed. philadelphia,
pa: lippincott williams & wilkins, 2004:210-213.
bailey b. glucagon in b-blocker and calcium channel
blocker overdoses: a systemic review. j toxicol clin
toxicol 2003;41:595-602.
de roos f. calcium channel blockers. in goldfrank lr,
flomenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs,
nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th
ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:762-774.
love jn, sachdeva dk, bessman es, curtis la, howell jm.
a potential role for glucagon in the treatment of druginduced symptomatic bradycardia. chest. 1998;114:323-326.
salhanick sd, shannon mw. management of calcium
channel antagonist overdose. drug saf. 2003;26:65-79.
howland ma. calcium. in goldfrank lr, flomenbaum ne,
lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelso ls, ed.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill, 2002:1341-1345.
yuan th, kerns wp, tomaszewski ca, ford md, kline ja.
insulin-glucose as adjunctive therapy for severe calcium
channel antagonist poisoning. clin toxicol. 1999;37:463-474.
kline ja, leonova e, raymond rm. beneficial myocardial
metabolic effects of insulin during verapamil toxicity in the
anesthetized canine. crit care med. 1995;23:1251-1263.

176. boyer we, shannon m. treatment of calcium-channelblocker intoxication with insulin infusion. n engl j med.
2001;344:1721-1722.
177. marques i, gomes e, de oliveira j. treatment of calcium
channel blocker intoxication with insulin infusion: case
report and literature review. resuscitation. 2003;57:211-213.
178. mcguigan ma. acute iron poisoning. pediatr ann.
1996;25:33-38.
179. lipschitz d, dugard j, simon m, bothwell th, charlton
rw. the site of action of  xxxd1824xxx . br j haematol.
1971;20:395-404.
180. perrone j. iron. in goldfrank lr, flomenbaum ne, lewin
na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, ed.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny. mcgraw-hill; 2002:548-557.
181. ling lj, hornfeldt cs, winter jp. absorption of iron after
experimental overdose of chewable vitamins. am j emerg
med. 1991;9:24-26.
182. cheney k, gumbiner c, benson b, tenenbein m. survival
after a severe iron poisoning treated with intermittent
infusions of  xxxd1824xxx . j toxicol clin toxicol.
1995;33:61-66.
183. tenenbein m, kowalski s, sienko a, bowden dh,
adamson iy. pulmonary toxic effects of continuous desfferioxamine administration in acute iron poisoning.
lancet. 1992;339:699-701.
184. mofenson hc, caraccio tr, sharieff n. iron sepsis:
yersinia enterocolitica septicemia possibly caused by an
overdose of iron. n engl j med. 1987;316:1092-1093.
185. mills kc, curry sc. acute iron poisoning. emerg med clin
north am. 1994;12:397-413.
186. helfer re, rodgerson do. the effect of  xxxd1824xxx  on
the determination of serum iron and iron-binding capacity. j pediatr. 1966;68:804-806.
187. curry sc, bond gr, raschke r, tellez d, wiggins d. an
ovine model of maternal iron poisoning in pregnancy.
ann emerg med. 1990;19:632-638.
188. tran t, wax jr, philput c, steinfeld jd, ingardia cj.
intentional iron overdose in pregnancy-management and
outcome. j emerg med. 2000;18:225-228.
189. furie b, furie bc. molecular and cellular biology of blood
coagulation. n engl j med. 1992;326:800-806
190. howland ma. protamine. in goldfrank lr, flomenbaum
ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, ed.
goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:651-654.
191. sutcliffe fa, macnicoll ad, gibson gg. aspects of anticoagulant action: a review of the pharmacology, metabolism
and toxicology of warfarin and congeners. drug metabol
drug interact. 1987;5:225-271.
192. dowd p, ham sw, naganathan s, et al. the mechanism of
action of  xxxd3522xxx . annu rev nutr. 1995;15:419-440.
193. vermeer c, hamulyak k. pathophysiology of  xxxd3522xxx 
deficiency and oral anticoagulants. thromb haemost.
1991;66: 153-159.
194. freedman md, olatidoye ag. clinically significant drug
interactions with the oral anticoagulants. drug saf.
1994;10: 381-394.
195. raj g, kumar r, mckinney p. time course or reversal of
anticoagulant effect of warfarin y intravenous and subcutaneous  xxxd2941xxx . arch intern med. 1999;159:2721-2724.
196. brophy m, fiore l, deykin d. low-dose  xxxd3522xxx  therapy in excessively anticoagulated patients: a dose finding
study. j thrombosis thrombolysis. 1997;4:289-292.
197. park bk, scott ak, wilson ac, et al. plasma disposition of
 xxxd3522xxx  in relation to anticoagulant poisoning. r j clin
pharmacol. 1984;18:655-661.
198. sutcliffe fa, macnicoll ad, gibson gg. aspects of anticoagulant action: a review of the pharmacology, metabolism, and toxicology of warfarin and congeners. drug
metabol drug interact. 1987;5:225-271.
199. howland ma. vitamin k1. in goldfrank lr, flomenbaum
ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds.

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

antidote use

200.
201.

202.
203.
204.

205.
206.
207.
208.
209.
210.

goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th ed. new york,
ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:647-650.
ansell j, hirsh j, dalen j, et al. managing oral anticoagulant therapy. chest. 2001;119:22s-38s.
bruno gr, howland ma, mcmeeking a, hoffman rs.
long-acting anticoagulant overdose: brodifacoum kinetics
and optimal vitamin k1 dosing. ann emerg med. 2000;36:
262-267.
sheen s, spiller j. symptomatic rodifacoum ingestion
requiring high-dose  xxxd2941xxx  therapy. vet hum
toxicol. 1994;36:216-217.
smolinske sc, scherger dl, kearns ps, et al. superwarfarin
poisoning in children: a prospective study. pediatrics.
1989; 84:490-494.
ingels m, lai c, tai w, manning bh, rangan c, et al. a
prospective study of acute, unintentional, pediatric superwarfarin ingestions managed without decontamination.
ann emerg med. 2002;40:73-78.
arnon ss, schecter r, inglesby tv, et al. botulinum toxin
as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. jama. 2001;285:1059-1070.
tacket co, shandera wx, mann jm, hargrett nt, blake pa.
equine antitoxin use and other factors that predict outcome
in type a foodborne botulism. am j med. 1984;76:794-798.
robinson rf, nahata mc. management of botulism. ann
pharmacother. 2003;37:127-131.
black re, gunn ra. hypersensitivity reactions associated
with botulinal antitoxin. am j med. 1980;69:567-570.
wright ro, lewander wj, woolf ad. methemoglobinemia:
etiology, pharmacology, and clinical management. ann
emerg med. 1999;34:646-656.
howland ma.  xxxd2610xxx . in goldfrank lr,
flomenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma, hoffman rs,
nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic emergencies. 7th
ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:1450-1452.

211. rosen pj, johnson c, mcgehee wg, beutler e. failure of
 xxxd2610xxx  treatment in toxic methemoglobinemia.
ann intern med. 1971;76:83-86.
212. elonen e, neuvonen pj, halmekoski j, mattila mj. acute
dapsone intoxication: a case with prolonged symptoms.
clin toxicol. 1979;14:79-85.
213. kirsch i, cohen m. heinz body hemolytic anemia from the
use of  xxxd2610xxx  in neonates. j pediatr. 1980;96:
276-278.
214. roberts jr, otten ej. snake and other reptiles. in
goldfrank lr, flomenbaum ne, lewin na, howland ma,
hoffman rs, nelson ls, eds. goldfrank’s toxicologic
emergencies. 7th ed. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill; 2002:
1552-1572
215. davidson tm. intravenous rattlesnake envenomation.
west j med. 1988;148:45-47.
216. langley rl, morrow we. deaths resulting from animal
attacks in the united states. wild environ med. 1997;8: 8-16.
217. whitley re. conservative treatment of copperhead
snakebites without antivenom. j trauma. 1996;41:219-221.
218. kunkel db, curry sc, vance mv, ryan pj. reptile envenomations. j toxicol clin toxicol. 1983-1984;21:503-526.
219. jansen pw, perkin rm, vanstralen d. mojave rattlesnake
envenomation: prolonged neurotoxicity and rhabdomyolysis. ann emerg med. 1992;21:322-325.
220. boyer lv, seifert sa, cain js. recurrence phenomena after
immunoglobulin therapy for snake envenomations: part 2.
guidelines for clinical management with crotaline fab
antivenom. ann emerg med. 2001;37:196-210.
221. spaite d, dart r, sullivan fm. skin testing in cases of possible crotaline envenomations. ann emerg med. 1988;17:
105-106.
222. jurkovich gj, luterman a, mccullar k, ramenofsky ml,
curreri pw. complications of crotalideae antivenin therapy. j trauma. 1988;28:1032-1037.

journal of intensive care medicine 21(5); 2006
downloaded from jic.sagepub.com at brown university on december 17, 2012

277

