127

bioch~mica et biophysica acta, 1025 (1990) 127-134
elsevier
bbamem 74879

group iiia-metal hydroxides indirectly neutralize the voltage
sensor of the voltage-dependent mitochondrial channel,  xxxg2409xxx ,
by interacting with a dynamic binding site
da-wei zhang and marco colombini
laboratories of cell biology, department of zoology, university of maryland, college park, md (u.s.a.)
(received 30 october 1989)
(revised manuscript received 9 march 1990)

key words:  xxxd131xxx ;  xxxg2409xxx ; metal binding site; voltage dependence; channel; mitochondrion

the voltage-dependent, anion-selective mitochondrial channel,  xxxg2409xxx , undergoes two different conformational changes
from the open to a closed state under positive and negative applied electric fields. micromolar quantifies of aluminum
hydroxide and other metal trihydroxides have recently been shown to be able to inhibit this voltage-dependent closure
(dill et al. (1987) j. membr. biol. 99, 187-196; zhang and colombini (1989) biochim. biophys. acta 991, 68-78). it
was suggested that the inhibition results from the neutralization of the positively charged voltage sensors by the metal
species. in the present study, the dynamics of the metal-binding site accompanying channel closure was investigated by
adding in(oh) a to only one side of the membrane and examining its effect on the channel's gating processes. indium
added to open channels inhibited channel closure only when the metal-containing side was on the lower potential side of
the applied field. if indium was added only to the higher-potential side, the channels closed and tended to remain closed
after the field was abolished. the addition of metal hydroxide after closing the channels with a negative potential on the
metal side did not result in channel re-opening as would be expected for sensor neutralization. inhibition occurred
immediately, however, if the channels were first allowed to open briefly. the closed-state selectivity seemed to be very
similar in the absence or presence of the metal, indicating that the metal-binding sites are not located within the pore of
the channel in the closed conformation. the results are consistent with a voltage-dependent transiocation across the
membrane of each of two metal-binding sites on  xxxg2409xxx . this translocation is tightly coupled with channel opening and
closing.

introduction

 xxxg2409xxx  channels are the pathways in the mitochondrial outer membrane through which much of the
molecular traffic between the cytoplasm and the mitochondrial spaces is thought to flow.  xxxg2409xxx  channels
have been found and studied in a wide variety of
organisms ranging from protists to mammals [1-11].
two important, source-independent properties of these
channels are their voltage dependence and anionic
selectivity [12].
to understand the nature of the voltage dependence
of the rat-liver  xxxg2409xxx  channel, bowen and co-workers
[13] investigated the relationship between the voltage
dependence and the ph of the solutions bathing the
 xxxg2409xxx -containing phospholipid membranes. by raising

correspondence: m. colombini, department of zoology university
of maryland, college park, md 20742, u.s.a.

the ph they were able to reduce the channel's voltage
dependence in a manner consistent with the neutralization of the voltage sensor. the apparent pk of the
titratable entity was 10.6, consistent with that of lysine
c-amino groups. while arginine modifiers [13] had no
effect on the voltage dependence of  xxxg2409xxx , the amino
group modifier [14], succinic anhydride, was shown to
reduce the channel's voltage dependence and reverse the
ion selectivity simultaneously [15,16]. these observations indicate that  xxxg2409xxx 's voltage sensor contains
amino groups and the motion of these charges through
the electric field is responsible for the channel's voltage
dependence. a model was proposed in which one set of
positive charges located along the inner wall of the
channel is responsible for both the voltage dependence
and anion selectivity of the channel [17]. however, no
unambiguous link between the two has been established.
this model was challenged by later studies with
aluminum [18]. aluminum was shown to reduce the

0005-2736/90/$03.50 © 1990 elsevier science publishers b.v. (biomedical division)

128
channel's voltage dependence without changing the
open-channel selectivity. this finding suggests that the
sensor and the selectivity filter are two separate entities
and that the sensor is, most likely, located outside the
pore of the channel [18].
a more recent study has shown that other metals,
including indium, gallium, and a few trivalent transition
metals, are also capable of inhibiting channel closure
[19]. the active form of the metals were shown to be
their neutral trihydroxylated species, as opposed to the
usually-expected m 3+ [19]. this indicates that the inhibition is probably not achieved by direct electrostatic
binding between the metal and the charged groups on
the sensor.
in the present study, the dynamics of the voltage-dependent conformational changes of  xxxg2409xxx  were investigated by asymmetrical addition of a metal trihydroxide and by monitoring the ion selectivity of the
channel in the closed state. the results have provided
unexpected information towards a better understanding
of the voltage gating process of  xxxg2409xxx .
methods

preparation of channels
as described by mannella [20], mitochondrial membranes were isolated from log-phase suspension cultures
of a wall-less mutant of neurospora crassa (atcc no.
32360). isolated mitochondria were lysed by suspending
in a hypoosmotic solution, and the membranes were
pelleted at 25000 × g for 30 min at 4 ° c . finally, the
membrane pellets were suspended in a solution containing 1 mm kci, 1 m m tris-hcl (ph 7.4) and 15% ( v / v )
d m s o to a final protein concentration of approx. 3
m g / m l . the suspension was stored in aliquots at
70oc.
-

experimental procedures and data analysis
all experiments were performed on planar phospholipid membranes generated according to the method of

* in the present experiments a ph of 5.0 was used because in the
literature on  xxxg2409xxx  most selectivity measurements were obtained
under non-buffered conditions (ph ~ 5). inci 3 was first used and
was soon found to make the open channel more anion selective
than usual. aici 3 was then tested and the same effect was observed.
this was unexpected because aluminum had been shown not to
affect the open-state ion selectivity at neutral ph [181. to be certain
that these observations were not due to experimental error, both
metals were tested again at ph 7.0 and both had no effect on ion
selectivity. it is very likely that at ph 5 another species (besides
m(oh)3), possibly m 3÷ is involved and interacts with the selectivity filter. the observation that gaci 3, when later tested, had no
effect on selectivity at ph 5.0 supports the above hypothesis
because both the [in3+ ] and the [ai 3+ ] are fairly high at ph 5.0
while the [ xxxd2196xxx +l is very low [191. to avoid complications and
assure that the interaction between the metal and the gating mechanism could be unambiguously studied, ph 5.0 and gallium were
employed in the ion gradient experiments.

montal and mueller [21] with modifications [1]. membranes were made across a 0.1 mm-diameter hole in a
saran partition separating two buffered salt solutions.
soybean phospholipids [1] were used to make the membranes. for the experiments involving asymmetrical additions of incl 3 the two solutions were identical, each
containing i m m kci, 5 mm caci 2, and 10 mm bistris
(ph 7.0). in the second set of experiments, the kci
concentration of one solution (the trans side, as defined
below) was only 0.1 m, giving rise to a 10-fold salt
gradient. the p h was 5.0 and gallium instead of indium
was used *
an operational amplifier was used to clamp the
transmembrane potential, and the membrane current
was recorded on a kipp & zonen bd41 chart recorder
[1]. the solution held at virtual ground by the amplifier
is defined as the trans side so that the signs of potentials
refer to those of the solution on the other side of the
membrane, the cis side.
before use, an aliquot of the v d a c preparation was
thawed and diluted thrice with distilled water to assure
that only moderate numbers of channels were added to
the bathing solution. triton x-100 was added to a final
concentration of 1% (v/v), and the mixture was let
stand at room temperature for at least 10 min prior to
use. after formation of the membrane, 5 - 1 0 ttl of the
 xxxg2409xxx  dilution was added to the solution on one side
of the membrane (usually the cis side unless otherwise
indicated). the solutions were stirred during the addition of  xxxg2409xxx , and a low potential was applied ( - 10
mv) in order to monitor the changes in membrane
conductance. the insertions of individual channels were
monitored and seen as stepwise increases in current.
high purity ( > 99.9%) gallium chloride and indium
hydroxide were obtained from johnson mathey inc.,
and the in(oh)3 was converted to the chloride salt by
adding hci. these metal-chloride solutions were acidic
but in the presence of 10 mm buffers the small quantities added (2-6 p.m final concentrations) did not result
in p h shifts greater than 0.2 units.

calculation of the closed-state reversal potential
current-voltage curves recorded from membranes
containing a few channels (four to six) were used as the
source of information. reversal potentials of the control
channels were obtained by extrapolating to zero current
the portion of the curve where all channels were closed.
for gallium-treated channels, the level of gallium was
chosen to ensure sufficient inhibition so that only one
of the channels would close. the conductance change
associated with that closing event was determined from
the change in slope of the 1-v curve. the reversal
potential of that channel was determined as follows:
1' = ngo( v - eo) + r a g e ( v - ec)

(1)

1 = (n - 1)go( v- eo) + (m + 1)ga v - e~)

(2)

129
where i ' and i are the current levels prior to and
following the closure of one channel, respectively; v is
the t r a n s m e m b r a n e potential; n, go, and e o are, respectively, the number, single-channel conductance, and reversal potential of the open channels in the same membrane; m, go, and e c are those of the closed channel.
w h e n i = 0, by definition v = e . _ 1, the average reversal potential of the m e m b r a n e with channels being open
and one channel closed. since e . _ l and e o can be
directly, unambiguously measured from the i-v curves
when one channel is closed and when all are open,
respectively, eqn. 2 can be rearranged to calculate the
closed-state reversal potential:

eo=[(,-l)so(e,_,-eo)+(,,+l)scen_,]/(,,+l)sc

(3)

some e¢ values of control channels (without gaci3)
were also obtained this way in order to be certain that
the difference, if any, between the two groups (control
and treated) had not resulted from the use of different
methods of estimation.

neurospora crassa v d a c channels were inserted into
planar phospholipid m e m b r a n e s by adding detergentsolubilized v d a c to the cis side of the m e m b r a n e
(unless otherwise indicated). the two aqueous bathing
solutions each contained 1 m kci, 5 m m caci 2, and
10 m m bistris ( p h 7.0). after a relatively steady membrane current level had been achieved under a low-voltage driving force (usually - 10 mv), the channel's voltage dependence was tested by applying positive and
negative closing potentials (usually higher than + 2 0
mv), and the channel-closure 1 / e decay time (the time
required for the current level to decrease to 1 / e of its
total decay) was used as a quantitative measure of the
voltage dependence. incl 3 was then added to the solution on the trans side (unless otherwise indicated), and
the same characterization procedure was repeated. after
each experiment the p h on both sides were re-measured
and no change greater than + 0.2 units was observed.
fig. 1 shows a portion of a recording of current
flowing through v d a c channels in response to various
applied potentials (signs of potentials always refer to

nomenclature
the potential on the trans side was held at virtual
g r o u n d and defined as zero. the signs of the potentials
mentioned in this paper therefore always refer to those
of the cis side relative to zero, the trans side potential.
unless otherwise indicated, the channels were always
added to the cis side, and the metals were added either
to the trans side only (asymmetrical addition), or to
both sides (ion gradient experiments). in the text and
figure legends regarding the 'asymmetrical addition'
experiments, the sign and magnitude of a potential is
often followed by a statement (in parentheses) which
serves to indicate whether the metal was on the lower or
higher potential side. for example, at - 4 0 mv applied
potential, the metal, which was added to the trans side,
was at the higher potential side (0 > - 4 0 ) .
this is
necessary because the sidedness of the metal's effect on
the voltage dependence of the channel is the major issue
addressed in this paper (see discussion).

30sec
i

+40 mv

2.5na ~

the dynamics of the metal hydroxide-binding site on
 xxxg2409xxx , i.e., the translocations of the binding site
a c c o m p a n y i n g the conformational changes of the channel, were explored in two ways: (i) by adding the metal
hydroxide to the solution on one side of the m e m b r a n e
and examining its effect on the channel's gating
processes; (ii) by analyzing the characteristics of the
channel's closed-state selectivity in the presence of the
metal hydroxide. indium, a more effective inhibitor
than aluminum [19], was used for the first part of the
study. in the selectivity experiments gallium and p h 5
were used.

~ +40 mv

t~

..~ _.....~

incl3
f

?if
~-40 mv

r ~

+40 mv

-40 mv
f - 4 0 mv

fig 1. the addition of indium chloride to only one side of a membrane results in the inhibition of only one gating process. initially
both aqueous solutions contained 1 m kci, 5 mm caci 2, and 10 mm
bis-tris (ph 7).  xxxg2409xxx  channels were inserted by adding an aliquot
of the detergent-solubilized sample to the solution on the cis side. the
sign of the membrane potential always refers to the cis compartment,
the trans side was held at virtual ground. at the indicated points
(vertical arrows) voltage-dependent channel closure was tested under
=t:40 mv applied potentials, and the resultant transmembrane current
is shown. after each pulsing the potential was returned to - 10 mv to
allow the channels to re-open. indium chloride was then added only
to the trans side, to a final concentration of 2 lam. note that the
metal was on the lower potential side under positive potentials.
channel closure was tested again by applying+ 40 or --40 mv. the
horizontal arrow indicates the zero current level.

130
~,+30 mv

0.2

na
~.+30 mv

+30mv

+ 30 rnv

~"1

1.

,9

0.5 na
-30mv

1

m~n

-30my

id

fig 2. effect of indium on channel closure when added with channels closed. experimental conditions and procedures were essentially identical to
those described in fig. l, except that the channels were held in the closed state at the time of metal addition (2 /tm final concn.) and during the
first 2 min after the addition. note the scale change after the first two pulses of the experiment. the sign convention for the applied potentials is
the same as in fig. 1 and note that, between pulses at the indicated voltage, the potential was returned to - 10 inv.

the cis side). prior to the addition of incl 3, rapid
channel closure was observed at both +40 and - 4 0
mv as indicated by the steep current decay following
the application of the potentials (the residual current is
that flowing through the low-conducting, 'closed-state'
channels). following the addition of 2 / , m inc13 to the
trans side, closure under positive potentials (the metalcontaining side was the lower potential side) was
markedly inhibited while that under negative potentials
was not affected (also see fig. 2). in 13 different experiments in which indium was added only to the trans side,
closure at positive potentials was either too poor to
measure a 1 / e decay time or had an increase in 1 / e
decay time between 3- and ll-fold. in all cases, closure
under negative potentials was not significantly affected
with a fold change in 1 / e decay time after indium
addition of 0.9 + 0.2. the complementary experiment,
 xxxg2409xxx  added to the trans side and inc13 to the cis side,
resulted in inhibition of closure at negative potentials
while that at positive potentials was not affected (not
shown). it should be noted that in the experiment (fig.
1) illustrated, the closure rates of the control channels
appear to be greater under negative potentials than
under positive ones. this was often observed and does
not affect the interpretation of the results *

* since the 1 / e decay times after indium addition were always
compared to the controls obtained prior to metal addition, the
variability in the control l / e decay times should not affect the
interpretation of the results. moreover, the faster rate of channel
closure under positive potentials was observed whether v d a c w a s
added to the cis or trans side, indicating that it may have been due
to an inherent asymmetry in the lipid bilayer.

channel closure prior to indium addition appeared
to protect the channels from the action of indium. as
shown in fig. 2, channels were closed prior to indium
addition by applying a 30 mv potential. this potential
was maintained for about 2 min following the addition
of incl 3 (2 ~tm final concn.) to the trans side. during
the entire 2 rain little if any channel opening was
detected. however, after the membrane potential was
dropped to - 1 0 mv for less than one second to allow
the channels to open, the immediate re-application of a
30 mv positive potential failed to close the channels.
thus, sensitivity to indium was restored by a brief
period of time in the open state.
while indium addition to the trans side inhibited
voltage-dependent channel closure under positive and
not negative potentials, once the channels were closed
with negative potentials, their opening rates were
markedly reduced by the presence of indium. under
negative potentials the channels seemed to be free to
close but tended to stay closed after the potential had
been decreased to - 1 0 mv (fig. 3). this phenomenon
was highly reproducible and quantitatively significant.
to estimate the extent to which channels stayed closed
after having been closed under a negative potential
(metal on the higher potential side), membranes containing only a few (five to twelve) channels were used so
that the exact number of channels could be directly
measured and current-change events precisely understood. the results were expressed as 'the number of
channels that stayed closed as a percentage of total
channels closed'. as summarized in fig. 4, the percentages of channels that stayed closed after a negative
potential were quite high whereas those in response to a
positive potential were negligible.

131
06

l

04
1 mm

02

i

i

0
c
c

l

i
i

-02
-04
-off

incl3

-0.8
-1.0

~o -20
fig 3. tendency of the indium-affected channels to stay closed after being closed under negative potentials. experimental conditions and
procedures were identical to those described in the legend of fig. 1. in the presence of 2 p m incl 3 (added to the trans side) the channels remained
closed (the large arrows) after the - 4 0 mv voltage pulse. signs convention of the applied potentials is as indicated in fig. 1. the metal was on the
higher potential side under negative potentials.

although it was shown that aluminum addition did
not change open-channel selectivity [18], the possibility
exists that the metal binding site moves into the channel
upon channel closure. if metal binding were to alter the
charge (number or sign) within the pore in a closed
state, this change could be detected as a closed-state
selectivity change with respect to that of a control
channel. the experiments were performed, at ph 5, on
membranes containing only a few (no more than six)

channels in the presence of a salt gradient (1 m vs. 0.1
m kci). after insertion of the channels, an asymmetric
triangular voltage wave was applied and the transmemi
1
-6o

-4o

-2o
v (mv)

100

80

i°.

60

40

80

b

i

•

,

,

(+)

(-)

(+)

(-)

control

indium

fig. 4. summary of many observations similar to the one illustrated in
fig. 3. shown are the mean values (~ channel remaining closed) and
their standard errors obtained from membranes containing control or
indium-affected channels. symbols below the x-axis refer to the signs
of potentials under which the data had been obtained and refer to the
potential on the cis side while indium was added to the trans site.
the n u m b e r of observations included in the figure are: 17, 13, 10,
and 12 for control ( + ) , control ( - ) , indium ( + ) , and indium ( - ) ,
respectively.

fig 5. a current-voltage plot recorded in the presence and absence of
gaci 3. experiments were performed on m e m b r a n e s with only a few
channels in the presence of a 10-fold salt gradient (1 m vs. 0.1 m
kcl). after insertion of the channels, an asymmetric triangular voltage wave was applied travelling between - 6 4 and + 22 mv at a rate
of 0.7 m v / s , and the transmembrane current was simultaneously
recorded, l - v c u r v e s in the absence (line a) or presence (line b) of 16
v m gaci 3 were obtained from the records when the voltage wave was
travelling from negative to positive potentials. open.channel reversal
potentials were measured by extrapolating the current tracings to
1 = 0 when all channels were open (intercept of the line on the
x-axis). closed-channel reversal potentials were obtained by extrapolation and calculation based on the events in which only one channel
was closed.

132
30

v
0

20- x

own
clceed (~ontrol)
~o~mki ( e a 1 ~ )
q

vv

i00

"~

0-

0

...........

e]

v

ox

-r..el- - ..r. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[3

n do )4< n x x

0

xx

-i0o.
-20-

ch~ u i ~ - o°~ °
o -oxc~oo~ ~ ~

-30-

o

-40-50
0

xo
o
x

x

°o

x
i

i

.5

1

single c h a n n e l

i

1.5
conductance

i

2

2.5

(ns)

fig 6. c o n d u c t a n c e a n d reversal p o t e n t i a l for c h a n n e l s in the open
a n d closed state with a n d w i t h o u t g a l l i u m present. these results were
o b t a i n e d from e x p e r i m e n t s such as the one illustrated in fig. 5. openor closed-state reversal p o t e n t i a l s in the absence or presence of g a c i 3
are plotted against the c o r r e s p o n d i n g single-channel conductances.

brane current was simultaneously recorded (fig. 5, line
a). gallium chloride was then added to both sides of
the membrane, and the i - v curve was again recorded
(fig. 5, line b). open-channel reversal potentials were
directly measured by extrapolating the current tracings
to i = 0 when all channels were open (fig. 5). since
strong inhibition of channel closure must be present
when evaluating the channel's selectivity characteristics,
closed-channel reversal potentials had to be obtained by
both extrapolation and calculation based on the events
in which only one channel was closed (see methods).
fig. 5 shows that after the addition of 16 /tm gaci 3
channel closure became a rare event while the open-state
reversal potential did not change as evidenced by the
same intercept of the two lines, a and b, on the voltage
axis. the results from several experiments are summarized in fig. 6. while the open-channel reversal
potentials and conductances all fall into a narrow range,
there are apparently multiple closed states as demonstrated by the much wider distribution of both the
closed-channel reversal potentials and the closed
single-channel conductances. however, the overall distribution patterns of the closed-state reversal potentials
of the gallium-treated ( × ) and the control (13) channels
are very similar.
discussion
it was clear when  xxxg2409xxx  was first discovered in 1975
[1] that each  xxxg2409xxx  channel can undergo two voltagedependent conformationai changes, one under positive
potentials and the other under negative potentials. later,
evidence emerged to indicate that these changes represent two separate gating processes that result in two
fundamentally different closed states [22]. the use of a

chemical modifier, succinic anhydride [15,16], and perturbing agents, polyanions [23] and the  xxxg2409xxx  modulator [24], showed that each gating mechanism could be
affected independently.
in the original experiments [18], which showed that
aluminum was capable of inhibiting the voltage-dependent closure of  xxxg2409xxx , the metal salts were added to
the solutions on both sides of the membrane. even so,
some asymmetry was observed and was attributed to
asymmetrical free metal concentrations caused by adding  xxxg2409xxx  and detergent to one side only. in the
present study, asymmetrical additions of indium salt
resulted in selective inhibition of only one of the two
gating processes. in the presence of indium, normal
channel closure only occurred when indium was on the
higher-potential side (under negative potentials), and
the closure in response to positive potentials (indium on
the lower-potential side), was greatly inhibited.
the present results have provided evidence to show
that the indium-binding site is translocated through the
membrane during the conformational change from open
to closed state (see fig. 7). while readily undergoing
voltage-dependent closure when the indium side was
made positive, the channels, once closed, tended to
remain closed. the simplest explanation for this phenomenon would be that the indium-binding site that
had been hidden from indium in the open state traversed
the membrane during the closure process and became
now exposed to the indium-containing medium; the
subsequent binding by indium hydroxide probably
stabilized the closed state. additional supporting information comes from the type of experiment shown in
fig. 2. that the addition of indium to channels held
closed by positive potentials (negative on the indium
side) did not result in channel opening and that a
transient re-opening of the channels resulted in inhibition of channel closure indicate that the indium-binding
site that was accessible to indium became hidden when
the channels were closed.
an alternative hypothesis to the translocation of the
metal binding site through the membrane is that the site
merely becomes more or less able to bind indium depending on the channel's conformation. if so, then e a c h
portion of the channel responsible for o n e of the two
gating processes must have two indium binding sites,
one on the cis and the other on the trans side of the
membrane *. one site, exposed in the open state, binds
indium and inhibits channel closure and the other,
exposed in the closed state, inhibits channel opening.
only in this way can one explain the finding that if
indium added to one side inhibits channel closure due
* the possibility of i n d i u m d i f f u s i n g t h r o u g h the c h a n n e l a n d a c t i n g
on a site on the o t h e r side is r e m o t e because the i n d i u m - f r e e
c o m p a r t m e n t acts as an infinite sink a n d because we w o u l d n o t be
o b s e r v i n g a s y m m e t r i c a l effects if this process were significant.

133

,.----

"•i¸i¸

' i,li:!'~:~
~i
l
open

plus ai on i~ghl

plus ai on left

no electric reld

open

of~n

i:! ..

+

l,

~j

1

ml
open

--

plus electricfield + a'b

closed

j

i
open

noelec~icfield

.1

a{i'~~i
closed

j

fig 7. schematic drawing of a model which embodies the observed
m e t a l - v d a c interaction. the longitudinal cross section of each
cylindrical channel is represented by two rectangles, one for each
subunit, and the space between the two rectangles represents the pore
of the channel. small notches on the rectangles represent the metalbinding sites. at the top of the figure, a l u m i n u m is added to different
sides of the channel in the absence of applied potential (therefore
channels are open). an electric field is then applied so that in one
situation (left) the a l u m i n u m is on the lower-potential side and in the
other (fight) it is on the higher-potential side. the channel on the left
cannot close due to aluminum binding from the lower-potential side
whereas the channel on the right closes. closure results in the translocation of one site across the membrane. both binding sites of the
closed channel are now on the aluminum side and therefore aluminum
can bind to both. this channel remains closed after the removal of the
field, probably due to stabilization of such a conformation by
aluminum binding.

to one gating process, then indium must be added to the
other side to inhibit the opening rate for that s a m e
gating process. it seems less complex to consider one
metal site per gating process which translocates through
the membrane and indeed the two hypotheses are functionally equivalent.
the possibility that the indium-binding site does not
move all the way across the membrane and becomes
lodged within the channel's aqueous pore, was tested by
examining the channel's closed-state selectivity in the
presence of indium. the previous finding that aluminum
did not affect the open-state ion selectivity [18] suggests
that the metal-binding site was located outside  xxxg2409xxx 's
pore. however, upon channel closure the binding site
could conceivably be moved into the pore. since it is
likely that metal binding results in a change in charge at
the binding site (in order to account for the metal's
inhibitory effect on voltage gating), movement of the
site into the pore would be expected to alter the ion
selectivity of the closed state. however, despite the
variabilities in the measurements of the closed-state

selectivity, the present experiments have shown that the
overall distributions of the values obtained in the absence or presence of indium appear to be very similar
(see fig. 6). therefore the results indicate that the
metal, while inhibiting channel closure, does not affect
the closed-state selectivity, indicating that the translocation of the binding site is fully across the membrane.
if the metal binding site is indeed translocated across
the membrane upon channel closure, the direction of
this translocation is not consistent with the expected
direction of translocation of the voltage sensor. based
on .the strong evidence provided by earlier studies
[13,15,17,23] that the sensor was composed of positive
charges, and on their new observations, dill and coworkers [18] strongly suggested that aluminum acts by
neutralizing the voltage sensor(s). therefore, if the voltage-dependent channel closure were coupled to the
movement of positive charges through the transmembrane electric field, the closure with positive potential
on the indium-containing side should be in consequence
of the translocation of the positive sensor from the
indium side to the opposite side. were indium binding
to directly neutralize the sensor, channel closure with
positive potential on the indium side would be inhibited. since the observed effect was the opposite to
the above prediction, the indium-binding site is highly
unlikely to be the sensor itself. a very different mechanism must be considered to account for these observations.
the evidence that aluminum neutralizes  xxxg2409xxx 's
voltage sensor was derived from the finding that
aluminum reduced the channel's voltage dependence
while increasing the voltage needed to close half the
channels [181. this mechanism should also apply to
indium and other metals that have been shown to
interact with  xxxg2409xxx  in much the same way as aluminum
[19]. it is possible to reconcile the observations from
asymmetrical indium addition with the aluminum resuits by postulating that the conformational change
associated with  xxxg2409xxx  closure results from the movement of a positively-charged sensor across the membrane and also results in the translocation of an uncharged metal-binding site in the opposite direction. if
indium binding were to generate a net positive charge at
the binding site, then this positive charge would be
translocated in the opposite direction to the movement
of the sensor. this would effectively neutralize the
charges on the voltage sensor and consequently negate
the voltage-dependent energy change needed for the
gating mechanism to function.
these findings are consistent with the current view of
 xxxg2409xxx 's molecular structure and voltage-gating mechanism [12]. experimental evidence indicates that the
functional channel is a homodimer [22] and the two
subunits together form a simple cylindrical pore [25].
the subunits are proposed to be oriented in opposite

134
directions across the m e m b r a n e , each f o r m i n g half the
cylinder to form a symmetrical c h a n n e l [12]. in this
a r r a n g e m e n t (fig. 7) the two m o n o m e r s would respond,
respectively, to negative a n d positive electrical fields to
achieve two different closed states. likewise, each
m o n o m e r possesses one i n d i u m - b i n d i n g site so that the
channel, in the open state, has an i n d i u m - b i n d i n g site
o n each m e m b r a n e surface. each b i n d i n g site is structurally coupled to a sensor o n the opposite side of the
m e m b r a n e so that when a sensor moves in the applied
field, resulting in c h a n n e l closure, its coupled i n d i u m b i n d i n g site is translocated across the m e m b r a n e in the
opposite direction. this model explains the m e c h a n i s m
of (i) the i n h i b i t i o n of c h a n n e l closure, (ii) the i n h i b i t i o n
of c h a n n e l r e - o p e n i n g after having been closed, a n d (iii)
the differences between the results o b t a i n e d with ind i u m present o n only o n e side a n d on b o t h sides.
acknowledgement
this work was s u p p o r t e d by o n r g r a n t n00014-85k0651.

references
1 schein, s.j., colombini, m. and fink¢lstein, a. (1976) j. membr.
biol. 30, 99-120.
2 parsons, d.f., williams, g.r. and chance, b. (1966) ann. n.y.
acad. sci. 137, 643-666.
3 colombini, m. (1979) nature (london) 279, 643-645.
4 coiombini, m. (1980) j. membr. biol. 53, 79-84.
5 zalman, l.s., nikaido, h. and kagawa, y. (1980) j. biol. chem.
255, 1771-1774.

6 roos, n, benz, r. and brdiczka, d. (1982) biochim. biophys.
acta 686, 204-214.
7 freitag, h., neupert, w. and benz, b. (1982) eur. j. biochem. 123,
629-636.
8 linden, m., gellerfors, p. and nelson, b.d. (1982) biochem. j.
208, 77-82.
9 mannella, c.a, and colombini, m. (1984) biochim. biophys. acta
774, 206-214.
10 nakashima, r.a., mangan, p.s., colombini, m. and pederson,
p.l. (1985) biochemistry 25, 1015-1021.
11 smack, d.p. and colombini, m. (1985) plant physiol. 79, 10941097.
12 colombini, m. (1989) j. membr. biol. 111, 103-111.
13 bowen, k.a., tam, k. and colombini, m. (1985) j. membr. biol.
86, 51-59.
14 habeeb, a.f.s.a., cassidy, h.g. and singer, s.j. (1958) biochim.
biophys. acta 2% 587-593.
15 doting, c. and colombini, m. (1985) j. membr. biol. 83, 81-86.
16 adelsberger-mangan, d.m. and colombini, m. (1987) j. membr.
biol. 98, 157-168.
17 doting, c. and colombini, m. (1985) j. membr. biol. 83, 87-94.
18 dill, e.t., holden, m.j. and colombini, m. (1987) j. membr. biol.
99, 187-196.
19 zhang, d. and colombini, m. (1989) biochim. biophys. acta 991,
68-78.
20 mannella, c.a. (1982) j. cell biol. 94, 680-687.
21 montal m. and mueller, p. (1972) proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 69,
3561-3566.
22 colombini, m. (1986) in ion channel reconstitution (miller, c.,
ed.), pp. 533-552, plenum press, new york.
23 mangan, p.s. and colombini, m. (1987) proc. natl. acad. sci.
usa 84, 4896-4900.
24 holden, m.j. and colombini, m. (1988) febs lett. 241, 105-109.
25 mannella, c.a., radermacher, m. and frank, j. (1984) proc
annu. emsa meet. 42, 644-645.

