molecular microbiology (2006) 62(1), 45–56

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05351.x
first published online 30 august 2006

succinic semialdehyde couples stress response to
quorum-sensing signal decay in agrobacterium
tumefaciens
chao wang,1 hai-bao zhang,1 lian-hui wang1 and
lian-hui zhang1,2*
1
institute of molecular and cell biology, 61 biopolis
drive, singapore 138673.
2
department of biological science, national university
of singapore, singapore 119260.
summary
quorum sensing (qs) signal decay in agrobacterium
tumefaciens occurs in response to starvation or
host signals. we have demonstrated that the
g- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba) shunt metabolite links
stress response to qs signal decay. mutation of the
aldh gene encoding a succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase ( xxxg138xxx ) that converts succinic semialdehyde (ssa) to  xxxd3251xxx  results in early
expression of the signal degrading enzyme, attm.
exogenous addition of ssa or its precursor gaba
induces attm expression and abolishes ti plasmid
conjugative transfer. ssa acts by binding to the
repressor attj that regulates the attklm operon. attk
encodes another  xxxg138xxx . the stress alarmone ppgpp
and ssa modulates separately the expression of the
two  xxxg138xxx  enzymes, which might control the intracellular ssa level and hence to switch on/off the
qs signal decay system in response to environmental changes. these findings document for the
first time a sophisticated signalling mechanism of
the widely conserved gaba degradation pathway
in prokaryotes.
introduction
agrobacterium tumefaciens increases its community
infectivity by conjugal transfer of the virulence genes
carried by the ti-plasmid from pathogenic cells to nonpathogenic members. ti-plasmid conjugal transfer of this
bacterium is controlled by a cell-to-cell communication
mechanism known as quorum sensing (qs), in which the
two key components are the acylhomoserine lactone
(ahl)-type qs signal, n-(3-oxo-octanoyl)-l-homoserine
accepted 25 july, 2006. *for correspondence. e-mail lianhui@imcb.
a-star.edu.sg; tel. (+65) 6586 9686; fax (+65) 6779 1117.

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd

lactone (3oc8hsl), and its cognate receptor, trar (piper
et al., 1993; zhang et al., 1993). when reaching a threshold concentration, 3oc8hsl forms a complex with trar
and induces the expression of genes controlling the
ti-plasmid copy number and the ti-plasmid conjugation.
(zhu and winans, 1999; qin et al., 2000; pappas and
winans, 2003). most of these genes encode proteins and
enzymes involved in conjugal dna replication and processing, synthesis of conjugal pili and formation of mating
pairs (zhu et al., 2000).
ti-plasmid transfer is a growth-phase-dependent
process, initiating at the early exponential phase, maximizing at the mid-exponential phase, and diminishing
when bacterial cells enter the stationary phase (tempé
et al., 1978). the mechanism behind this growth-phasedependent phenomenon had not been elucidated until a
recent study showed that the sharp decline in conjugation
at the stationary phase is due to enhanced expression of
attm (zhang et al., 2002). the attm gene encodes an
ahl-lactonase responsible for hydrolysing ahl signals. in
a. tumefaciens, attm, together with attk and attl, constitutes a transcriptional unit that is negatively regulated by
an iclr-type repressor attj at the exponential phase. gel
retardation analysis has shown that attj specifically binds
to the attklm promoter. null mutation of attj abolishes
ahl signal production and ti-plasmid conjugal transfer. at
the stationary phase, the repression of attj is somehow
relieved and attm enzyme activity is significantly
increased, which accompanies the rapid decline in ahl
signal accumulation and ti-plasmid transfer (zhang et al.,
2002). subsequent analysis has revealed that the release
of attj repression is induced by nutrient deprivation and
mediated by the stress alarmone ppgpp (zhang et al.,
2004). in addition, expression of the attm enzyme is also
induced by contact with the host plant (rosen et al.,
2004). these intriguing findings suggest that qs signal
decay in a. tumefaciens represents a sophisticated
stress-sensing and response mechanism. however, it is
still not clear how ppgpp and the plant signal modulate
the derepression of the qs signal decay system.
the g-aminobutyrate (gaba) metabolic pathway is
present in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes; the key
metabolites include gaba and succinic semialdehyde
(ssa). gaba is best known for its role in neurotransmis-

46 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
sion in the mammalian brain (varju et al., 2001). defects
in the gaba metabolism are associated with numerous
clinical syndromes (gordon, 2004). in plants, gaba production is drastically enhanced in response to biotic and
abiotic stresses, and appears to play an essential role in
the defence against environmental stress (shelp et al.,
1999; bouche and fromm, 2004). the biological functions
of gaba and its metabolites are less clear in prokaryotes.
recent studies showed that ssa and gaba could induce
the expression of the attklm operon (carlier et al., 2004;
chevrot et al., 2006), but the mechanism by which the two
molecules regulating attklm expression is not fully
understood. in this report, we find that the transposon
insert mutation of aldh, which encodes a homologue of
succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase ( xxxg138xxx ), results
in overexpression of the attklm operon. biochemical
analysis confirms that aldh converts ssa to  xxxd3251xxx 
(sa). addition of ssa and its precursor gaba, but not
other structural analogues, drastically enhances attm
activity. ssa functions by attenuating attj association with
the attklm promoter. moreover, we find that aldh expression is downregulated at the stationary phase, which is
mediated by the stress alarmone ppgpp. finally, we show
that the attk encoded by the attklm operon, which is
homologous to the  xxxg138xxx  encoded by aldh, functionally
complements the aldh-deficient mutant when expressed
constitutively. these findings have unveiled a key signalling role of gaba degradation pathway in a. tumefaciens
in response to biotic and abiotic stresses.

results
null mutation of aldh encoding a homologue of  xxxg138xxx 
results in overexpression of the attklm operon
based on the observation that the expression of ahllactonase encoded by attm is tightly regulated in
a. tumefaciens, we have previously generated a reporter
strain a6(attklm::lacz), in which all three genes of the
operon were disrupted because of the transcriptional
fusion of lacz to the 5′ region of attk (zhang et al., 2004),
for identification of the genetic components that control
the expression of attklm operon. the reporter colonies
show only a dim blue colour on a bm plate supplemented
with xgal because the expression of the operon is
repressed by attj when there are sufficient nutrients.
using this reporter as the parental strain, we screened
approximately 60 000 transposon mutants and identified
a number of dark blue mutant colonies. sequence analysis of the potential mutants showed that there were eight
dark blue mutants with tn5 inserted at the different locations of one open reading frame (orf) and its promoter
region, in addition to 12 transposon insertion mutants of
attj. the orf encodes a peptide of 483 amino acids with

a deduced molecular mass of 51 704 da. a blast search
showed that the peptide shared 97% identity with the
peptide encoded by the aldh gene (atu3498, ncbi no.
aal44311) of a. tumefaciens strain c58. aldh was annotated as a member of the aldehyde dehydrogenase family
(wood et al., 2001), which includes aldehyde dehydrogenase (ec 1.2.1.3),  xxxg138xxx  (ec 1.2.1.16), and a few other
members. a blast search showed that aldh is most
similar to the annotated  xxxg138xxx  enzymes of nitrobacter
hamburgensis (ncbi accession no. zp_00625337, 69%
identity) and pseudomonas syringae (ncbi accession
no. np_742487, 66% identity). the peptide is also similar
to attk (42% identity), the first protein encoded by the
attklm operon of a. tumefaciens. a recent study found
that attk is a  xxxg138xxx  (carlier et al., 2004).
to confirm that the attklm overexpression phenotype is
due to tn5 insertion, we regenerated the aldh in frame
deletion mutants in the reporter a6(attklm::lacz) and in
wild-type a6 respectively. we also cloned the aldh coding
region under the control of the lac promoter and generated the expression construct pla-aldh for complementation analysis. the results showed that deletion of aldh in
strain a6(attklm::lacz) had no effect on bacterial growth
(fig. 1a), but increased the attklm expression as indicated by b-galactosidase activity by more than eight times
in comparison with the parental strain at the early stage of
growth (before 18 h) (fig. 1b). complementation of the
mutant with pla-aldh, which expressed aldh constitutively, repressed the attklm expression at the early
growth stage as expected, but intriguingly, also abolished
the stationary-phase-dependent expression pattern of
attklm shown by its parental strain a6(attklm::lacz)
(fig. 1b).
similarly, deletion of aldh significantly boosted ahllactonase activity at the early stage (12 h, 16 h in fig. 1c),
and complementation of the mutant with pla-aldh suppressed the attm expression to the basal level throughout
the growth phases (fig. 1c). however, no significant
increase of the ahl-lactonase activity was found at the
stationary phase in the mutant a6(daldh) over the wildtype a6 (fig. 1c), which is in sharp contrast to the phenotypes of strain a6(attklm::lacz) and its aldh deletion
mutant (fig. 1b).
enzymatic oxidation of ssa to sa by aldh
a blast search suggested that aldh might encode a
 xxxg138xxx .  xxxg138xxx , an enzyme of the gaba degradation
pathway, converts ssa into sa using nad or nadp as
the cofactor. to test this possibility, we purified the recombinant aldh protein from escherichia coli. in trial experiments, we found that aldh was capable of catalysing ssa
in the presence of nad, but much less efficiently with
nadp. to determine the reaction product, ssa was

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

ssa modulating qs signal decay 47
those of the hexyl-amidated sa (hexyl-sa) standard
(fig. 2a and b). in contrast, the control with denatured
aldh did not show the specific peak at 13.2 min (fig. 2d).
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (esi-ms)
analysis of the hplc fraction showed a strong quasimolecular (m-h) ion at an m/z of 200.2 (fig. 2e), which is the
expected molecular mass of n-hexyl-succinamic acid
(hexyl-sa) (fig. 2f). the results demonstrate that aldh
possesses nad-dependent succinate semialdehyde
dehydrogenase ( xxxg138xxx ) enzyme activity.
ssa is a specific signal inducing attklm expression and
inhibiting qs-dependent ti-plasmid conjugative transfer

fig. 1. involvement of aldh in negative regulation of ahl-lactonase
expression in a. tumefaciens.
a. deletion of aldh does not affect bacterial growth in bm minimal
medium: a6(attklm::lacz), circles; a6(attklm::lacz, daldh),
triangles; a6(attklm::lacz, daldh, pla-aldh), squares.
b. deletion of aldh drastically enhanced the attklm
promoter-directed b-galactosidase activity. symbols:
a6(attklm::lacz), circles; a6(attklm::lacz, daldh), triangles;
a6(attklm::lacz, daldh, pla-aldh), squares.
c. deletion of aldh significantly enhanced the ahl-lactonase
activity at exponential growth phase. symbols: a6, circles;
a6(daldh), triangles; a6(pla-aldh), squares. each value represents
the mean of at least three replicates. bars indicate the standard
deviations.

reacted with aldh in the presence of nad and the reaction
mixture was derivated with hexylamine. highperformance liquid chromatography (hplc) fractionation
of the hexyl-amidated reaction mixture of aldh revealed a
peak with a retention time of 13.2 min (fig. 2c) and
maximal uv end absorbance at 198.1 nm, identical to

the above findings are consistent with the previous report
that ssa could trigger attklm expression in
a. tumefaciens nopaline strain c58 (carlier et al., 2004).
figure 3a shows that addition of ssa to the liquid culture
of the octopine strain a6(attklm::lacz) also induced substantial increases in b-galactosidase activity, suggesting
that the signalling mechanism is conserved in different
types of a. tumefaciens strains. similarly, ssa significantly increased ahl-lactonase activity, particularly at the
exponential phase (fig. 3b). further experiments showed
ssa induction occurred in a dosage-dependent manner
with an effective concentration starting from 50 mm and
showing a maximum at about 1 mm (fig. s1). when the
concentration of ssa was increased to about 15 mm, the
chemical showed a detrimental effect on bacterial growth.
we further tested whether other metabolites of the
gaba degradation pathway, including gaba and sa,
could
also
promote
attklm
transcription
in
a. tumefaciens. only gaba significantly enhanced the
attklm expression (fig. s2a and b) with an effect paralleling that of ssa (fig. 3a and b). ssa is a member of the
aldehyde group of compounds that are highly reactive
reagents. for example, acetaldehyde can attack lysine
residues to form a stable adduct (braun et al., 1995). to
test whether ssa is a specific signal, we then tested 11
other aldehyde derivatives but none showed ssa-like
activity in a concentration range from 0.2 to 5 mm
(fig. s3).
we then determined the impact of ssa, gaba and aldh
on ahl signal production and ti-plasmid conjugative
transfer in a. tumefaciens. we used strain k588 in ahl
signal assay because unlike a6, it is a conjugative constitutive strain producing readily detectable ahl signals in
liquid culture (zhang et al., 2002). k588 rapidly accumulated the ahl signals in the supernatant at the exponential
phase, but the signals sharply declined when cells
entered the stationary phase (fig. 3c). in contrast, when
ssa was added into the exponential-growth bacterial
culture (12 h), ahl accumulation stopped and declined
gradually (fig. 3c). exogenous addition of gaba showed

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

48 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
fig. 2. demonstration that aldh possesses
 xxxg138xxx  enzyme activity.
a. hplc profile of standard sa derivated with
hexylamine (retention time 13.2 min).
b. uv spectrum of hexyl-sa.
c. ssa was reacted with aldh enzyme and
the reaction mixture derivated with
hexylamine and separated in hplc. arrow
indicates the fraction showing the same
retention time (13.2 min) and uv spectrum as
the standard hexyl-sa.
d. hplc profile of the hexylamine product of
ssa incubated with denatured aldh. au,
arbitrary unit.
e. esi-ms analysis of the fraction at 13.2 min
in c.
f. schematic presentation of analysis strategy
used in this experiment and the
corresponding chemical structures.

the same effect as ssa (fig. s2c). moreover, aldh, which
converts ssa to sa, when overexpressed in k588 by the
introduced expression construct pla-aldh, abolished the
ahl signal decay phenotype at the stationary phase
(fig. 3c). in the conjugation experiment, as expected,
addition of ssa or gaba to the induction medium of strain
a6 blocked ti-plasmid transfer (less than 1 ¥ 10-9),
whereas the a6 control without ssa and gaba transferred its ti-plasmid with a frequency of about 3 ¥ 10-5
(fig. s4). these results imply that intracellular ssa
content could be a key factor that determines the expression of the ahl signal decay system in a. tumefaciens.
ssa interferes with attj binding to the attklm
promoter in vitro
our previous study showed that the protein level of attj
remains constant at different growth stages of
a. tumefaciens (zhang et al., 2004), which suggests that
it is unlikely that the signal acts by changing the expression pattern of attj. the alternate possibility is that ssa
might interfere with the binding of the attj repressor to the
attklm promoter (pattklm). a gel retardation assay was
conducted to test this possibility. gel retardation assays
showed that optimal binding to a radioisotope-labelled
pattklm dna promoter fragment was about 50:1 under

the conditions used in this experiment (fig. 4a). using
this ratio, we analysed the effect of ssa, sa and gaba on
the attj–promoter interaction. the results shown in
fig. 4b showed that ssa interfered with attj–pattklm
complex formation in a dose-dependent manner (fig. 4b).
in contrast, gaba and sa failed to disassociate the attj–
pattklm complex even at a high concentration (fig. 4b).
to understand how ssa interferes with the formation of
the attj–pattklm complex, the possibility of ssa binding
to attj was determined by using isothermal titration calorimetry (itc). figure 4c shows the typical titration calorimetry profile resulting from consecutive injection of 2 ml
aliquots of 0.1–1 mm ssa to 100 mm attj solution at 28°c.
the binding reaction is exothermic with a binding association constant ka equivalent to (2.77 ⫾ 0.54) ¥ 106 m-1, indicating that ssa binds to attj with a high affinity. gaba was
also tested as a control but itc analysis did not reveal any
binding reaction between gaba and attj (data not shown).
aldh expression is negatively regulated by the ppgpp
synthase rela
given that ssa is the signal that counteracts the inhibition
of attj on the attklm operon and this counteraction occurs
when a. tumefaciens enters stationary phase, it is rational
to speculate that the intracellular content of ssa might be

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

ssa modulating qs signal decay 49

fig. 3. ssa enhances ahl-lactonase activity and decreases ahl
accumulation in a. tumefaciens.
a. the attklm promoter-directed b-galactosidase activity of strain
a6(attklm::lacz) without ssa induction (open symbols) or with
ssa induction (filled symbols) at the exponential growth phase
(12 h) and the stationary phase (24 h).
b. the ahl-lactonase activity of a6 without ssa induction (open
symbols) or with ssa induction (filled symbols) at the exponential
and stationary stages.
c. ahl accumulation in supernatants of strain k588 and its
derivative overexpressing aldh. symbols: open triangle, k588 in
bm medium; filled triangle, k588 in bm medium with ssa addition
at 12 h; filled square, k588(pla-aldh). in the above experiments,
ssa was added at a final concentration of 1 mm at the beginning
of culture or at the time point indicated by arrow.

significantly increased when the bacterial cells encounter
nutritional stress. such a change could be caused either by
overproduction of ssa or by decreased metabolism of ssa
by aldh. the intriguing finding that constitutive expression
of aldh, the enzyme metabolizing ssa, abolished the
typical expression of the attklm operon at the stationary
phase (fig. 1b) implies that aldh could be the cause. in

fig. 4. ssa is the signal ligand interacting with transcriptional
repressor attj.
a. dna gel retardation analysis of specific binding of attj to the
promoter of attklm (pattklm). lane 1, 32p-labelled pattklm probe;
lane 2, the probe incubated with bovine  xxxg124xxx  (bsa) as a
non-specific protein control. lanes 3–7, the probe was incubated
with purified attj with increasing concentrations shown on the top.
the final concentration of the probe used in this experiment was
2 nm.
b. ssa-dependent disassociation of attj–pattklm complex. lane
1, probe only; lanes 2–5, the probe and attj were incubated with or
without ssa as indicated; lanes 6 and 7, the probe and attj were
incubated with 10 mm of sa and gaba respectively.
c. itc analysis of ssa binding to attj. the upper panel shows the
itc titration of 100 mm attj with 2 ml aliquots of 1 mm ssa in dpbs
buffer, ph 7.3, at 28°c. the lower panel shows the binding
isotherm for titration as described in the upper panel where the
solid line is the best fit of the data to a one-site binding model.

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

50 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
affected in an attk and aldh double mutant strain. furthermore, we showed that overexpression of attk in the double
mutant a6(attklm::lacz, daldh) strongly inhibited the
expression of the attklm operon (fig. 6b). in contrast,
overexpression of attm from the same operon encoding an
ahl lactonase had no effect on attklm expression
(fig. 6b). thus, we conclude that a. tumefaciens has two
ssa metabolic enzymes, i.e. aldh and attk, which are
expressed at the exponential and stationary phase
respectively.
discussion
fig. 5. regulation of aldh expression by ppgpp synthase rela in
a. tumefaciens.
a. rt-pcr analysis of aldh transcriptional expression in strain a6
and its rela null mutant a6(rela::kanr). the rna samples were
prepared at different time points of bacterial growth as indicated.
b. western blot analysis of aldh expression at different growth
stages of a6 and a6(rela::kanr) using aldh-specific antibody.

in this study, we have used genetic, chemical and biochemical approaches to investigate the molecular mecha-

silico analysis showed that aldh seems to have a typical
s70-type promoter that directs gene expression in log
phase. in agreement with the in silico promoter analysis,
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr)
analysis showed that the transcriptional expression of aldh
was strong at the early growth stages of a. tumefaciens a6,
declined at the transition to the stationary phase, and
disappeared completely at the stationary phase (fig. 5a).
considering that expression of the ppgpp synthase rela
at the stationary phase is essential for induction of attklm
(zhang et al., 2004), we determined whether abolishing
rela expression could change the expression pattern of
aldh. the results showed the rela null mutant
a6(rela::kanr) expressed the aldh gene constitutively
throughout, maintaining a similar transcriptional level at
both the exponential and stationary phases (fig. 5a). furthermore, western blot confirmed similar contrasting
expression patterns of aldh in the wild type and the rela
mutant (fig. 5b), demonstrating that aldh expression
is subjected to the negative regulation of rela in
a. tumefaciens.
attk is a functional homologue of aldh
a previous study proposed that attk is a succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (carlier et al., 2004). to study
whether attk also functions to digest ssa in a. tumefaciens cells, we compared the growth patterns of strain a6
and its derivatives using ssa as the sole carbon source.
the wild-type strain a6, the attk null mutant
a6(attklm::lacz) and the aldh null mutant a6(daldh) displayed similar population density after growth for 2 days
(fig. 6a). however, bacterial growth was dramatically

fig. 6. attk is a functional  xxxg138xxx .
a. double deletion of attk and aldh abolishes the growth of
a. tumefaciens using ssa as the sole carbon source. strain a6 and
its derivatives were inoculated in bm medium in which mannitol
was replaced by 1 mm ssa. cell growth was monitored by
measurement of optical density (od600) after incubation 24 h at
28°c and shaking at 200 r.p.m.
b. complementation of the aldh deletion mutant by attk. bacterial
cells were grown in bm medium overnight and the b-galactosidase
activity was determined. experiments were repeated three times
and bars indicate the standard deviation.

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

ssa modulating qs signal decay 51
nism that couples the qs signal decay to generic stress
response of a. tumefaciens. unexpectedly, the investigation led to the discovery of the signalling function of the
gaba metabolites. the diverse physiological roles of the
gaba metabolic pathway have been documented in
mammalian and plant kingdoms, but little is known in
prokaryotes except for its metabolic functions (dover and
halpern, 1972; tian et al., 2005). the results from this
study demonstrate that the enzymes of the gaba degradation pathway may not be present in prokaryotes purely
for metabolic functions.
ssa is the key signal coupling stress response to qs
signal decay
the negative transcription factor attj and the stress alarmone ppgpp synthase rela comprise the two important
regulatory components controlling the expression of the
qs signal decay system in a. tumefaciens. several lines
of evidence from this study suggest that ssa plays a
vital role in modulation of the qs signal decay system
by transducing the upstream stress alarmone signal to
modulate the repressor activity of the downstream regulator attj. first, transposon mutagenesis and deletion
analysis showed that disruption of the aldh gene significantly increased the expression of attklm operon as
well as the ahl-lactonase activity encoded by attm
(fig. 1). biochemical analysis demonstrated that aldh
encodes a nad-dependent  xxxg138xxx , which oxidizes ssa
to generate sa (fig. 2). second, exogenous addition of
ssa and its precursor gaba into the cell cultures considerably increases attklm transcription and ahllactonase activities, respectively, resulting in a sharp
decrease in ahl qs signal accumulation and ti-plasmid
conjugal transfer (fig. 3, figs s2 and s3). third, the gel
retardation assay demonstrated that ssa, but not its
precursor gaba or metabolic product sa, attenuates the
binding ability of attj to the promoter of the attklm
operon and prevents the formation of attj–pattklm
complex (fig. 4). fourth, abundant expression of aldh
occurs at the early growth stage but its product
decreases sharply when bacterial cells enter the stationary phase (fig. 5), which explains the observed
stationary-phase-dependent expression pattern of ahllactonase (zhang et al., 2002). moreover, this study has
also established that the termination of aldh at the stationary phase is due to the activation of the stress alarmone synthase rela at the same growth stage (zhang
et al., 2004), because in the null mutant of rela, aldh is
expressed at a constant level throughout the bacterial
growth phases (fig. 5). thus, our findings have
unequivocally established that ssa is the key signal that
couples the generic stress response to the qs signal
decay in a. tumefaciens.

why a. tumefaciens requires two differentially
expressed  xxxg138xxx  enzymes?
it is interesting to note that a. tumefaciens has two differentially expressed ssa metabolic enzymes, i.e. aldh and
attk, occurring at the exponential and stationary phases
respectively. in addition to their vital roles in ssa signalling as discussed later, these two periodically expressed
enzymes may also serve to keep the intracellular ssa
content within a subtle range. ssa is chemically active,
and its accumulation might be toxic in all living organisms.
we noted that external addition of ssa higher than 15 mm
has a detrimental effect on bacterial growth. the existence of two ssa metabolic enzymes also explains the
seemingly inconsistent findings in the first part of the
results section, i.e. deletion of aldh in the reporter strain
a6(attklm::lacz) significantly increased the attklm
promoter-controlled b-galactosidase activity (fig. 1b),
whereas deletion of the same gene in strain a6 had no
significant effect on the same promoter-regulated ahllactonase activity at the stationary phase (fig. 1c). the
answer to this puzzle becomes clear now because, in
mutant a6(attklm::lacz;daldh), both ssa metabolic
enzymes were mutated, while in a6(daldh), only one ssa
metabolic enzyme was deleted; therefore, a higher
amount of intracellular ssa could be accumulated in the
former mutant than in the latter.
more importantly, the findings from this study unveil an
amazingly sophisticated signal regulatory mechanism that
governs the on/off state of the qs signal decay pathway in
a. tumefaciens (fig. 7). in this model, expression of aldh
at the early growth stage prevents accumulation of ssa in
the cytoplasm, thus, ahl-lactonase production is kept at
the basal level because the attklm operon is tightly
repressed by attj (zhang et al., 2002) (fig. 7a); when
bacterial cells enter the stationary phase, a starvation
signal induces the production of rela and accumulation of
ppgpp; binding of ppgpp to rna polymerase (rnap)
may destabilize the rnap-s70-promoter complexes and
terminate the transcription of aldh, which in turn leads to
accumulation of ssa; the accumulated ssa interacts with
attj, dissociates the repressor from the attklm promoter,
which leads to expression of ahl-lactonase (attm) (the
qs signal decay system is now ‘on’) and rapid decay of
the ahl qs signal (fig. 7b). remarkably, the attk gene of
the attklm operon encodes a functional  xxxg138xxx  that
can complement the function of aldh (fig. 6). the
co-ordinated expression of attk and attm from the same
operon at the stationary phase thus allows the qs signal
decay system to return automatically to the original ‘off’
state following elimination of ahl signals by the attmencoded ahl-lactonase, because attk encodes a functional ssa metabolic enzyme, which digests excessive
ssa (fig. 7b).

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

52 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
rnap that is induced under many stress conditions
including starvation and can compete with the vegetative
sigma factor s70 (hengge-aronis, 2002). in e. coli, rnap
is composed of a core enzyme (e) and one of the seven
sigma factors (s). in the stationary phase, downregulation
of those genes expressed at the exponential growth
phase is believed to occur through the effect of binding of
ppgpp at the interface of the b- and b′-subunits of rnap
(chatterji et al., 1998). binding of ppgpp destabilizes
es70–promoter complexes, which facilitates formation of
e–rpos complexes for initiating the transcription of
stress-related genes (jishage et al., 2002). our previous
data show that the ppgpp synthase rela is essential for
the induction of the qs signal decay system at the stationary phase of a. tumefaciens, which is consistent with
the general role of ppgpp as a stress alarmone. however,
it was not clear how the attj transcriptional repressor
could fit into the regulatory network of the alarmonemediated induction of attklm operon (zhang et al., 2004).
the findings that ssa is the signal counteracting the
inhibitory effect of attj (figs 3 and 4) and expression of
the ssa oxidative enzyme aldh is subjected to the negative regulation of ppgpp synthase rela (fig. 5) have thus
illustrated a new stress response signalling mechanism.
agrobacterium tumefaciens and beyond: the role of the
gaba degradation

fig. 7. schematic presentation of the regulatory network for qs
signal decay in a. tumefaciens. the genes located within the same
locus are connected by solid lines and those located in different
loci are indicated by dashed lines. a solid arrow indicates
constitutive processes, and a dashed arrow suggests inducible
processes.
a. the qs signal decay system is ‘off’ at the bacterial exponential
growth phase, in which cytosol ssa is constantly removed by aldh.
accumulated ahl signals modulate the expression of qs  xxxd313xxx .
b. the qs signal decay system is ‘on’ at the bacterial stationary
phase. the stress alarmone ppgpp synthesized by rela interferes
with the function of rna polymerase (rnap), stops expression of
aldh, which results in accumulation of ssa. interaction of ssa with
attj repressor activates the expression of attklm operon. attm
degrades the ahl signal to acylhomoserine (ah) and qs stops.
the excessive ssa is removed by attk, which gradually resets the
qs decay system to the ‘off’ mode. exogenous gaba from the
host plant can also activate the qs decay system by increasing the
cytosol ssa pool through gaba-transaminase ( xxxg8xxx ).

a stress response signalling pathway independent of
the stress sigma factor rpos
one intriguing puzzle in microbiology is how
a-proteobacteria including a. tumefaciens, which does
not have an rpos homologue (wood et al., 2001), could
control the expression of the genes implicated in stress
and starvation responses. rpos, encoded by rpos homologues in many bacterial species, is a sigma subunit of

a recent study reported that the attklm operon of
a. tumefaciens strain c58 could be activated by gamma
butyrolactone (gbl), gamma hydroxybutyrate (ghb) and
ssa (carlier et al., 2004). more recently, chevrot et al.
(2006) showed that gaba is a plant signal that stimulates
the inactivation of ahl qs signal by the agrobacterium
lactonase attm. consistently, we found that gaba
strongly induces the expression of the attklm operon at a
level similar to ssa (fig. s2). unlike its metabolite ssa,
gaba does not seem to interfere with the promoter
binding activity of attj (fig. 4), suggesting that the
observed induction activity of gaba is due to conversion
to its metabolite ssa.
succinic semialdehyde is typically synthesized by a
 xxxg8xxx  ( xxxg8xxx ), which together with
 xxxg138xxx  is responsible for converting ssa to sa; this
constitutes the gaba degradation pathway, which is
widely conserved in microorganisms, as well as in
mammals and plants. the finding that gaba has a similar
effect on induction of the qs signal decay system suggests that a. tumefaciens has a functional  xxxg8xxx , which
is confirmed by biochemical analysis. although  xxxg8xxx 
activity is significantly enhanced when a. tumefaciens
grows in the presence of gaba, the enzyme activity is
also evident in the bacterial cells without gaba induction
(fig. s5). the finding that a. tumefaciens has a  xxxg8xxx 

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

ssa modulating qs signal decay 53
table 1. bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study.
strains and plasmids
a. tumefaciens
nt1(trar,
tra::lacz749)
a6
a6(attklm::lacz)
a6(attklm::lacz,
aldh::tn5)
a6(attklm::lacz,
daldh)
a6(attklm::lacz,
daldh, pla-aldh)
a6(attklm::lacz,
daldh, pla-attk)
a6(attklm::lacz,
daldh, pla-attm)
a6(rela::kanr)
a6(daldh)
a6(pla-aldh)
k749
k588
k588(pla-aldh)
e. coli
dh5a
bw020767
hb101(prk2013)
bl21(de3)
s17-1
plasmids
plafr3
pla-aldh
pla-attk
pla-attm
paw19
paw19-daldh
p2t-attj
pet14b-aldh
prl-aldh::tn5

relevant characteristicsa

sources or references

c58c1rs harbouring pjm749 and psvb33, indicator strain for
3oc8hsl bioassay, kanr, tcr
wild-type octopine strain of a. tumefaciens
a6 with the attklm operon transcriptionally fused with
tn3hoho1-lacz, ampr
a6(attklm::lacz) in which the aldh gene was inserted by tn5,
ampr, kanr
a6(attklm::lacz) with in frame deletion of the aldh gene, ampr

piper et al. (1993)

a6(attklm::lacz, daldh) with aldh overexpression, ampr, tcr

this study

r

a6(attklm::lacz, daldh) with attk overexpression, amp , tc

r

a. kerr
zhang et al. (2004)
this study
this study

this study

a6(attklm::lacz, daldh) with attm overexpression, ampr, tcr

this study
r

a6 with rela disrupted by kanamycin-resistant fragment, kan
a6 with an in frame deletion of the aldh gene
a6 with aldh overexpression, tcr
nopaline strain, pat-, pti-, ti-plasmid conjugal transfer recipient
strain, rifr
c58c1 harbouring the ti-plasmid of ptib6s3trac, eryr, chlr
k588 with aldh overexpression, eryr, chlr, tcr

zhang et al. (2004)
this study
this study
a. kerr

supe44 dlacu169(f80laczdm15) hsdr17 lpir reca1 enda1
gyra96 thi-1 rela1
harbouring tn5 transposon for a. tumefaciens mutagenesis, kanr
thr leu thi reca hsdr hsdm pro, kanr
f– ompt hsds(rb– mb–) dcm+ tetr gal (de3) enda hte
pro res– mod+ integrated copy of  xxxg1955xxx , mob+

laboratory collection

incp, broad host range cosmid vector, tcr
plafr3 harbouring the encoding region of aldh, tcr
plafr3 harbouring the encoding region of attk, tcr
plafr3 harbouring the encoding region of attm, tcr
f1(+)ori lacza of pbluescript ii (sk+), sacb, sucr
paw19 containing part of aldh and its flanking region for aldh
in frame deletion, kanr
pgex-2t vector harbouring the encoding region of attj for protein
purification, ampr
pet14b vector harbouring the encoding region of aldh for protein
purification, ampr
a plasmid rescued from strain a6(attklm::lacz, aldh::tn5) by
self-ligation, kanr

a. kerr
this study

larsen et al. (2002)
laboratory collection
stratagen
a. kerr
staskawicz et al. (1987)
this study
this study
this study
s.k. farrand
this study
this study
this study
this study

a. ampr, ampicillin-resistant; chlr, chloramphenicol-resistant; eryr, erythromycin-resistant; kanr, kanamycin-resistant; rifr, rifampicin-resistant;
sucr, sucrose-resistant; tcr, tetracycline-resistant; trac, constitutive in 3oc8hsl production and ti-plasmid conjugal transfer.

enzyme(s) explains why gaba, which was not able to
interfere with attj binding to the attklm promoter, could
induce the expression of attm (chevrot et al., 2006).
in bacteria, the gaba degradation has been known
previously to metabolize gaba exclusively and the compound may act as a signal to induce its own metabolic
enzymes (donnelly and cooper, 1981; prell et al., 2002;
schneider et al., 2002). however, this seemingly narrow
metabolic function of the gaba degradation may not be
able to explain the observation that the shunt can be
induced by a range of stress conditions, including acidic
ph, osmotic shock and starvation (schneider et al., 2002;
metzner et al., 2004). in addition, attj homologues, which
are the members of the iclr negative transcription factor

family (zhang et al., 2002), are widely conserved in
microorganisms. these findings plus the results from this
study suggest that the biological function of the gaba
degradation in microorganisms may not be as simple as
for metabolism only and the potential signalling roles of its
metabolites in other bacterial species are clearly worthy of
further investigation.
experimental procedures
strains and culture conditions
the bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are
listed in table 1. e. coli strains were grown at 37°c in lb
medium. a. tumefaciens strains were grown at 28°c in lb or

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

54 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
in bm minimal medium (zhang et al., 2002). antibiotics were
supplemented at the following concentrations when necessary: kanamycin, 100 mg  xxxg1167xxx ; ampicillin, 100 mg  xxxg1167xxx ; tetracycline, 5 mg  xxxg1167xxx  (a. tumefaciens) or 10 mg  xxxg1167xxx  (e. coli);
rifampincin, 50 mg  xxxg1167xxx . xgal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-bd-galactopyranoside) was included in the medium at a final
concentration of 50 mg  xxxg1167xxx  for detection of b-galactosidase
activity on solid agar plates. the chemicals used in this study
were purchased from sigma unless otherwise specified.

gene cloning and deletion
all the primers used in this study are listed in table s1.
plasmid preparation, ligation, cloning and transformation of
e. coli were performed following standard procedures. to
generate the suicide plasmid construct paw-daldh, two dna
fragments were amplified from a. tumefaciens a6 with the
primer pairs aldhf1/r1 and aldhf2/r2 respectively. after
enzymatic digestion and ligation, the ligation mixture was
directly aliquoted for another round of pcr amplification
using primers aldhf1/aldhr2. dna fragments of the
expected size were then recovered from 1% agarose gel,
blunted with klenow enzyme, and inserted into vector
paw19, which was treated with the same enzymes. the
resulting plasmid paw-daldh was screened by pcr and
confirmed by dna sequencing. for construction of pla-aldh,
pla-attm and pla-attk, the aldh, attm and attk genes from
a. tumefaciens a6 were amplified with corresponding pcr
primers respectively. pcr products were digested with
appropriate enzymes and purified using a qiaquick pcr
purification kit (qiagen), then ligated into the enzyme-treated
cosmid plafr3. the resultant constructs were verified by
dna sequencing.
in frame deletion of aldh in a. tumefaciens was carried out
following the modified procedure described previously
(metcalf et al., 1996). the transconjugants were screened on
bm medium containing kanamycin. the purified transconjugants were further selected on fresh bm agar plates containing 5% sucrose. the potential deletion mutants were then
selected by the loss of kanamycin resistance on lb agar
plates and confirmation by pcr with specific primers.

transformation and transposon mutagenesis
transformation of a. tumefaciens was carried out as reported
previously (zhang et al., 2004). transposon mutagenesis
was performed using e. coli bw020767 containing a mini tn5
transposon (larsen et al., 2002). the fresh overnight cultures
of e. coli bw020767 and a. tumefaciens a6(attklm::lacz)
were mixed together, plated on an lb agar plate and grown
for 5 h at 28°c. cells were then resuspended in sterile water
and plated on selective plates containing xgal and appropriate antibiotics. after incubation at 28°c for 4 days, the
colonies with a bluer colour than the parental strain
a6(attklm::lacz) were selected and purified. disrupted
genes were identified by sequencing the tn5-flanking fragments (larsen et al., 2002).

primers aldhf4/r4, then fused into the 6¥ his-tagging
expression vector pet14b (novagen) digested with bamhi.
the resultant construct pet14b-aldh was transformed into
host strain e. coli bl21(de3). after sequencing confirmation,
the his6-aldh protein was expressed and purified with the
ni-nta affinity column according to the procedure recommended by qiagen. for purification of the recombinant attj,
the attj coding region was amplified from strain a6 and fused
into the bamhi-ecori sites of the gst fusion expression
vector pgex-2t (pharmacia) to create construct p2t-attj.
after dna sequence verification, the construct was transformed into e. coli bl21(de3). attj protein was purified
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (amersham).

gel retardation and itc analysis
the gel retardation assay was performed as previously
reported (zhang et al., 2002). the promoter region of the
attklm operon was amplified by pcr, treated with ecori and
labelled at the 3′ end with [a-32p]-dctp by klenow enzyme.
the chemicals listed in fig. 4 were included in the reaction
solution when necessary. after separation on native page
gel (4.5%) at 4°c, the radioactive signals were recorded by
autoradiograph.
titration calorimetric measurements were performed using
a vp-itc calorimeter (microcal, northampton, ma) following
the manufacturer’s protocol. in brief, 2 ml aliquots of ssa
solution (1 mm) were added at an interval of 4 min between
injections via  xxxd3426xxx  ml syringe to the sample cell containing
1.4 ml of attj (0.1 mm) with constant stirring at 290 r.p.m.,
and heat changes accompanying these additions were
recorded. the protein samples were extensively dialysed
against dpbs buffer (containing 0.2 g kcl, 0.2 g kh2po4,
8.0 g nacl and 2.16 g na2hpo4·7h2o per litre, ph 7.3)
before titration. ssa solution was prepared directly in the
dpbs buffer and all titrant and titrate solutions were thoroughly degassed under vacuum prior to loading in the itc.
the titration experiment was repeated at least twice and the
data were calibrated with the buffer control and fitted using
the one-site model to determine the binding constant (ka)
using microcal origin v7.0 software.

quantitative assay
quantitative analysis of the b-galactosidase activity of
a. tumefaciens strains was conducted according to the
method previously described (stachel et al., 1985). the
amount of ahl signals produced by bacterial cells was quantitatively determined as described previously (dong et al.,
2000) and expressed as the equivalent of 3oc8hsl (wang
et al., 2006), which is the major ahl signal in a. tumefaciens
(zhang et al., 1993). ti-plasmid conjugal transfer analysis
was performed following the published method (wang et al.,
2006). when required, ssa or gaba was supplied in bm
minimal media with a final concentration of 1 mm.

purification of aldh and attj

ssa dehydrogenase assay and characterization of
reaction products

for purification of the recombined protein his6-aldh, the aldh
encoding region from a. tumefaciens a6 was amplified using

the catalytic reaction of ssa by aldh was carried out in 3 ml
of phosphate buffer (50 mm, ph 8.0) containing 120 mm

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

ssa modulating qs signal decay 55
ssa, 120 mm nad and 40 mm aldh at 28°c for 3 h with
gentle shaking. as the positive control, ssa was replaced by
the same amount of sa (from sigma) and reacted in the
same way as described above; in the negative control, the
same amount of denatured aldh was added to the ssa
reaction mixture. for chemical derivatization of sa to facilitate hplc analysis, each reaction mixture was reacted separately with 0.36 mmol hexylamine using 0.72 mmol 1-ethyl-3(3-dimethylamino-propyl)carbodiimine (edc) as the coupling
agent (hoare and koshland, 1967). for hplc analysis and
purification, the sample was introduced onto a symmetry c18
reverse-phase column (4.6 ¥ 250 mm). fractions were eluted
isocratically with 50/50 methanol/water (v/v) at a flow rate of
1 ml min-1, and detected by a waters 996 photodiode array
detector. esi-ms was performed on a finnigan/mat lcq
ion-trap mass spectrometer. the purified fraction was introduced into the mass spectrometer by loop injection.

rna purification and rt-pcr
total rnas were extracted from the bacterial cells cultivated
in minimal medium using rneasy® mini kit (qiagen) and
treated with rnase-free dnase i. rt-pcr was conducted
following a one-step strategy (qiagen). an aliquot of 0.1 mg
of total rnas was used as the template for rt-pcr to
amplify the aldh coding region using the primers
rtaldhf1/r1 (table s1). a 1.3 kb fragment of the 16s rrna
gene was also amplified as an internal control.

references
bouche, n., and fromm, h. (2004) gaba in plants: just a
metabolite? trends plant sci 9: 110–115.
braun, k.p., cody, r.b., jr, jones, d.r., and peterson, c.m.
(1995) a structural assignment for a stable acetaldehydelysine adduct. j biol chem 270: 11263–11266.
carlier, a., chevrot, r., dessaux, y., and faure, d. (2004)
the assimilation of gamma-butyrolactone in agrobacterium tumefaciens c58 interferes with the accumulation of
the n-acyl-homoserine lactone signal. mpmi 17: 951–957.
chatterji, d., fujita, n., and ishihama, a. (1998) the mediator
for stringent control, ppgpp, binds to the beta-subunit of
escherichia coli rna polymerase. genes cells 3: 279–
287.
chevrot, r., rosen, r., haudecoeur, e., cirou, a., shelp,
b.j., ron, e., and faure, d. (2006) gaba controls the level
of quorum-sensing signal in agrobacterium tumefaciens.
proc natl acad sci usa 103: 7460–7464.
dong, y.h., xu, j.l., li, x.z., and zhang, l.h. (2000) aiia, an
enzyme that inactivates the acylhomoserine lactone
quorum-sensing signal and attenuates the virulence of
erwinia carotovora. proc natl acad sci usa 97: 3526–
3531.
donnelly, m.i., and cooper, r.a. (1981) succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenases of escherichia coli: their role in the
degradation of p-hydroxyphenylacetate and gammaaminobutyrate. eur j biochem 113: 555–561.
dover, s., and halpern, y.s. (1972) utilization of
g- xxxd2177xxx  as the sole carbon and nitrogen source
by escherichia coli k-12 mutants. j bacteriol 109: 835–843.

gordon, n. (2004) succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency ( xxxg138xxx ) (4-hydroxybutyric aciduria, gammahydroxybutyric aciduria). eur j paediatr  xxxd122xxx  8: 261–
265.
hengge-aronis, r. (2002) signal transduction and regulatory
mechanisms involved in control of the sigma(s) (rpos)
subunit of rna polymerase. microbiol mol biol rev 66:
373–395.
hoare, d.g., and koshland, d.e., jr (1967) a method for the
quantitative modification and estimation of carboxylic acid
groups in proteins. j biol chem 242: 2447–2453.
jishage, m., kvint, k., shingler, v., and nystrom, t. (2002)
regulation of sigma factor competition by the alarmone
ppgpp. genes dev 16: 1260–1270.
larsen, r.a., wilson, m.m., guss, a.m., and metcalf, w.w.
(2002) genetic analysis of pigment biosynthesis in xanthobacter autotrophicus py2 using a new, highly efficient
transposon mutagenesis system that is functional in a wide
variety of bacteria. arch microbiol 178: 193–201.
metcalf, w.w., jiang, w., daniels, l.l., kim, s.k.,
haldimann, a., and wanner, b.l. (1996) conditionally replicative and conjugative plasmids carrying lacz alpha for
cloning, mutagenesis, and allele replacement in bacteria.
plasmid 35: 1–13.
metzner, m., germer, j., and hengge, r. (2004) multiple
stress signal integration in the regulation of the complex
sigma s-dependent csid-ygaf-gabdtp operon in escherichia coli. mol microbiol 51: 799–811.
pappas, k.m., and winans, s.c. (2003) a luxr-type regulator from agrobacterium tumefaciens elevates ti plasmid
copy number by activating transcription of plasmid replication genes. mol microbiol 48: 1059–1079.
piper, k.r., beck von bodman, s., and farrand, s.k. (1993)
conjugation factor of agrobacterium tumefaciens regulates
ti plasmid transfer by autoinduction. nature 362: 448–450.
prell, j., boesten, b., poole, p., and priefer, u.b. (2002) the
rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae vf39 gammaaminobutyrate (gaba) aminotransferase gene (gabt) is
induced by gaba and highly expressed in bacteroids.
microbiology 148: 615–623.
qin, y., luo, z.q., smyth, a.j., gao, p., beck von bodman,
s., and farrand, s.k. (2000) quorum-sensing signal
binding results in dimerization of trar and its release from
membranes into the cytoplasm. embo j 19: 5212–5221.
rosen, r., sacher, a., shechter, n., becher, d., buttner, k.,
biran, d., et al. (2004) two-dimensional reference map of
agrobacterium tumefaciens proteins. proteomics 4: 1061–
1073.
schneider, b.l., ruback, s., kiupakis, a.k., kasbarian, h.,
pybus, c., and reitzer, l. (2002) the escherichia coli
gabdtpc operon: specific  xxxd2177xxx  catabolism and nonspecific induction. j bacteriol 184: 6976–
6986.
shelp, b.j., bown, a.w., and mclean, m.d. (1999) metabolism and functions of gamma- xxxd2177xxx . trends
plant sci 4: 446–452.
stachel, s.e., an, g., flores, c., and nester, e.w. (1985) a
tn3 lacz transposon for the random generation of betagalactosidase gene fusions: application to the analysis of
gene expression in agrobacterium. embo j 4: 891–
898.

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

56 c. wang, h.-b. zhang, l.-h. wang and l.-h. zhang
staskawicz, b., dahlbeck, d., keen, n., and napoli, c. (1987)
molecular characterization of cloned avirulence genes from
race 0 and race 1 of pseudomonas syringae pv. glycinea.
j bacteriol 169: 5789–5794.
tempé, j., estrade, c., and petit, a. (1978) the biological
significance of opines. ii. the conjugative activities of the ti
plasmids of agrobacterium tumefaciens. in proceedings of
the 4th international conference on plant pathogenic bacteria, pp. 153–160.
tian, j., bryk, r., itoh, m., suematsu, m., and nathan, c.
(2005) variant tricarboxylic acid cycle in mycobacterium
tuberculosis:
identification
of
{alpha}-ketoglutarate
decarboxylase. proc natl acad sci usa 102: 10670–
10675.
varju, p., katarova, z., madarasz, e., and szabo, g. (2001)
gaba signalling during development: new data and old
questions. cell tissue res 305: 239–246.
wang, c., zhang, h.b., chen, g., chen, l., and zhang, l.h.
(2006) dual control of quorum sensing by two tram antiactivators in agrobacterium tumefaciens octopine strain
a6. j bacteriol 188: 2435–2445.
wood. d.w., setubal, j.c., kaul, r., monks, d.e., kitajima,
j.p., okura, v.k., et al. (2001) the genome of the natural
genetic engineer agrobacterium tumefaciens c58. science
294: 2317–2323.
zhang, h.b., wang, l.h., and zhang, l.h. (2002) genetic
control of quorum-sensing signal turnover in agrobacterium tumefaciens. proc natl acad sci usa 99: 4638–4643.
zhang, h.b., wang, c., and zhang, l.h. (2004) the quormone degradation system of agrobacterium tumefaciens is
regulated by starvation signal and stress alarmone
(p)ppgpp. mol microbiol 52: 1389–1401.

zhang, l., murphy, p.j., kerr, a., and tate, m.e. (1993)
agrobacterium conjugation and gene regulation by n-acyll-homoserine lactones. nature 362: 446–448.
zhu, j., and winans, s.c. (1999) autoinducer binding by
the quorum-sensing regulator trar increases affinity for
target promoters in vitro and decreases trar turnover
rates in whole cells. proc natl acad sci usa 96: 4832–
4837.
zhu, j., oger, p.m., schrammeijer, b., hooykaas, p.j.,
farrand, s.k., and winans, s.c. (2000) the bases
of crown gall tumorigenesis. j bacteriol 182: 3885–
3895.

supplementary material
the following supplementary material is available for this
article online:
fig. s1. ssa dose-dependant induction of the attklm
expression.
fig. s2. gaba increases ahl-lactonase expression and
decreases ahl accumulation in a. tumefaciens.
fig. s3. induction of qs signal decay system by ssa and
related chemicals.
fig. s4. effect of ssa, gaba and aldh-deletion on the efficiency of ti-plasmid conjugal transfer in a. tumefaciens a6.
fig. s5. constitutive and inducible pyruvate-dependent
 xxxg8xxx  ( xxxg8xxx ) enzyme activities in
a. tumefaciens.
table s1. pcr primers used in this study.
this material is available as part of the online article from
http://www.blackwell-synergy.com

© 2006 the authors
journal compilation © 2006 blackwell publishing ltd, molecular microbiology, 62, 45–56

