br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

a v a i l a b l e a t w w w. s c i e n c e d i r e c t . c o m

w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / b r a i n r e s

research report

the role of peripheral and central sodium channels in
mediating brain temperature fluctuations induced by
intravenous cocaine
eugene a. kiyatkin⁎, p. leon brown
cellular neurobiology branch, national institute on drug abuse-intramural research program, national institutes of health, dhhs,
333 cassell drive, baltimore, md 21224, usa

a r t i c le i n fo

ab s t r a c t

article history:

while cocaine's interaction with the dopamine (da) transporter and subsequent increase in

accepted 4 august 2006

da transmission are usually considered key factors responsible for its locomotor

available online 7 september 2006

stimulatory and reinforcing properties, many centrally mediated physiological and
psychoemotional effects of cocaine are resistant to da receptor blockade, suggesting the

keywords:

importance of other non-da mechanisms. to explore the role of cocaine's interaction with

brain temperature

na+ channels, rats were used to compare locomotor stimulatory and temperature (nacc,

behavior

temporal muscle and skin) effects of repeated iv injections of cocaine (1 mg/kg) with those

dopamine uptake inhibition

induced by procaine (pro 5 mg/kg), a short-acting local anesthetic with negligible effect on

procaine

the  xxxg2149xxx , and cocaine methiodide (coc-met 1.31 mg/kg), a quaternary cocaine

cocaine methiodide

derivative that is unable to cross the blood–brain barrier. while pro, unlike cocaine, did not

metabolic brain activation

induce locomotor activation, it mimicked cocaine in its ability to increase brain temperature

and inhibition

following the initial injection and to induce biphasic, down–up fluctuations following

rats

repeated injections. this similarity suggests that both these effects of cocaine may be driven
by its action on na+ channels, a common action of both drugs. while coc-met also did not
affect locomotor activity, it shared with cocaine and pro their ability to increase brain
temperature but failed to induce temperature decreases after repeated injections. these
findings point toward activation of peripheral na+ channels as the primary mechanism of
rapid excitatory effects of cocaine and inhibition of centrally located na+ channels as the
primary mechanism for transient inhibitory effects of cocaine. da receptor blockade
(sch23390 + eticlopride) fully eliminated locomotor stimulatory and temperature-increasing
effects of cocaine, but its temperature-decreasing effects remained intact. surprisingly, da
receptor blockade also altered the temperature fluctuations caused by pro and coc-met,
suggesting that some of the central effects triggered via na+ channels are in fact dadependent. finally, repeated administration of pro to animals that had previous cocaine
experience led to conditioned locomotion and potentiated temperature-increasing effects of
this drug. it appears, therefore, that, in addition to the central effects of cocaine mediated via
interaction with the  xxxg2149xxx  and potentiation of da uptake, interaction with

⁎ corresponding author. fax: +1 410 550 5553.
e-mail address: ekiyatki@intra.nida.nih.gov (e.a. kiyatkin).
0006-8993/$ – see front matter © 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.08.016

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

39

peripheral and central na+ channels is important for the initial physiological and, perhaps,
affective effects of cocaine, likely contributing to the unique abuse potential of this drug.
© 2006 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.

1.

introduction

although cocaine acts on multiple neural substrates in the
brain and the periphery, neuropharmacological evidence
strongly suggests that cocaine's inhibition of dopamine (da)
uptake underlies its locomotor stimulatory and reinforcing
effects (ritz et al., 1987; taylor and ho, 1978; wise and bozarth,
1987). there are, however, two problems when attempting to
invoke this drug action as the sole mechanism responsible for
changes in da transmission and reinforcement during
cocaine self-administration. first, cocaine is a pure uptake
inhibitor, with no effect on da release in vitro (heikkila et al.,
1975; rothman et al., 2001), and inhibits impulse-dependent
da release in vivo as suggested by da cell recordings following
intravenous (iv) administration (einhorn et al., 1988; pitts and
marwah, 1987). although cocaine potentiates evoked da
release (lee et al., 2001; stamford et al., 1989; venton et al.,
2006), it remains unclear how cocaine per se might increase da
levels via an uptake-inhibiting mechanism if impulse-dependent da release is inhibited. the drug action that induces this
release, and whether this action even exists, remains unclear.
second, cocaine has a high affinity for the  xxxg2149xxx 
(ic50 = 0.3–0. 8 mum; hennings et al., 1999; rothman et al., 2001).
while a single iv cocaine injection results in a rapid increase in
brain cocaine levels (∼ 26 mum as suggested by direct pet
measurements; fowler et al., 1998), leading to almost complete inhibition of da reuptake (volkow et al., 1996), brain
levels of cocaine achieved during repeated self-injections (up
to 80–100 mum, as calculated from measured peaks and halflives of radioactive cocaine in the stratum; fowler et al., 1998)
are enough to totally saturate all da transporters. further
injections, consequently, may leave cocaine available to act
via other mechanisms during self-administration. therefore,
while important for drug-seeking behavior and the initiation
of drug taking, cocaine's action on the  xxxg2149xxx  does not
sufficiently explain the tight regulation of highly cyclical drug
intakes in self-administering animals.
our previous work showed that nucleus accumbens (nacc)
da-dependent electrochemical signals increase after the
initial self-administration of cocaine, but fluctuate biphasically (down–up) at elevated plateau levels during subsequent
injections (kiyatkin and stein, 1995). similar, though less
pronounced, changes also occurred during repeated passive
cocaine injections (kiyatkin and stein, 1996). while the
pattern of tonic da signal changes generally mimics that of
extracellular da levels evaluated by microdialysis (hemby et
al., 1997; wise et al., 1995), the nature of rapid post-cocaine
signal decreases remained unclear. since brain temperature
fluctuates in response to various stimuli and reflects metabolic neural activation (kiyatkin et al., 2002), we recently used
this parameter to clarify this issue. matching electrochemical
findings, brain temperature increased following the initial and
fluctuated following repeated cocaine self-injections (kiyatkin
and brown, 2003). similar, albeit less pronounced, brain
temperature fluctuations also occurred during repeated pas-

sive cocaine injections (kiyatkin and brown, 2004). while the
inhibiting action of iv cocaine on monoamine uptake might be
responsible for its locomotor stimulatory and brain temperature-increasing effects, a direct inhibition of central na+
channels may underlie rapid, transient decreases in brain
temperature after each repeated drug administration.
although cocaine's affinity for na+ channels is lower than
that for monoamine transporters (ic50 = 14–17 mum; gifford and
johnson, 1992; ritz et al., 1987), rapid and strong increases in
brain cocaine levels after each repeated injection are high
enough for full manifestation of this action. when locally
applied by iontophoresis, cocaine potently inhibits striatal
neurons (kiyatkin and rebec, 2000). these inhibitions are
especially strong during glutamate-induced neuronal excitation, totally resistant to systemic da receptor blockade and
mimicked by iontophoretic procaine (pro), a short-acting
blocker of na+ channels with minimal effects on da uptake
(ritz et al., 1987). in contrast to the relatively slow and
prolonged action on da uptake (heron et al., 1994; kiyatkin
et al., 2000; pogun et al., 1991), cocaine's action on na+
channels is rapid and transient, tightly following rapid
fluctuations in brain cocaine levels. therefore, it may be
hypothesized that both these functionally antagonistic central
actions, acting in concert, are sufficient to drive and regulate
cocaine self-administration behavior.
in support of this hypothesis, we recently showed that
systemic da receptor blockade completely eliminates locomotor-stimulatory and temperature-increasing effects of iv
cocaine in the brain, but fails to affect its temperaturedecreasing effects in both the brain and skin (kiyatkin and
brown, 2005a). instead of rapid increases and biphasic, down–
up fluctuations following repeated iv injections seen in control
animals, during da receptor blockade cocaine only resulted in
phasic decreases in brain temperature after each injection.
although these findings support a role for da in locomotor
stimulatory and temperature-increasing effects of cocaine
and suggest that da-independent drug actions might be
responsible for cocaine-induced decreases in brain and skin
temperature, the exact role of cocaine's interaction with na+
channels in mediating its behavioral and physiological effects
remains unclear. this study was designed to clarify these
issues by comparing the behavioral and temperature effects of
iv cocaine, pro and cocaine methiodide (coc-met). while
pro can be used to assess the role of cocaine's action on
central and peripheral na+ channels, coc-met, a quaternary
derivative of cocaine that is unable to cross the brain–blood
barrier (shriver and long, 1971), is important for the examination of peripheral mechanisms that may mediate cocaine's
central effects.
similar to our previous studies (kiyatkin and brown, 2004,
2005a,b), cocaine was given to awake, unrestrained rats at the
optimal self-administration dose (1 mg/kg) as a series of 10
repeated passive iv injections delivered in a pattern that
mimicked the timing of self-administration behavior (8-min
inter-injection interval). pro was delivered at an equipotential

40
br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

fig. 1 – mean changes in temperature (a, b) and locomotion (c) following a series of ten iv injections of cocaine, procaine and cocaine methiodide in awake, unrestrained rats in
drug-naive conditions. a = relative temperature change with respect to the last pre-injection value. b = nacc–muscle and skin–muscle temperature differentials. filled
symbols show values significantly different (p < 0.05) from the last pre-injection value. the effect of time on both temperature and movement was statistically evaluated for each
drug with one-way anova with repeated measures. f values (nacc, skin, muscle and movement, respectively) were for cocaine: f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98; procaine:
f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98; and for cocaine methiodide: f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98. all values indicate significant effect, with p < 0.01. vertical hatched lines
show the moments of drug injection and horizontal hatched lines show basal values preceding the first drug injection.

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

anesthetic dose (5 mg/kg) and coc-met at an equimolar dose
(1.31 mg/kg) according to the same experimental protocol.
since da receptor blockade dramatically alters the behavioral
and temperature effects of cocaine, we also assessed how da
receptor blockade, induced by a mixture of d-1 and d-2
selective da antagonists (sch23390 and eticlopride), affects
the behavioral and temperature effects of pro and coc-met.
finally, to understand the potential role cocaine's interaction
with na+ channels may play in a conditioned response to the
drug, we studied the behavioral and temperature effects of
pro in rats previously treated with cocaine.

2.

results

2.1.
behavioral and temperature effects of cocaine,
procaine and cocaine methiodide
2.1.1.

tonic changes

as shown in fig. 1a, nacc temperature significantly increased
after the first injection of each tested drug and remained
elevated during subsequent repeated injections. this tonic
increase was weakest for cocaine (∼ 0.3 °c) and larger for pro

41

(∼ 0.6 °c) and coc-met (∼ 0.5 °c). skin temperature rapidly
decreased after the first injection of each drug and then either
fluctuated biphasically at levels below baseline (cocaine) or
near baseline (pro and coc-met). temperature changes in
muscle for the most part were similar to those in the nacc.
with each drug nacc–muscle differentials rapidly increased
after the first injection of each drug and remained at higher
levels during subsequent repeated injections (fig. 1b). in
contrast, skin–muscle differentials robustly decreased after
the first injection and either became cyclical (cocaine) or
slowly returned toward pre-injection baseline (pro and cocmet) following subsequent injections. locomotor activity was
greatly increased and phasic during repeated cocaine administration but was altered little by repeated pro and coc-met
(fig. 1c).

2.1.2.

phasic changes

as can be seen in fig. 2a, for each drug brain and muscle
temperatures significantly increased and skin temperature
significantly decreased after the first injection of a series. the
nacc temperature increase was larger and more rapid with
pro and coc-met than with cocaine. in contrast, skin
temperature decrease was equally rapid with each drug and

fig. 2 – mean changes in temperature following the initial (a) and repeated (b) injections of cocaine, procaine and cocaine
methiodide in drug-naive conditions. c = changes in locomotion following repeated injections of each drug. filled symbols
show values significantly different from the last pre-injection value (p < 0.05; scheffe post hoc test based on significant time
effects evaluated by anova with repeated measures). f values of the effect of the initial injections were presented in
abbreviations to fig. 1. f values (nacc, skin, muscle and movement, respectively) for repeated injections were for cocaine:
f125,1133 = 19.61, 88.39, 19.34 and 33.15 (each p < 0.001); for procaine: f53,485 = 2.94, 6.18, 1.68 and 4.54 (each, except muscle, is
significant with p < 0.01); for cocaine methiodide: f125,1133 = 6.03, 2.45, 4.61 and 2.12 (each is significant with p < 0.05).

42

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

maximal in amplitude (−0.6 °c) after cocaine. muscle temperature generally followed brain temperature, but the
increase was weaker and delayed with each drug. with
cocaine, but not with pro and coc-met, muscle temperature
decreased significantly immediately after injection.
when repeated injections (2–10) are averaged, it is apparent that cocaine induced significant biphasic temperature
fluctuations in each location, with maximal change in the skin
(fig. 2b). repeated cocaine injections also induced biphasic
fluctuations in locomotion, though it was the inverted mirror
image of temperature fluctuations (fig. 2c). while pro had
little effect on locomotion, it induced similar, although
weaker, biphasic temperature fluctuations in the nacc and
skin, with no changes in the muscle. similar to cocaine, postpro temperature decrease was maximal in skin. in contrast to
cocaine and pro, coc-met showed a weak, transient increase
in nacc temperature with a gradual decrease in skin and
muscle temperatures. changes in skin temperature followed
the same pattern as with cocaine and pro, but the change was
smaller.

2.1.3.

between-drug comparisons

nacc temperature increase following the first injection for
both pro and coc-met was significantly more rapid and
stronger than that for cocaine (fig. 3). although each drug
induced a similar decrease in skin temperature, it was
strongest for cocaine and weakest for pro. in contrast to the
first injection, nacc temperature transiently decreased during
repeated injections of both cocaine and pro; the decrease was
more rapid but weaker for pro than for cocaine. the cocmet-induced change was significantly different from that of
cocaine, showing a delayed biphasic fluctuation. similar to the

first injection, each drug transiently decreased skin temperature after repeated injections, but the effect of coc-met was
minimal, significantly weaker than that of cocaine.

2.2.
the effects of da receptor blockade on drug-induced
changes in temperature and locomotion
2.2.1.

tonic changes

da receptor blockade dramatically altered temperature changes induced by all drugs (figs. 4a, b) and completely
eliminated drug-induced locomotor responses (fig. 4c). in
contrast to moderate increases in brain and muscle temperature induced by cocaine in control conditions, these
parameters decreased under da receptor blockade. however,
the temperature-decreasing effects of cocaine remained
intact, resulting in a negative temperature trend. in contrast
to the stable increase in brain–muscle differential seen in
control conditions, this parameter decreased below the preinjection baseline. similar to control, during da receptor
blockade, skin–muscle differential also decreased during
repeated cocaine injections, though this decrease was greater
in control.
pre-treatment with da antagonists completely eliminated
the gradual increases in brain and muscle temperature and
decreases in skin temperature induced by repeated pro
injections seen in control conditions (fig. 4). similarly, during
this treatment, pro-induced changes in brain–muscle and
skin–muscle differential were completely eliminated.
in contrast, da receptor blockade had minimal effect on
brain and muscle temperature changes induced by coc-met
(fig. 4a). the increase, however, was less sharp, but more
tonic than in control. skin temperature decrease was blocked,

fig. 3 – between-drug differences in temperature changes in the nacc (top) and skin (bottom) following the initial injection of
cocaine, procaine and cocaine methiodide. filled symbols show values significantly different from those of cocaine.

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

fig. 4 – mean changes in temperature (a, b) and locomotion (c) following a series of ten iv injections of cocaine, procaine and cocaine methiodide in awake, unrestrained rats
during da receptor blockade. a = relative temperature change with respect to the last pre-injection value. b = nacc–muscle and skin–muscle temperature differentials. filled
symbols show values significantly different (p < 0.05) from the last pre-injection value. the effect of time on both temperature and movement was statistically evaluated for each
drug with one-way anova with repeated measures. f values (nacc, skin, muscle and movement, respectively) were for cocaine: f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98;
procaine: f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98; for cocaine methiodide: f20,650 = 11.40, 14.29, 24.43 and 15.98. all values indicate significant effect, with p < 0.01. vertical hatched
lines show the moments of drug injection and horizontal hatched lines show basal values preceding the first drug injection.

43

44

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

and this parameter instead followed brain and muscle temperatures. changes in nacc– and skin–muscle differential were
weaker. the effect was especially evident for skin.

2.2.2.

phasic changes

da receptor blockade totally eliminated brain and muscle
temperature increase following the first injection of cocaine,
decreasing temperature in both sites (fig. 5a). cocaine's effect
on skin temperature was similar to the control condition
without the return toward baseline seen before the next
injection. da receptor blockade also eliminated all temperature change following the first pro injection; nacc, muscle
and skin temperatures all remained at baseline levels. cocmet had almost the same effect as pro under da receptor
blockade: skin temperature did not change, and brain and
muscle temperature increased, though less than they did
under control conditions.
repeated injections were also altered by da receptor
blockade (figs. 5b, c). under this condition, cocaine still
caused a decrease in temperature in all three sites, but skin

temperature did not decrease as greatly and all three temperatures did not return to baseline as occurred under control
conditions. temperatures following repeated pro administration did fluctuate but were more muted under da receptor
blockade. finally, repeated coc-met administration led to a
slight increase in skin and nacc temperature and no change in
muscle temperature after pre-treatment with da antagonists.
additionally, with all three drugs, locomotor activity was
nearly non-existent during da receptor blockade.

2.2.3.

between-condition comparisons

fig. 6 compares differences in temperature effects of the initial
injection of cocaine, pro and coc-met in control conditions
and during da receptor blockade separately for nacc (top) and
skin (bottom). da antagonists significantly altered cocaineinduced change in nacc temperature. rather than increasing,
nacc temperature slightly decreased. skin temperature was
not significantly changed. da antagonists also significantly
altered pro-induced changes in nacc and skin temperatures.
in both sites, pro had no effect on temperature, which

fig. 5 – mean changes in temperature following the initial (a) and repeated (b) injections of cocaine, procaine and cocaine
methiodide during da receptor blockade. c = changes in locomotion following repeated injections of each drug. filled symbols
show values significantly different from the last pre-injection value (p < 0.05; scheffe post hoc test based on significant time
effects evaluated by anova with repeated measures). f values of the effect of the initial injections were presented in
abbreviations to fig. 4. f values (nacc, skin, muscle and movement, respectively) for repeated injections were for cocaine:
f44,404 = 15.81, 8.28, 7.81 and 0.66 (each, except movement, is significant with p < 0.001); for procaine: f53,485 = 12.05, 0.62, 9.05
and 0.71 (all, except muscle and movement, are significant with p < 0.001); and for cocaine methiodide: f53,485 = 2.45, 3.51, 0.85
and 0.87 (each, except muscle and movement, is significant with p < 0.05).

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

45

fig. 6 – differences in temperature changes induced by the initial injection of cocaine, procaine and cocaine methiodide in
drug-naive conditions (control) and during da receptor blockade (sch + eti). filled symbols show values significantly different
from the last pre-injection values and asterisks show between-group differences (p < 0.05; student's t test).

remained near baseline levels. although the increase in
nacc temperature induced by initial coc-met injection
during da receptor blockade was weaker than in control,
this difference was not significant. in contrast, da receptor
blockade almost completely eliminated the decrease in skin
temperature induced by the initial administration of this
drug.

the same, within-drug comparison for repeated drug
injections is shown in fig. 7. during repeated cocaine
injections following da antagonists, nacc temperature
decreased more quickly and remained at a lower level than
it did under control, but skin temperature did not change as
much as it did in control. following repeated pro, nacc
temperature showed a delayed biphasic response, and skin

fig. 7 – differences in temperature changes induced by repeated injections of cocaine, procaine and cocaine methiodide in
drug-naive conditions (control) and during da receptor blockade (sch + eti). filled symbols show values significantly different
from the last pre-injection values and asterisks show between-group differences (p < 0.05; student's t test).

46

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

temperature decrease was completely blocked by da antagonists. repeated coc-met under da receptor blockade did not
result in altered nacc temperatures. however, skin temperatures increased following an administration and did not fully
return to baseline before the next administration.

2.3.
locomotor and temperature effects of procaine in
cocaine-experienced rats
fig. 8 shows changes in temperature (a, b) and locomotion (c)
during a series of repeated pro injections in cocaineexperienced rats. these rats were exposed to 3 days of cocaine
treatment (days 1–3; two with saline and one with sch + eti
pretreatment) and tested with repeated pro on day 5. with
respect to the effects of pro in cocaine-naive conditions (see
fig. 1), the most important change in cocaine-experienced
conditions was an increase in locomotion seen after the first
and each subsequent pro injection. this increase was clearly
phasic and significantly higher than that induced by pro in
drug-naive conditions (fig. 9). however, the pattern of proinduced hyperlocomotion was clearly different from that
induced by cocaine in control conditions, with which there
were phasic increases superimposed on a tonic increase in

fig. 9 – changes in nacc temperature (top) and locomotion
(bottom) induced by each of ten procaine injections in
drug-naive (open symbols) and cocaine-experienced (black
symbols) conditions. asterisks show between-group
differences (p < 0.05; student's t test).

locomotor activity. although locomotor responses to each pro
injection in cocaine-experienced animals were larger than in
drug-naive controls (fig. 10), the difference was minimal for
the initial injection of a series, grew with subsequent
injections (2–6) and decreased for the final injections of a
series.
although pro given to cocaine-experienced rats resulted in
a similar elevation in temperature as in cocaine-naive rats
(compare figs. 1 and 8), increases in brain and muscle
temperature were significantly larger and brain–muscle
differentials increased significantly stronger (fig. 8b). as
shown in fig. 10, these differences in tonic nacc temperatures
resulted from a significantly stronger increase after the first
pro injection. following subsequent injections, temperatures
maintained at the same plateau, but in contrast to control
conditions, fluctuations in brain and muscle temperature
disappeared and both temperatures had a tendency to
tonically increase. in contrast to strong effects on brain and
muscle temperature, the effects of pro on skin temperature in
cocaine-experienced conditions were similar to drug-naive
conditions. in both conditions, skin temperature strongly and
phasically decreased after the first procaine injection and
showed significant down–up fluctuations with no changes in
tonic baseline following subsequent injections.

fig. 8 – changes in temperature (a, b) and locomotion (c)
induced by procaine injections in drug-naive conditions and
after cocaine experience. panel a shows relative temperature
changes in cocaine-experienced conditions, panel b shows
between-group differences in nacc–muscle differential, and
panel c shows between-group differences in locomotion.

3.

discussion

although it is generally believed that brain temperature is a
stable homeostatic parameter, it shows relatively rapid and
strong fluctuations in response to salient somato-sensory
stimuli and different drugs as well as during various types of

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

47

3.1.
thermorecording as a tool for studying metabolic brain
activation and central effects of drugs

fig. 10 – mean changes in temperature (a, b) and locomotion
(c) during repeated procaine injections in drug-naive
conditions and after cocaine experience. filled symbols show
values significantly different from the pre-injection baseline.
asterisks show between-group differences (procaine in
drug-naive vs. cocaine-experienced conditions) in locomotion
(*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001; student's t test).

motivated behavior (see kiyatkin, 2005 for review). our
previous work revealed that cocaine at a typical self-administering dose (1 mg/kg, iv) has different effects on brain
temperature depending upon the behavioral context and
pattern of administration. while a single injection induces a
monophasic temperature increase (kiyatkin and brown,
2005a), repeated self-administrations result in biphasic,
down–up fluctuations maintained at elevated, relatively
stable levels (kiyatkin and brown, 2003). because the time
course of transient brain temperature decreases induced by
repeated cocaine injections matches the time course of its
appearance in the brain upon iv administration (fowler et al.,
1998), we hypothesized that the direct action of cocaine on
central na+ channels might be responsible for this effect. our
finding that da receptor blockade eliminates the locomotor
and brain temperature-increasing effects of repeated cocaine
but not its temperature-decreasing effects (kiyatkin and
brown, 2005a) indirectly supports such a mechanism. the
present study was designed to further explore the possible role
of na+ channels in mediating the locomotor stimulatory and
temperature effects of iv cocaine.

while the behavioral effects of addictive drugs can be
evaluated by locomotion, alterations in brain, skin and muscle
temperatures provide information to characterize their physiological effects. since increased brain metabolism is accompanied by heat production (laughlin et al., 1998; ritchie, 1973;
siesjo, 1978), phasic increases in brain temperature induced by
salient environmental challenges and drugs appear to reflect
metabolic brain activation (see kiyatkin, 2005 for review).
although such activation also enhances body metabolism and
increases systemic and cerebral circulation, metabolic heat
generated in the body cannot be delivered to the brain because
arterial blood under physiological conditions is always cooler
than brain tissue (delgado and hanai, 1966; hayward and
baker, 1968; kiyatkin et al., 2002; mcelligott and melzack, 1967;
nybo et al., 2002). while alterations in cerebral blood flow
provide another indirect measure of metabolic brain activity
(mintun et al., 2001; raichle, 2003; trubel et al., 2006), they also
affect heat dissipation from the brain, thus modulating brain
temperature.
while brain temperature fluctuations depend primarily on
brain metabolic activity, alterations in skin temperature are
determined by the tone of peripheral vessels as well as
changes in arterial blood temperature. brain hyperthermia
induced by salient environmental stimuli is typically accompanied by rapid, transient skin hypothermia (baker et al., 1976;
kiyatkin, 2005), a result of limiting heat dissipation through
vasoconstriction. therefore, drug-induced changes in skin
temperature may reflect not only local actions of drugs on skin
vessels, but also a peripheral manifestation of metabolic brain
activation and centrally mediated sympathoexcitation.
finally, temperature changes in temporal muscle are important to determine both the source of initial heat production and
direction of heat flow between the brain and the rest of the body.
since this head muscle is supplied with blood from the carotid
artery just as the brain is, and as a non-locomotor muscle does
not produce heat during movement, its temperature depends
primarily on heat delivery by incoming blood. therefore, the
change in brain–muscle temperature differentials is a good
indicator of metabolic activity. hyperthermia induced by salient
environmental challenges is always delayed in the muscle
relative to the brain, implicating metabolic brain activation
rather than blood as the source of brain hyperthermia (see
kiyatkin, 2005). conversely, pentobarbital-induced hypothermia
is stronger and more rapid in the brain than in the muscle,
suggesting metabolic brain inhibition rather than decreased
arterial blood temperature as its primary cause (kiyatkin and
brown, 2005b).

3.2.
cocaine's interaction with peripheral na+ channels as
a trigger of its brain temperature-increasing and other central
excitatory effects
while inducing negligible locomotor activation, both pro and
coc-met generally mimicked the temperature-increasing
effects of cocaine in the brain and induced similar skin
hypothermia. as previously mentioned, rapid skin hypothermia reflects peripheral vasoconstriction, a known effect of iv

48

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

cocaine and a component of its sympathoexitatory effect
(knuepfer and branch, 1992; crandall et al., 2002). although
cocaine is known to release peripheral amines in blood
plasma (robinson et al., 2000), it is well established that these
effects are centrally mediated (knuepfer and branch, 1992;
szabo et al., 1995; tella and goldberg, 1998) and resistant to
da receptor blockade (kiritsy-roy et al., 1990; poon and van
den buuse, 1986). therefore, although peripheral vasoconstriction diminishes heat dissipation, metabolic brain activation (breiter et al., 1997; howell et al., 2002; robinson et al.,
2000; thomas et al., 1995) appears to be the primary
contributor to cocaine-induced brain hyperthermia and peripheral vasoconstriction. intra-brain heat accumulation is
most likely not due to cerebral vasoconstriction since cerebral
blood flow increases rather than decreases following iv
cocaine in awake animals (dohi et al., 1990; robinson et al.,
2000; stein and fuller, 1993).
despite ineffectiveness as a monoamine uptake inhibitor,
pro also caused rapid and strong brain temperature elevation
and skin hypothermia, suggesting metabolic brain activation.
while this similarity with cocaine may be surprising, iv pro is
known to mimic several of the same physiological effects as
cocaine: an acute increase in arterial blood pressure (pitts et
al., 1987), rapid and strong eeg activation (adamec and starkadamec, 1987; parekh et al., 1995), and powerful increases in
cerebral blood flow (servan-shreiber et al., 1998). intravenous
pro also induces strong subjective effects in healthy individuals (servan-shreiber et al., 1998). while these effects differ
from those of cocaine, they are equally rapid, combining
euphoria, anxiety, and fear as well as powerful sensory and
somatic sensations. this centrally mediated sympathoexcitatory action appears to be the cause of skin hypothermia
induced by iv pro, which is not a vasoconstrictor but a
vasodilator in vitro (lindorf, 1979; willats and reynolds, 1985).
despite an inability to cross the blood–brain barrier, iv cocmet also increased brain and decreased skin temperatures as
well as fully mimicked the cardiovascular effects of iv cocaine
(dickerson et al., 1999). since pro, like cocaine, interacts with
na+ channels (ritz et al., 1987) and coc-met acts only in the
periphery (shriver and long, 1971), it appears that the brain
hyperthermia and vasoconstriction that follow iv cocaine
result primarily from the drug's interaction with peripheral
na+ channels.
although this study did not clarify where these peripheral
na+ channels are located, the afferent terminals of sensory
nerves may be a possible substrate. these afferents are dense
in venous walls (goder et al., 1993; michaelis et al., 1994) and
equipped with polymodal receptors that are sensitive to
shifting levels of various chemical substances in blood (lee
et al., 2005). several ionic channels, including na+ channels,
are known to be involved in activating these afferents (see lee
et al., 2005 for review). while the exact mechanisms by which
these receptors are activated are unclear, and special work is
necessary to verify the role of na+ channels in their stimulation, this receptor activation produces afferent drive to the
cns, involves thalamo-cortical pathways, and results in rapid
and generalized brain activation, which is similar to that
induced via activation of cutaneous sensory receptors (ploner
et al., 2002). this action, however, is different from a classic
local anesthetic action, which is related to inhibition of

transmembranal na+ transport and block of neuronal activity,
and it more resembles the action of somato-sensory stimuli,
which induce metabolic brain activation by interacting with
peripheral receptors and rapidly transmitting to the cns via
sensory pathways. temperature responses induced by
somato-sensory stimuli and cocaine also shared important
similarities: more rapid and stronger temperature increase in
brain than muscle, acute, transient skin hypothermia and
dependence of brain temperature increase upon basal brain
temperatures (activity state).
consistent with the key role da plays in central organization of activational processes (le moal and simon, 1991), we
found that da antagonists completely blocked cocaineinduced locomotor activation and eliminated its temperatureincreasing effects, replicating our previous work (kiyatkin
and brown, 2005a). unexpectedly, we found that da receptor
blockade also completely eliminates temperature-increasing
effects of pro in the brain and muscle, blocks its temperature-decreasing effects in the skin, but does not eliminate its
temperature-decreasing effects in the brain and muscle.
therefore, it appears that the temperature-increasing effects
of pro, which are triggered via a da-independent mechanism, are in fact da-mediated, despite its inability (at this
dose) to affect directly monoamine uptake. if iv pro induces
da activation, one may assume that iv cocaine also induces
rapid da activation independently from its later action on da
uptake. via this mechanism, cocaine would provide phasic
da release, to be later potentiated by uptake inhibition,
resulting in a rise of da concentration. such an action may
explain the unusually rapid appearance (20–30 s or less) of
da in the nacc of awake rats following iv cocaine as
measured by fast-cyclic voltammetry (heien et al., 2005). as
shown in this study, da is detected electrochemically at the
same time as or even before cocaine reached the brain
(∼ 20 s) and peaks in arterial blood in striatum (∼120 s; fowler
et al., 1998) and well before it is able to cross the blood–brain
barrier, diffuse to the  xxxg2149xxx  and inhibit pre-synaptic
uptake. although direct cocaine interaction with the da
transporter has been postulated as a possible cause of these
rapid increases in extrasynaptic da, this extremely fast effect
is inconsistent with the more delayed and slower time course
of da uptake inhibition (heron et al., 1994; kiyatkin et al.,
2000; pogun et al., 1991).
by using rapid neural transmission and inducing generalized brain activation, cocaine action on peripheral na+
channels may be important in drug sensing and a number of
its rapid subjective and physiological effects. some of these
rapid affective and physiological effects, moreover, occur
more rapidly than expected based on the dynamics of cocaine
concentration in the brain. cocaine is perceived by humans
within seconds after iv injection (fischman and schuster,
1983; zernig et al., 2003), and several of its central effects (i.e.,
eeg, evoked potential, da release) in both humans and
animals occur too quickly to reflect inhibition of da uptake
or even a direct interaction of the drug with brain substrates
(heien et al., 2005; mateo et al., 2004; lukas et al., 1990;
matsuzaki et al., 1978). it is well known that acute subjective
effects of iv cocaine are extremely rapid and generally
resistant to da receptor blockade (gawin, 1986; sherer et al.,
1989). as shown in these studies, da antagonists affect some

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

of the more prolonged subjective effects, but strong feelings of
crash and rush, major components of an euphoric experience,
remain intact. this rapid neural action could provide an
essential “sensory” drug cue and thus contribute to learning.
our finding that pro given to cocaine-experienced animals is
able to induce conditioned locomotion and significantly
stronger brain temperature effects supports this role (see
below).

3.3.
cocaine's interaction with central na+ channels as a
primary mechanism determining its temperature-decreasing
and other central inhibitory effects
we previously hypothesized that direct action on central na+
channels is responsible for transient decreases in brain
temperature during repeated cocaine injections. in the
present study, repeatedly injected pro consistently induced
brain temperature decreases similar to those seen with
cocaine. in contrast, peripherally acting coc-met failed to
induce this effect. the temperature-decreasing effects of both
cocaine and pro, moreover, remained intact during da
receptor blockade. therefore, these data appear to confirm
that cocaine's action on central na+ channels is essential for
its temperature-decreasing effects. these temperature
decreases were rapid and transient, inversely matching the
increases in brain cocaine levels (fowler et al., 1998). while a
measured, 26 mum cocaine peak in the striatum following a
single iv injection at 1 mg/kg dose is well above the levels for
substantial binding to neuronal na+ channels (gifford and
johnson, 1992; reith et al., 1986; ritz et al., 1987), simple
pharmacodynamic calculations suggest that brain cocaine
levels during self-administration behavior, similarly fluctuating with each injection, would peak at about 80–100 mum. these
levels are about 100 times larger than the ed50 for monoamine
transporters (hennings et al., 1999; ritz et al., 1987), suggesting
their saturation and thus functional inactivation. on the other
hand, a direct action on na+ channels is strongly concentration-dependent and its contribution should exponentially
grow with repeated cocaine self-injections.
work with iontophoresis suggests that locally applied
cocaine inhibits impulse activity of central neurons by
blocking trans-membrane na+ transport. both cocaine and
pro were found to be equally potent at inhibiting spontaneously active striatal neurons in awake, unrestrained rats
(kiyatkin and rebec, 2000). as shown in this study, this effect
was stronger during tonic neuronal excitation induced by
continuous, low-current glutamate application and totally
resistant to da receptor blockade (sch + eti), which sometimes resulted in even stronger effects perhaps because of
increased discharge rate and stronger neuronal responsiveness to glutamate induced by da antagonists.
while it is clear that cocaine may inhibit central neurons
via direct interaction with na+ channels, it remains unclear
which cells are inhibited and what the consequences of this
inhibition might be. it is known, however, that the sensitivity
of central neurons to local anesthetic action depends upon
the size of their somata and terminals, presence or absence
of the myelin sheath on their axons, the type of their
intrinsic organization (autoactive vs. driven by excitatory
inputs), as well as their ongoing activity state (gasser and

49

erlanger, 1929; gifford and johnson, 1992; kiyatkin and rebec,
2000). while direct data are absent, monoamine-containing
cns neurons, which have relatively small somata and highly
arborized, thin, non-myelinated axons, should be more
sensitive to local anesthetic action than other cells. it is
known that these cells are strongly inhibited by iv cocaine in
anesthetized animals (einhorn et al., 1988; pitts and marwah,
1987); under this condition rapid excitatory action appears to
be blocked. although a rise in synaptic monoamine levels
because of cocaine action on uptake is believed to be a
primary factor determining this response, the time course of
neuronal responses was very rapid and generally similar for
each type of monoamine-containing neurons. for example,
da cell inhibition was prominent at ∼ 30 s after iv injection,
peaked at 1–2 min and slowly disappeared over the next 10–
12 min. this time course is consistent with the dynamics of
local cocaine levels, but inconsistent with the relatively slow
effect of this drug on da uptake (see above).

3.4.

unique effects of cocaine and their possible mediation

while the similarity in the temperature effects of cocaine, pro
and coc-met may clarify the role of central and peripheral na+
channels in their mediation, the unique effects of cocaine,
which are absent in pro and coc-met, may be related to its
specific pharmacological action—a potent inhibition of monoamine uptake in the brain.
in contrast to other drugs, cocaine induced strong and
rapid locomotor activation following the initial injection and
phasic locomotor responses during each repeated injection.
since these effects were completely blocked by da antagonists, it is logical to assume that they are related to the da
uptake-inhibiting properties of cocaine. however, cocaineinduced locomotor activation appeared surprisingly fast.
although the activity increased reliably during the first
minutes following the initial cocaine injection, other indices
of behavioral activation in most animals were evident at the
end of the injection or within seconds after. locomotor
activation, moreover, grew following several cocaine injections and reached a tonic plateau with only phasic fluctuations of progressively decreasing amplitude. finally, reduced
but significant locomotor activation occurred after the initial
injection of both pro and coc-met; these effects rapidly
habituated following subsequent injections. nevertheless, the
increasing effect of pro on locomotor activity was significant
as an average for all repeated injections in the series. therefore, it may be suggested that, although the locomotor
stimulatory action of cocaine is obviously related to da uptake
inhibition, it tightly interacts with other cocaine actions
mediated via na+ channels.
cocaine also differed from pro in several important
aspects of temperature dynamics. while both drugs had
temperature-increasing and -decreasing properties, their
ratio was different. with repeated injections, cocaine induced
stronger temperature decreases in each recording location
than pro, although their time course was similar. furthermore, da antagonists generally blocked most temperature
effects of pro, but made inhibitory effects of cocaine stronger,
suggesting that other mechanisms, possibly uptake inhibition
of other monoamines, are involved. brain–muscle differentials

50

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

following repeated cocaine treatment significantly decreased
during da receptor blockade, suggesting that under this
condition this drug acts as a metabolic inhibitor. while it is
difficult to speculate on the mechanisms determining these
differences, cocaine under this self-administration-like treatment regimen should almost fully saturate all monoamine
transporters, making them “functionally inactive” at regulating neurotransmission levels. under these conditions, local
anesthetic mechanisms, which are dose-dependent, continue
to act with increasing potency. therefore, it is possible to
speculate that, under conditions of monoamine uptake
blockade, cocaine's actions via peripheral and central na+
channels serve as the primary means for regulating monoamine transmission.
co-existence of these mechanisms with da uptake inhibition may explain the dynamics of da transmission during
cocaine self-administration previously suggested by our
electrochemical studies (kiyatkin and stein, 1995). while
nacc da-dependent electrochemical signals gradually
increase both before (because of drug-independent da cell
activity) and after the initial few cocaine self-injections
(because of drug-induced da cell activation and drug-induced
uptake inhibition), they stabilize with consistent, phasic
down–up fluctuations tightly related to individual self-injections. therefore, it is logical to assume that transient postcocaine decreases in da suggested by our previous data may
result from phasic inhibitions on da cells because of direct
inhibitory action of cocaine via its interaction with na+
channels.
the contribution of da-independent, na+ channel-mediated actions of cocaine may also explain the paradoxical
findings that  xxxg2149xxx  knockout animals are able not
only to learn cocaine self-administration, but also to
maintain cyclical drug taking at levels comparable to wildtype animals (rocha et al., 1998). although the da uptake
mechanism is permanently inactivated in these animals and
basal da levels are extremely high (jones et al., 1998; benoitmarand et al., 2000), cocaine still acts via na+ channels and
this action appears to be sufficient for the development of
drug-taking behavior and its regulation in these hyper-da
animals.

3.5.
conclusions: possible role of cocaine's interaction with
peripheral and central na+ channels in the development and
regulation of cocaine self-administration
the results of this study suggest that in addition to inhibiting
monoamine uptake iv cocaine has two functionally opposite
actions triggered via interaction with na+ channels. the first
action, which is presumably mediated via peripheral na+
channels located on terminals of sensory nerves, is excitatory
in nature and results in generalized metabolic brain activation. this action provides a sensory signal of the drug and is
reflected in various rapid psychoemotional and physiological
effects. although this action is triggered independently of the
da system, strong attenuation of brain temperature increases
resulting from da receptor blockade suggests a key role for
da mechanisms in its central organization and mediation.
analogous to other salient environmental stimuli, which
phasically activate da neurons (kiyatkin, 1988; strecker and

jacobs, 1985; steinfels et al., 1983), this rapid drug action may
provide phasic da release, creating the proper setting for the
more delayed action of cocaine as a da reuptake inhibitor. by
providing a rapid sensory signal of drug, this action appears
to be important for learning and reinforcement, thus
contributing to cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization,
the development of cocaine self-administration and its
reinstatement in drug-experienced individuals. the appearance of conditioned locomotion and an increased brain
temperature response to pro after previous cocaine experience strongly support this role. along with this action on
peripheral na+ channels, cocaine's interaction with central
na+ channels appears to play an important role in regulating
drug-taking behavior. by providing rapid neuronal inhibition
via direct blockade of na+ channels, neural activation that
precedes drug intake is transiently blocked. this mechanism
may play a key role in operant reinforcement and regulation
of drug intakes, contributing to drug-induced euphoria and
relaxation. therefore, although cocaine's interaction with the
 xxxg2149xxx  appears to be essential in mediating the
primary reinforcing effects of cocaine (wise and bozarth,
1987; ritz et al., 1987), other mechanisms, particularly
involving drug's interaction with peripheral and central na+
channels, appear to be important in making cocaine a unique
reinforcer and cocaine self-administration a highly compulsive motivated behavior.

4.

experimental procedures

4.1.

subjects and surgery

nineteen long–evans male rats (taconic, germantown, ny),
weighing 420–480 g and housed in a 12 h light cycle (lights on
at 0700) with ad libitum food and water, were used. protocols
were performed in compliance with the guide for the care and
use of laboratory animals (nih, publications 865-23) and were
approved by the animal care and use committee, nida-irp.
each rat underwent the same procedure of thermocouple
electrode and jugular iv catheter implantation. thermocouples were prepared as previously described (kiyatkin and
brown, 2003). animals were anesthetized with equithesin
(3.3 ml/kg i.p.) and mounted in a stereotaxic apparatus. holes
were drilled through the skull over nacc shell (1.2 mm
anterior to the bregma, 0.9 mm lateral to the bregma)
according to the coordinates of paxinos and watson (1998).
the dura matter was retracted, and a thermocouple probe
was slowly lowered to the desired target depth (7.4 mm). a
second thermocouple probe was implanted subcutaneously
along the nasal ridge with the tip approximately 15 mm from
bregma. a third thermocouple probe was implanted in deep
temporal muscle (musculus temporalis). the probes were
secured with dental cement to three stainless steel screws
threaded into the skull. for jugular catheter implantation, a
10 mm incision was made in the neck to expose the jugular
vein. a catheter was then inserted into, and secured to, the
vein, and the catheter was run subcutaneously to the head
mount and secured with dental cement. rats were allowed
3 days recovery and 1 day of habituation (6 h session) to the
testing environment before the start of testing.

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

4.2.

experimental protocol

all tests occurred inside a plexiglas chamber (32 × 32 × 32 cm),
equipped with four infrared motion detectors (med associates,
burlington, vt) and placed inside a sound attenuation
chamber with an environmental temperature maintained at
23 ± 0.5°c. rats were brought to the testing chamber at 9:00 and
attached via a flexible cord and electrical commutator to
thermal recording hardware (thermes 16, physitemp, clifton,
nj). a catheter extension was also attached to the internal
catheter, thereby allowing remote iv injections. temperatures
were recorded with a time resolution of 10 s, and movement
was recorded as the number of infrared beam breaks per
1 min.
all animals were divided into three equal groups according to the drug being tested (cocaine, pro and coc-met;
n = 7, 6 and 6, respectively). animals of each group were
exposed to three similar recording sessions; one additional
session was given in the cocaine group. after a habituation
period (at least 3 h), rats were given an sc injection of either
saline (session 1 and 3) or a mixture of da antagonists
(session 2), and 30 min later they were exposed to a series of
ten repeated iv injections of one of three drugs [(−) cocaine
hcl, procaine hcl or pro, (−) cocaine methiodide or cocmet]. intervals between injections were 8 min, corresponding to the modal value of inter-injection intervals during
cocaine self-administration (kiyatkin and brown, 2003). each
drug was dissolved in saline and delivered as a 0.15 ml
injection over 16 s. the cocaine dose was 1 mg/kg, which is
the optimal dose for maintaining self-administration, cocmet was used at an equimolar dose (1. 31 mg/kg), and pro
was used at a dose (5 mg/kg) that is equipotential to
cocaine's local anesthetic action. at this dose, procaine has
virtually no effects on da uptake because its affinity for the
 xxxg2149xxx  is more than 100 times less than that for
cocaine (153:1; wilcox et al., 2001; 260:1; ritz et al., 1987).
recording was continued for at least 120 min after the last iv
injection. to eliminate the influence of day-to-day differences in basal temperatures (kiyatkin et al., 2002) and
increase data sample, animals of each group were exposed
to two identical saline pretreatment sessions (days 1 and 3)
and one da antagonists pretreatment session (day 2). one
free day was allowed after the session with da antagonists to
eliminate any possible consequences of this treatment. in
the cocaine group, one additional session was conducted
after two free days. during this session, 30 min after a saline
injection, rats were exposed to a series of repeated pro
injections (5 mg/kg with 8-min inter-injection intervals).
during free days before this session, the catheter was flushed
twice with saline to remove any remaining drug.
to induce da receptor blockade, we used a mixture of d1like selective (sch23390 0.2 mg/kg) and d2-like selective
(eticlopride or eti 0.2 mg/kg) antagonists. as previously
reported, a sch + eti mixture at these doses effectively
attenuated striatal neuronal responses to iontophoretic da
(kiyatkin and rebec, 1999), strongly decreased spontaneous
movement activity and fully blocked locomotor activation
induced by iv cocaine (kiyatkin and brown, 2005a). these
drugs were freshly dissolved in saline before each treatment
session.

4.3.

51

histology and data analysis

when recording was completed, all rats were anesthetized,
decapitated and had their brains removed for sectioning and
confirmation of probe placement. brains were cut on a
cryostat into 50 mu slices and placed on glass slides. all brain
probes were located within nacc shell, as described in paxinos
and watson (1998).
temperature and movement data were analyzed with
1-min time bins and presented as both absolute and relative
changes. we analyzed both tonic changes during a drug
session (vs. pre-injection baseline) and phasic changes associated with either the first or repeated (2–10) drug injections of
each tested drug. anova with repeated measures, followed by
post hoc scheffe tests, was used for statistical evaluation of
drug-induced changes in temperature and movement. student's t test was used for comparisons of between-site,
between-drug and between-treatment (saline vs. da antagonists) differences in temperature and locomotion.

acknowledgments
we thank dr. barry hoffer for valuable comments regarding
this manuscript. this research was supported by the intramural research program of the nih, nida.m

references

adamec, r.e., stark-adamec, c., 1987. the effects of procaine
hcl on population cellular and evoked response activity
within the limbic system of the cat. evidence for
differential excitatory action of procaine in a variety of
limbic circuits. prog. neuro-psychoparmacol. biol. psychiatry
11, 345–364.
baker, m., cronin, m., mountjoy, d., 1976. variability of skin
temperature in the waking monkey. am. j. physiol. 230,
449–455.
benoit-marand, m., jaber, m., gonon, f., 2000. release and
elimination of dopamine in vivo in mice lacking the dopamine
transporter: functional consequences. eur. j. neurosci. 12,
2985–2992.
breiter, h.c., gollub, r.l., weisskoff, r.m., kennedy, d.n., makris,
n., berke, j.d., goodman, j.m., kantor, h.l., gastfriend, d.r.,
riorden, j.p., mathew, r.t., rosen, b.r., hyman, s.e., 1997.
acute effects of cocaine on human brain activity and emotion.
neuron 19, 591–611.
crandall, c.g., vongpatanasin, w., victor, r.g., 2002. mechanism
of cocaine-induced hyperthermia in humans. ann. intern.
med. 136, 785–791.
delgado, j., hanai, t., 1966. intracerebral temperatures in
free-moving cats. am. j. physiol. 211, 755–769.
dickerson, l.w., rodak, d.j., kuhn, f.e., wahlstrom, s.k.,
tessel, r.e., visner, m.s., schaer, g.l., gillis, r.a., 1999.
cocaine-induced cardiovascular effects: lack of evidence for a
central nervous system site of action based on hemodynamic
studies with cocaine methiodide. j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 33,
36–42.
dohi, s., jones, m.d., hudak, m.l., traystman, r.j., 1990. effects of
cocaine on pial arterioles in cats. stroke 21, 1710–1714.
einhorn, l.c., johansen, p.a., white, f.j., 1988. electrophysiological
effects of cocaine in the mesoaccumbens dopamine system:
studies in the ventral tegmental area. j. neurosci. 8, 100–112.

52

br a in re s ea rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –53

fischman, m.w., schuster, c.r., 1983. a comparison of the
subjective and cardiovascular effects of cocaine and procaine
in humans. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 18, 711–716.
fowler, j.s., volkow, n.d., logan, j., gatley, s.j., pappas, n., king, p.,
ding, y.-s., wang, g.-j., 1998. measuring  xxxg2149xxx 
occupancy by cocaine in vitro: radiotracer considerations.
synapse 28, 111–116.
gasser, h.s., erlanger, j., 1929. the role of the fiber size in the
establishment of a nerve block by pressure or cocaine. am. j.
physiol. 88, 581–591.
gawin, f., 1986. neuroleptic reduction of cocaine-induced
paranoia but not euphoria? psychopharmacology 90, 142–143.
gifford, a.n., johnson, k.m., 1992. comparison of the role of local
anesthetic properties with dopamine uptake blockade in the
inhibition of striatal and nucleus accumbens [3h]acetylcholine
release by cocaine. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 263, 757–761.
goder, r., habler, h.j., janig, w., michaelis, m., 1993. receptor
properties of afferent nerve fibers associated with the rat
saphenous vein. neurosci. lett. 164, 175–178.
hayward, j.n., baker, m.a., 1968. role of cerebral arterial blood in
the regulation of brain temperature in the monkey. am. j.
physiol. 215, 389–403.
heien, m.l., khan, a.s., ariansen, j.l., cheer, j.f., phillips, p.e.m.,
wassum, k.m., weightman, r.m., 2005. real-time
measurements of dopamine fluctuations after cocaine in the
brain of behaving rats. proc. natl. acad. sci. 102, 10023–10028.
heikkila, r.e., orlanski, h., cohen, g.., 1975. studies on the
distinction between uptake inhibition and release of
[3h]-dopamine in rat brain tissue slices. biochem. pharmacol.
24, 847–852.
hennings, e.c., kiss, j.p., de oliveira, k., toth, p.t., vizi, e.s., 1999.
 xxxg456xxx  antagonistic activity of
monoamine uptake blockers in rat hippocampal slices.
j. neurochem. 73, 1043–1050.
hemby, s.e., co, c., koves, t.r., smith, j.e., dworkin, s.i., 1997.
differences in extracellular dopamine concentrations in the
nucleus accumbens during response-dependent and
response-independent cocaine administration in the rat.
psychopharmacology 133, 7–16.
heron, c., costentin, j., bonnet, j.-j., 1994. evidence that pure
uptake inhibitors including cocaine interact slowly
with the dopamine neuronal carrier. eur. j. pharmacol. 264,
391–398.
howell, l.l., hoffman, j.n., votaw, j.r., landrum, a.m., wilcox,
k.m., lindsey, k.p., 2002. cocaine-induced brain activation
determined by positron emission tomography neuroimaging
in conscious rhesus monkeys. psychopharmacology 159,
154–160.
jones, s.r., gainetdinov, r.r., wightman, r.m, caron, m.g., 1998.
mechanisms of amphetamine action revealed in mice lacking
the  xxxg2149xxx . j. neurosci. 18, 1979–1986.
kiritsy-roy, j.a., halter, j.b., gordon, s.m., smith, m.j., terry, l.c.,
1990. role of the central nervous system in hemodynamic and
sympathoadrenal responses to cocaine in rats. j. pharmacol.
exp. ther. 256, 154–160.
kiyatkin, e.a., 1988. functional properties of presumed
dopamine-containing and other ventral tegmental area
neurons in conscious rats. int. j. neurosci. 42, 21–43.
kiyatkin, e.a., 2005. brain hyperthermia as physiological and
pathological phenomena. brain res. rev. 50, 27–56.
kiyatkin, e.a., brown, p.l., 2003. fluctuations in neural activity
during cocaine self-administration: clues provided by brain
thermorecording. neuroscience 116, 525–538.
kiyatkin, e.a., brown, p.l., 2004. brain temperature fluctuations
during repeated passive vs. active cocaine administration:
clues for understanding the pharmacological determination of
drug-taking behavior. brain res. 1005, 101–116.
kiyatkin, e.a., brown, p.l., 2005a. dopamine-dependent and
dopamine-independent actions of cocaine as revealed by brain

thermorecording in freely moving rats. eur. j. neurosci. 22,
9430–9938.
kiyatkin, e.a., brown, p.l., 2005b. brain and body temperature
homeostasis during sodium pentobarbital anesthesia with and
without body warming in rats. physiol. behav. 84, 563–570.
kiyatkin, e.a., rebec, g.v., 1999. striatal neuronal activity and
responsiveness of striatal neurons to dopamine and glutamate
after selective blockade of d1 and d2 dopamine receptors in
awake rats. j. neurosci. 19, 3594–3609.
kiyatkin, e.a., rebec, g.v., 2000. dopamine-independent action of
cocaine on striatal and accumbal neurons. eur. j. neurosci. 12,
1–13.
kiyatkin, e.a., stein, e.a., 1995. fluctuations in nucleus accumbens
dopamine during cocaine self-administration behavior: an in
vivo electrochemical study. neuroscience 64, 599–617.
kiyatkin, e.a., stein, e.a., 1996. conditioned changes in nucleus
accumbens dopamine signal established by intravenous
cocaine in rats. neurosci. lett. 211, 73–76.
kiyatkin, e.a., kiyatkin, d.e., rebec, g.v., 2000. phasic inhibition
of dopamine uptake in nucleus accumbens induced by
intravenous cocaine in freely behaving rats. neuroscience 98,
729–741.
kiyatkin, e.a., brown, p.l., wise, r., 2002. brain temperature
fluctuation: a reflection of functional neural activation. eur. j.
neurosci. 16, 164–168.
knuepfer, m.m., branch, c.a., 1992. cardiovascular responses to
cocaine are initially mediated by the central nervous system in
rats. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 263, 734–741.
laughlin, s.b., de ruyter van steveninck, r.r., anderson, j.c., 1998.
the metabolic cost of neural information. nat. neurosci. 1,
36–41.
lee, t.h., balu, r., davidson, c., ellinwood, e.h., 2001. differential
time-course profiles of dopamine release and uptake changes
induced by three dopamine uptake inhibitors. synapse 41,
301–310.
lee, y., lee, c.-h., oh, u., 2005. painful channels in sensory
neurons. mol. cells 20, 315–324.
le moal, m., simon, h., 1991. mesocortical dopaminergic network:
functional and regulatory roles. physiol. rev. 71, 155–234.
lindorf, h.h., 1979. investigation of the vascular effect of newer
local anesthetics and vasoconstrictors. oral surg. oral med.
oral pathol. 48, 2192–2297.
lukas, s.e., mendelson, j.h., amass, l., benedikt, r., 1990.
behavioral and eeg studies of acute cocaine administration:
comparisons with morphine, amphetamine, pentobarbital,
nicotine, ethanol and marijuana. nida res. monogr. 95,
146–152.
mateo, y., budygin, e.a., morgan, d., roberts, d.c.s., jones, s.r.,
2004. fast onset of dopamine uptake inhibition by intravenous
cocaine. eur. j. neurosci. 20, 2838–2842.
matsuzaki, m., spingler, p.j., whitlock, e.g., misra, a.l., mule, s.j.,
1978. comparative effects of cocaine and  xxxd1736xxx  on
eeg activities, cardiorespiratory functions, and
self-administration behavior in the rhesus monkey.
psychopharmacology (berlin) 57, 12–20.
mcelligott, j.c., melzack, r., 1967. localized thermal changes
evoked in the brain by visual and auditory stimulation. exp.
 xxxd122xxx . 17, 293–312.
michaelis, m., goder, r., janig, h.j., janig, w., 1994. properties of
afferent nerve fibers supplying the saphenous vein in the cat.
j. physiol. (london) 474, 233–243.
mintun, m.a., lundstrom, b.n., snyder, a.z., vlasenko, a.g.,
shulman, g.l., raichle, m.e., 2001. blood flow and oxygen
delivery to human brain during functional activity: theoretical
modeling and experimental data. proc. natl. acad. sci. 98,
6859–6864.
nybo, l., secher, n.h., nielson, b., 2002. inadequate heat release
from the human brain during prolonged exercise with
hyperthermia. j. physiol. 545, 697–704.

br a in re s e a rch 1 1 17 ( 20 0 6 ) 3 8 –5 3

parekh, p.i., spencer, j.w., george, m.s., gill, d.s., ketter, t.a.,
andreason, p., herscovitch, p., post, r.m., 1995. procaineinduced increases in limbic rcbf correlate positively with
increases in occipital and temporal eeg fast activity. brain
topogr. 7, 209–218.
paxinos, j., watson, c., 1998. the rat brain in stereotaxic
coordinates, fourth ed. academic press, san diego.
pitts, d.k., marwah, j., 1987. cocaine modulation of central
monoaminergic neurotransmission. pharmacol. biochem.
behav. 26, 453–461.
pitts, d.k., udom, c.e., marwah, j., 1987. cardiovascular effects of
cocaine in anesthetized and conscious rats. life sci. 40,
1099–1111.
ploner, m., holthusen, h., noetges, p., schnitzler, a., 2002. cortical
representation of venous nociception in humans.
j. neurophysiol. 88, 300–305.
pogun, s., scheffel, u., kuhar, m.j., 1991. cocaine displaces [3h]win
35,428 binding to dopamine uptake sites in vivo more rapidly
than  xxxd2546xxx  or gbr 12909. eur. j. pharmacol. 198, 203–205.
poon, j., van den buuse, m., 1986. autonomic mechanisms in the
acute cardiovascular effects of cocaine in conscious rats. eur. j.
pharmacol. 363, 147–152.
raichle, m.e., 2003. functional brain imaging and human brain
functions. j. neurosci. 23, 3959–3962.
reith, m.e.a., kim, s.s., lajtha, a., 1986. structural requirements
for cocaine congeners to interact with [3h]batrachotoxin
a20-alpha-benzoate binding sites on sodium channels in mouse
brain synaptosomes. j. biol. chem. 261, 7300–7305.
ritchie, j.m., 1973. energetic aspects of nerve conduction: the
relationships between heat production, electrical activity, and
metabolism. prog. biophys. mol. biol. 26, 147–187.
ritz, m.c., lamb, r.j., goldberg, s.r., kuhar, m.j., 1987. cocaine
receptors of dopamine transporters are related to
self-administration of cocaine. science 237, 1219–1223.
robinson, r., iida, h., o'brien, t.p., pane, m.a., traystman, r.j.,
gleason, c.a., 2000. comparison of cerebrovascular effects of
intravenous cocaine injection in fetal, newborn, and adult
sheep. am. j. physiol. heart. circ. physiol. 279, h1–h6.
rocha, b.a., fumagalli, f., gainetdinov, r.r., jones, s.r., ator, r.,
giros, b., miller, g.w., caron, m.g., 1998. cocaine
self-administration in dopamine-transporter knockout mice.
nat. neurosci. 1, 132–137.
rothman, r.b., bauman, m.h., dersch, c.m., romero, d.v., rice,
k.c., carrol, f.i, partilla, h.s., 2001. amphetamine-type
central nervous system stimulants release norepinephrine
more potently than they release dopamine and serotonin.
synapse 39, 32–41.
servan-shreiber, d., perlstein, w.m., cohen, j.d., mintun, m., 1998.
selective pharmacological activation of limbic structures in
human volunteers: a positron emission tomography study.
j. neuropsychiatry 10, 148–159.
sherer, m.a., kumor, k.m., jaffe, j.h., 1989. effects of intravenous
cocaine are partially attenuated by haloperidol. psychiatry res.
27, 117–125.
shriver, d.a., long, i.p., 1971. a pharmacological comparison of
some quaternary derivatives of cocaine. arch. int.
pharmacodyn. 189, 198–208.

53

siesjo, b., 1978. brain energy metabolism. wiley, new york.
stamford, j.a., kruk, z.l., millar, j., 1989. dissociation of the actions
of uptake blockers upon dopamine overflow and uptake in the
rat nucleus accumbens: in vivo voltammetric data.
neuropharmacology 28, 1383–1388.
stein, e.a., fuller, s.a., 1993. cocaine's time action profile on
regional cerebral blood flow in the rat. brain res. 626,
117–126.
steinfels, g.f., heym, l., strecker, r.e., jacobs, b.l., 1983. behavioral
correlates of dopaminergic unit activity in freely moving cat.
brain res. 258, 217–228.
strecker, r.e., jacobs, b.l., 1985. substantia nigra dopaminergic
unit activity in behaving cats: effect of arousal on
spontaneous discharge and sensory evoked activity. brain
res. 361, 339–350.
szabo, b., obergfell, a., starke, k., 1995. involvement of
monoamine uptake inhibition and local anesthesia in the
cardiovascular response to cocaine in conscious rabbits.
j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 274, 128–137.
taylor, d., ho, b.t., 1978. comparison of inhibition of monoamine
uptake by cocaine, methylphenidate and amphetamine. res.
comm. chem. pathol. pharmacol. 21, 67–75.
tella, s.r., goldberg, s.r., 1998.  xxxg2099xxx  and
sodium channel mechanisms in the rapid pressor response to
cocaine. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 59, 305–312.
thomas, w.l., cooke, e.s., hammer, r.p., 1995. pretreatment with
a dopamine d1-receptor antagonist prevents metabolic
activation by cocaine. neurosci. lett. 196, 161–164.
trubel, h.k.f., sacolick, l.i., hyder, f., 2006. regional temperature
changes in the brain during somatosensory stimulation.
j. cereb. flow metab. 26, 68–78.
venton, b.j., seipel, a.t., phillips, p.e., wetsel, w.c., gitler, d.,
greengard, p., augustine, g.j., wightman, r.m., 2006. cocaine
increases dopamine release by mobilization of a
synapsin-dependent reserve pool. j. neurosci. 26, 3206–3209.
volkow, n.d., gatley, s.j., fowler, j.s., logan, j., fischman, m.,
gifford, a.n., pappas, n., king, p., vitkun, s., ding, y.s., wang,
c.-j., 1996. cocaine doses equivalent to those abused by
humans occupy most of the dopamine transporters. synapse
24, 399–402.
willats, d.g., reynolds, f., 1985. comparison of the vasoactivity of
amide and ester local anesthetics. an intradermal study. br. j.
anaesth. 57, 1006–1011.
wilcox, k.m., paul, i.a., ordway, g.a., woolverton, w.l., 2001. role
of the  xxxg2149xxx  and the sodium channel on the
cocaine-like discriminative stimulus effects of local
anesthetics in rats. psychopharmacology 157, 260–268.
wise, r.a., bozarth, m.a., 1987. a psychomotor stimulant theory of
addiction. psychol. rev. 94, 469–492.
wise, r.a., newton, p., leeb, k., burnette, b., pocock, d., justice, j.b.,
1995. fluctuations in nucleus accumbens dopamine
concentration during intravenous cocaine self-administration
in rats. psychopharmacology 120, 10–20.
zernig, g., giacomuzzi, s., riemer, y., wakonigg, g., sturm, k.,
saria, a., 2003. intravenous drug injection habits: drug users'
self-reports versus researchers' perception. pharmacology 68,
49–56.

