review

brugada syndrome
charles antzelevitch, ph.d.
from the masonic medical research laboratory, utica, new york

first introduced as a new clinical entity in 1992, the brugada syndrome is associated with a relatively
high risk of sudden death in young adults, and occasionally in children and infants. recent years have
witnessed a striking proliferation of papers dealing with the clinical and basic aspects of the disease.
characterized by a coved-type st-segment elevation in the right precordial leads of the electrocardiogram
(ecg), the brugada syndrome has a genetic basis that thus far has been linked only to mutations in  xxxg2028xxx ,
the gene that encodes the alpha-subunit of the sodium channel. the brugada ecg is often concealed, but can
be unmasked or modulated by a number of drugs and pathophysiological states including sodium channel
blockers, a febrile state, vagotonic agents, tricyclic antidepressants, as well as cocaine and propranolol
intoxication. average age at the time of initial diagnosis or sudden death is 40 ± 22, with the youngest
patient diagnosed at 2 days of age and the oldest at 84 years. this review provides an overview of the
clinical, genetic, molecular, and cellular aspects of the brugada syndrome, incorporating the results of
two recent consensus conferences. controversies with regard to risk stratification and newly proposed
pharmacologic strategies are discussed. (pace 2006; 29:1130–1159)
ventricular arrhythmias, sudden cardiac death, atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia,
ventricular fibrillation, inherited disease
introduction
since its introduction as a new clinical entity
by pedro and josep brugada in 1992,1 the brugada
syndrome has attracted great interest because of its
high incidence in many parts of the world and its
association with high risk of sudden death, especially in males as they enter their third and fourth
decades of life. recent years have witnessed a dramatic rise in the number of reported cases and
a great proliferation of papers serving to define
the clinical, genetic, cellular, ionic, and molecular
aspects of the disease.2 a consensus conference
report published in 2002 delineated diagnostic
criteria for the syndrome.3,4 a second consensus
conference report published in 2005 focused on
risk stratification schemes and approaches to therapy.5,6 this review provides an in-depth overview
of the clinical, genetic, molecular, and cellular aspects of the brugada syndrome, incorporating the
results of the two consensus conference reports,
and the numerous clinical and basic publications
on the subject. controversies with regard to the
involvement of anatomic structural defects, the
approach to risk stratification, and new data relative to proposed pharmacologic strategies are discussed in detail. the proposed terminology, diagnostic criteria, risk stratification schemes and
address for reprints: charles antzelevitch, ph.d., gordon k.
moe scholar, masonic medical research laboratory, 2150
bleecker street, utica, ny 13501. fax: (315) 735-5648; e-mail:
ca@mmrl.edu
received february 14, 2006; revised april 11, 2006; accepted
april 14, 2006.

device, and pharmacologic approach to therapy
discussed are based on available clinical and basic studies, and should be considered a work-inprogress that will require significant fine-tuning
as confirmatory data from molecular studies and
prospective trials become available.
clinical characteristics and diagnostic criteria
characterized by an st-segment elevation in
the right precordial electrocardiogram (ecg) leads
and a high incidence of sudden death in patients
with structurally normal hearts, the brugada syndrome generally manifests during adulthood. the
average age at the time of initial diagnosis or sudden death is 40 ± 22. the youngest patient diagnosed with the syndrome is 2 days of age, and the
oldest is 84 years.
a recent report by skinner et al. provides a direct link between sudden infant death syndrome
and the brugada syndrome.7 this 19-day-old infant was successfully resuscitated from ventricular
fibrillation (vf). although the basal ecg did not
show features of brugada syndrome, dna analysis
revealed a missense mutation (r1193q) in  xxxg2028xxx ,
previously linked with the brugada syndrome.
because the ecg is so dynamic and often concealed, it is difficult to estimate the true prevalence of the disease in the general population.8
the prevalence of the brugada syndrome is estimated at 1–5 per 10,000 inhabitants worldwide.
the frequency is lower in western countries and
higher (≥5 per 10,000) in southeast asia, especially in thailand and the philippines where brugada syndrome is considered to be the major cause


c 2006, the authors. journal compilation 
c 2006, blackwell publishing, inc.

1130

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

table i.
diagnostic criteria for brugada syndrome (from

1st

consensus document) st-segment abnormalities in leads v1-v3

type 1
j-point
t-wave
st-t configuration
st segment (terminal portion)

type 2

≥2 mm
negative
coved type
gradually descending

≥2 mm
positive or biphasic
saddleback
elevated ≥1 mm

type 3
≥2 mm
positive
saddleback
elevated < 1 mm

1 mm = 0.1 mv, the terminal portion of the st segment refers to the latter half of the st segment. from wilde et al.3 with permission.

of sudden death in young individuals. in these
countries, the syndrome is often referred to as
sudden unexplained nocturnal death syndrome
(sunds).9,10
the electrocardiographic manifestations of
the brugada syndrome when concealed can be
unmasked by sodium channel blockers, a febrile
state, or vagotonic agents.11–14 three types of repolarization patterns in the right precordial leads
are recognized (table i and fig. 1).3,4 type 1 stsegment elevation is diagnostic of brugada syndrome and is characterized by a coved st-segment
elevation ≥2 mm (0.2 mv) followed by a negative
t wave. type 2 st-segment elevation has a saddleback appearance with a high take-off st-segment
elevation of ≥2 mm followed by a trough displaying ≥1 mm st elevation followed by either a positive or biphasic t wave. type 3 st-segment elevation has either a saddleback or coved appearance
with an st-segment elevation of <1 mm. these
three patterns may be observed sequentially in the
same patient or following the introduction of specific drugs. type 2 and 3 st-segment elevation

should not be considered diagnostic of the brugada syndrome. a brugada ecg refers to the manifestation of a type 1 st-segment elevation. brugada syndrome is definitively diagnosed when a
type 1 st-segment elevation (brugada ecg) is observed in more than one right precordial lead (v1v3), in the presence or absence of sodium channel blocking agent, and in conjunction with one or
more of the following: documented vf, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (vt); a family history
of scd (<45 years old); coved-type ecgs in family members; inducibility of vt with programmed
electrical stimulation (pes); syncope; or nocturnal
agonal respiration.3–6
differential diagnosis of the brugada syndrome must be approached with care since stsegment elevation is associated with a wide variety
of benign as well as malignant pathophysiologic conditions. definitive diagnosis is difficult
when the degree of basal st-segment elevation
is relatively small and the specificity of sodium
channel blockers, such as  xxxd2113xxx ,  xxxd96xxx ,
procainamide, disopyramide, propafenone, and

figure 1. three types of stsegment elevation generally observed in patients with the brugada
syndrome. shown are precordial
leads recorded from a patient diagnosed with the brugada syndrome.
note the dynamic ecg changes occurring over a period of 2 days.
the left panel shows a clear type
1 ecg, which is diagnostic of the
brugada syndrome. a saddleback
st-segment elevation (type 2) is
observed on february 7,1999. the
st segment is further normalized
on february 13, 1999, showing a
type 3 ecg. modified from wilde
et al. 4 with permission.

pace, vol. 29

october 2006

1131

antzelevitch

table ii.
drugs used to unmask the brugada syndrome
 xxxd96xxx 
 xxxd2113xxx 
procainamide
pilsicainide

1 mg/kg/5 min, i.v.
2 mg/kg/10 min, i.v. (400 mg, p.o.)
10 mg/kg/10 min, i.v.
1 mg/kg/10 min, i.v.

pilsicainide12,15,16 to identify patients at risk is uncertain. the recommended dosage regimens for the
most frequently used agents are listed in table ii.
a comparison of intravenous  xxxd96xxx  and  xxxd2113xxx  in the same cohort of patients revealed that
 xxxd96xxx  is more effective in unmasking the syndrome.17  xxxd2113xxx  failed in 7 of 22 cases (32%)
unmasked by  xxxd96xxx . a greater inhibition of i to
by  xxxd2113xxx  renders it less effective than  xxxd96xxx .
the sodium challenge should be monitored
with a continuous ecg recording (speed 10 mm/s
and interposed 50 mm/) and should be terminated
when (1) the diagnostic type 1 st-segment elevation, or brugada ecg, develops; (2) st segment in

table iii.
ecg abnormalities that can lead to or exacerbate
st-segment elevation in the right precordial leads
myocarditis47
atypical right bundle branch block
left ventricular hypertrophy
early repolarization
acute pericarditis
acute myocardial ischemia or infarction
pulmonary embolism
prinzmetal’s angina191
dissecting aortic aneurysm192
various central and autonomic nervous system
abnormalities193,194
duchenne muscular dystrophy195
thiamine deficiency196
hypokalemia155,197
hyperkalemia192,198,199
hypercalcemia200,201
arrhythmogenic right ventricular
dysplasia/cardiomyopathy45,46
hypothermia202,203
mechanical compression of right ventricular outflow
tract as with mediastinal tumor204
hemopericardium205
fatty acid oxidation disorder (medium chain acyl-coa
dehydrogenase deficiency)206

1132

type 2 increases by ≥2 mm; (3) premature ventricular beats or other arrhythmias develop; or (4)
qrs widens to ≥130% of baseline. sodium channel blockers should be used with particular caution in the presence of atrial and/or ventricular
conduction disease (presence of wide qrs, wide
p waves, or prolonged pr intervals). isolated cases
of mechano-electrical dissociation have been reported.  xxxd2401xxx  and sodium lactate may be
effective antidotes.5,6
confounding factor(s) that could account for
the ecg abnormality need to be carefully excluded
(table iii). exaggerated st-segment elevation is
sometimes observed for a brief period following
dc cardioversion, and this must be factored in
when first evaluating a patient following defibrillation.18
another important confounding factor is the
st-elevation encountered in well-trained athletes.
the st-segment elevation encountered in athletes
can be distinguished by virtue of the fact that it is
up-sloping rather than downsloping and is largely
unaffected by challenge with a sodium channel
blocker. in addition, a variety of drugs have been
reported to produce a brugada-like st-segment elevation (table iv). myocarditis and some forms
of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia (arvc/d) can lead to a brugada-like
phenotype (see below). the extent to which these
acquired forms of brugada syndromes have a genetic predisposition is the subject of intense investigation.
diagnosis of brugada syndrome is also considered positive when a type 2 (saddleback pattern)
or type 3 st-segment elevation is observed in more
than one right precordial lead under baseline conditions and can be converted to the diagnostic type
1 pattern occurs upon exposure to sodium channel blocker (st-segment elevation should be ≥2
mm). one or more of the clinical criteria described
above should also be present. drug-induced conversion of type 3 to type 2 st-segment elevation is
considered inconclusive for diagnosis of brugada
syndrome.
most cases of brugada syndrome display right
precordial st-segment elevation, although isolated cases of inferior lead19,20 or left precordial
lead21 st-segment elevation have been reported in
brugada-like syndromes, in some cases associated
with  xxxg2028xxx  mutations. in rare cases, st-segment
elevation is observed in all precordial leads (unpublished observation).
placement of the right precordial leads in a
superior position (up to the 2nd intercostal spaces
above normal) can increase the sensitivity of the
ecg for detecting the brugada phenotype in some
patients, both in the presence or absence of a drug
challenge (fig. 2).22,23 studies are underway to

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

table iv.
drug-induced brugada-like ecg patterns
antiarrhythmic drugs
na+ channel blockers
class ic drugs ( xxxd2113xxx ,12,15,142,207,208
pilsicainide,146,209 propafenone210 )
class ia drugs ( xxxd96xxx ,12,211 procainamide,12,13
disopyramide,4,13 cibenzoline212,213 )
ca2+ channel blockers
verapamil
beta-blockers
propranolol intoxication214
antianginal drugs
ca2+ channel blockers
nifedipine, diltiazem
nitrate
 xxxd2402xxx , nitroglycerine215
k+ channel openers
nicorandil
psychotropic drugs
tricyclic antidepressants216
amitriptyline,217,218 nortriptyline,151 desipramine,149
clomipramine150
tetracyclic antidepressants
maprotiline217
phenothiazine
perphenazine,217 cyamemazine.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
fluoxetine218
lithium157
other drugs
histaminic  xxxg1078xxx  antagonists
dimenhydrinate152
diphenhydramine219
cocaine intoxication153,220
alcohol intoxication
modified from antzelevitch et al.56 and shimizu221 with
permission.

ascertain whether the greater sensitivity is at the
cost of a lower specificity and whether a type
i ecg in the elevated leads is as predictive of
events as a type i ecg in standard leads. a recent report demonstrates that as many as 1.3%
of normal korean males display a type 2, but
not type 1, st-segment elevation when the right
precordial leads are recorded from a superior
position.24
a slight prolongation of the qt interval
is sometimes observed associated with the stsegment elevation.16,25,26 the qt interval is prolonged more in the right versus left precordial

pace, vol. 29

figure 2. shift of right precordial leads to 2nd and 3rd
intercostal space unmasks a type 1 brugada ecg. (top)
plot of 87 unipolar electrode sites (dots) and of 6 precordial electrocardiograms (ecg) (crosses). eighty sevenlead points are arranged in a lattice-like pattern (13 × 7
matrix), except for four lead points on both mid-axillary
lines and covered the entire thoracic surface. v1 and v2
leads of the ecg are located between d5 and e5, and between e5 and f5, respectively, whereas v4, v5, and v6
are coincident with g4, h4, and i4, respectively. (bottom) twelve-leads electrocardiograms (ecg) in a patient
with brugada syndrome. type 2 saddleback st-segment
elevation was observed in v1 and v2 of the standard 12lead ecg (4th intercostal space), whereas typical type
1 coved-type st-segment elevation was apparent in v1
and v2 recorded from the 2nd and 3rd intercostal space
(arrows). modified from antzelevitch et al. 5,6 with permission.

leads, presumably due to a preferential prolongation of action potential duration (apd) in right
ventricular (rv) epicardium secondary to accentuation of the action potential (ap) notch.27 a corrected qt (qtc) >460 ms in v2 has been shown
to be associated with arrhythmic risk.28 depolarization abnormalities including prolongation of

october 2006

1133

antzelevitch

p-wave duration, pr and qrs intervals are frequently observed, particularly in patients linked
to  xxxg2028xxx  mutations.29 pr prolongation likely reflects hv conduction delay.25
more recent reports indicate that approximately 20% of brugada syndrome patients develop
supraventricular arrhythmias.30 it is as yet unknown whether atrial vulnerability is correlated
with ventricular inducibility of arrhythmias or
whether atrial arrhythmias may serve as triggering
events for vt/vf, although the latter seems unlikely based on current knowledge. slowed atrial
conduction as well as atrial standstill have been
reported in association with the syndrome.31
in many cases, arrhythmia initiation is
bradycardia-related.32 this may contribute to the
higher incidence of sudden death at night in individuals with the syndrome and may account for
the success of pacing in controlling the arrhythmia in isolated cases of the syndrome.33 however, not all patients die at night and not all the
cases are controlled with rapid ventricular pacing. south asian patients who have the ecg pattern usually develop vt/vf during sleep at night.
makiyama and co-workers reported that loss-offunction  xxxg2028xxx  mutations resulting in brugada
syndrome are distinguished by profound bradyarrhythmias.34 pertinent to this observation is the
recent report by scornik and co-workers35 demonstrating expression of the cardiac sodium channel
gene,  xxxg2028xxx , in intracardiac ganglia. this interesting finding suggests that loss-of-function mutations in  xxxg2028xxx  may not only create the substrate
for reentry in ventricular myocardium, but may
also increase vagal activity in intracardiac ganglia,
thus facilitating the development of arrhythmias
in patients with the brugada syndrome.
a polymorphic vt resembling a rapid torsade
de pointes (tdp) arrhythmia is most commonly associated with the brugada syndrome. monomorphic vt is observed infrequently and is generally
more prevalent in children and infants.36–41
vt/vf often terminates spontaneously in patients with the brugada syndrome, as first reported
by bjerregaard et al.42 this may explain why patients wake up at night after episodes of agonal
respiration caused by the arrhythmia.
sunds, also known as suds, a disorder most
prevalent in southeast asia, and brugada syndrome have recently been shown to be phenotypically, genetically, and functionally the same disorder.10 sudden and unexpected death of young
adults during sleep, known in the philippines as
bangungut (“to rise and moan in sleep”), was first
described in the philippine medical literature in
1917. in japan, this syndrome, known as pokkuri
(“sudden and unexpectedly ceased phenomena”),
was reported as early as 1959.43 in 1997, nade-

1134

manee et al.44 reported that among 27 thai men
referred for aborted cases of what was known in
thailand as lai tai (“death during sleep”), as many
as 16 had the ecg pattern of brugada syndrome.
in their review of the literature in 1999, alings and
wilde found that of the 163 patients who met the
criteria for brugada syndrome, 58% were of asian
origin.25
relationship with structural heart disease
this issue has been the subject of much debate and one that is in a rapid course of evolution. like the long-qt and short-qt syndromes,
brugada syndrome is traditionally thought of as a
primary electrical cardiac disease arising in myocardium that is otherwise structurally normal.
although cardiac function may seem normal on
noninvasive examination using echocardiography,
more sophisticated tools including magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography,
and pathological evaluation of biopsies, have identified discrete anatomic abnormalities in many patients diagnosed with the brugada syndrome. the
somewhat ambiguous and complex relationship
between clinical phenotype of brugada syndrome,
the presence of  xxxg2028xxx  gene mutations, and structural heart disease has been brought into sharper
focus by recent clinical and basic studies.
the suggestion that patients with the clinical
features of brugada syndrome can have underlying
structural abnormalities stems back to 1996 when
corrado et al.45 described a family with autosomal
dominant inheritance of clinical features of brugada syndrome, but in whom postmortem investigation disclosed rv dilation, fibrofatty replacement of the rv free wall, and fibrotic disruption of
the right bundle branch. in 2001, corrado and coworkers reported another study of 273 young sudden death victims from the veneto region of italy
with the brugada syndrome phenotype.46 twelvelead ecgs were available from 96 patients and
14% (12 males and 2 females) displayed right precordial st-segment elevation. at autopsy, 12 of 13
showed pathological features of arvc, and 1 had
an apparently normal heart.
a recent study by frustaci and co-workers47
examined 18 consecutive patients (15 males and
3 females) with typical ecg features of brugada
syndrome, who were found to have normal cardiac
structure and function based on conventional noninvasive analysis using two-dimensional echocardiography. vf was documented in seven patients,
sustained polymorphic vt in seven, and syncope
in four. all patients underwent biventricular endomyocardial biopsies obtained 1 to 3 months
after the last known arrhythmic event in an effort to limit the possibility that any observed
structural abnormalities might have been caused

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

directly by the arrhythmia. in addition, the entire
coding region of the  xxxg2028xxx  gene was analyzed
in all patients; and in some patients, the coding
regions of ryr2 (the cardiac ryanodine receptor)
and the pkp2 (plakophilin-2) genes were screened.
surprisingly, pathological features were found in
biopsies from all 18 patients included in this study.
most patients had evidence of myocarditis. diffuse or localized rv inflammation was observed
in 14 patients (78%), and viral genomes were detectable by polymerase chain reaction in 4 of them
(coxsackie b3 in 2 patients, and epstein-barr virus
and parvovirus b-19 in single patients). interestingly, the typical st-segment abnormalities in the
right precordial leads that formed the basis of
the diagnosis of brugada syndrome disappeared
a few weeks after hospital discharge and were not
observed again at follow-up in eight patients in
whom endomyocardial biopsy revealed myocardial inflammation. an  xxxg2028xxx  mutation was not
identified in these patients. these observations
serve to confirm the fact that myocarditis is capable
of producing an acquired form of the brugada syndrome.48 other types of cardiac muscle pathology
were observed in biopsies from the remaining four
patients. one patient showed extensive fibrofatty
replacement typical of arvc in the rv biopsy and
the other three nonspecific abnormalities consistent with diffuse muscle disease typically present
in dilated cardiomyopathy. overall, rv biopsy
was abnormal in all 18 patients, whereas the left
ventricle biopsy was considered normal in 10
patients.
novel  xxxg2028xxx  mutations associated with loss
of function were detected in 4 of the 18 patients (22%). interestingly, none had myocarditis
on their biopsies, although three of the four exhibited myocyte hypertrophy and vacuolization,
changes that should be viewed with some caution
in that they are rather nonspecific, given the usual
amount of artifactual tissue disruption that occurs
during the endomyocardial biopsy procedure.49
although the study by frustaci and coworkers47 is not conclusive, it is consistent with
the notion that primary channelopathies can lead
to cellular changes.50 age-related development of
myocardial fibrosis and progressive slowing of
atrial and ventricular conduction have been reported in mice with a single null allele of the
 xxxg2028xxx  gene ( xxxg2028xxx +/− mice).51
that  xxxg2028xxx  mutations can be associated with
structural cardiac defects in humans was reported
by bezzina and co-workers in 2003.52 this was a
family whose members exhibited irregular widecomplex tachycardia and in whom mutational
analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations in  xxxg2028xxx . pathological analysis of the heart
in one family member revealed changes of dilated

pace, vol. 29

cardiomyopathy with severe degenerative abnormalities of the cardiac conduction system.
frustaci et al.47 suggested that deranged intracellular sodium homeostasis caused by a  xxxg2028xxx 
mutation could act via sodium-hydrogen and
sodium-calcium exchangers to affect intracellular
ph and calcium flux, which, in turn, could impair excitation-contraction coupling and energy
production. another hypothesis is that loss of
the ap, which is thought to provide the arrhythmogenic substrate in brugada syndrome, leads to
a hibernation-like state that is associated with
progressive cellular changes.50,53 the all-or-none
repolarization at the end of phase 1 of the ap
responsible for loss of the dome causes the calcium channel to inactivate very soon after it activates. as a consequence, calcium channel current
is drastically reduced, the cell becomes depleted
of calcium within seconds, and contractile function ceases. this leads to wall motion abnormalities, observed in many patients with brugada syndrome. loss of the ap dome, because it creates
a hibernation-like state, may over long periods of
time lead to mild structural changes, including intracellular lipid accumulation and vacuolization.
these structural changes may in turn contribute to
the arrhythmogenic substrate of the brugada syndrome, although they are very different from those
encountered in arvc/d.50,53
whatever the mechanism, structural remodeling of the myocardium in a patient with an  xxxg2028xxx 
mutation could help to explain the delay in manifestation of ecg abnormalities and arrhythmias,
and may account for the eventual progression of
some cases of brugada syndrome to ones exhibiting structural abnormalities.
these studies also point to inflammatory processes as being primary and in some cases implicating myocarditis in the development of an
acquired form of brugada syndrome, whose manifestation may be transient.47 to what extent the
electrocardiographic and arrhythmic manifestations of primary structural defects may have a genetic predisposition is not known and must await
delineation of the 70–80% of brugada syndrome
cases that have thus far not been linked to a genetic mutation.
these facts notwithstanding, the majority of
congenital brugada syndrome patients are believed to possess a structurally normal heart, consistent with the notion that this is a primary
electrical heart disease.54 while fibrosis and myocarditis may exacerbate or indeed trigger events
in patients with the brugada syndrome, it seems
clear that in the vast majority of cases these structural changes are unrelated to arvc/d. arvc and
brugada syndromes are distinct clinical entities,
both with respect to the clinical presentation and

october 2006

1135

antzelevitch

genetic predisposition.4,55,56 the only genes thus
far linked to the brugada syndrome are those
that influence sodium channel current, whereas
arvc has been linked to nine different chromosomal loci and four putative genes ( xxxg661xxx , plakoglobin, ryr2, and plakophilin-2) independent of those responsible for the brugada
syndrome.55,57,58 only the arvc5 locus has been
mapped to a region overlapping with the second
locus for brugada syndrome, but the responsible
gene has not been identified.57,58 in brugada syndrome, imaging techniques such as echocardiography, angiography, magnetic resonance imaging,
and radionuclide scintigraphy show no evidence
of overt structural heart disease, whereas arvc
patients characteristically display rv morphological and functional changes (such as global dilatation, bulgings/aneurysms, and wall motion abnormalities). ventricular arrhythmias in arvc are
most commonly monomorphic vt, often precipitated by catecholamines or exercise, accounting
for sudden death of young competitive athletes.
in contrast, st-segment elevation and arrhythmias
in brugada patients are enhanced by vagotonic
agents or beta-adrenergic blockers, and polymorphic
vt most commonly occurs during rest or sleep.
unlike brugada syndrome, the ecg abnormalities in arvc are usually not dynamic, displaying
a constant t-wave inversion, epsilon waves and,
in the progressive stage, reduction of the r amplitude, which are largely unaffected by sodium
channel blocker administration.
recent studies report that electron beam computed tomography has uncovered wall motion abnormalities in a series of brugada patients tested.59
although such contractile abnormalities are commonly considered pathognomonic of structural
disease, recent studies53,60 suggest that such contractile dysfunction can result from loss of the
ap dome in regions of rv epicardium, and, thus,
may be unrelated to any type of morphological defect. loss of the dome leads to contractile dysfunction, because calcium entry into the cells is greatly
diminished and sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
stores are depleted.
the right ventricular outflow tract (rvot) has
been identified as the source of the electrocardiographic abnormalities and arrhythmic activity in
patients with the brugada syndrome.61 these manifestations have been attributed to the greater i to mediated phase 1 and epicardial ap notch. magnetic resonance imaging in patients with brugada
syndrome has shown that the rvot is selectively
dilated,62 reflecting the presence of an electrophysiological abnormality, such as loss of the ap
dome and/or reflecting the presence of structural
changes that contribute to the development of an
arrhythmogenic substrate. the basis for the unique

1136

electrophysiological and anatomical features of
the rvot is not well defined, but may be related to
the embryological origin of this region of the heart.
of the four chambers of the heart, the right ventricle is anatomically, phylogenetically, and developmentally the most complex. formation of the
rvot involves the participation of an extra cardiac source of cells, i.e., neural crest cells.63,64 ablation of specific points of the cardiac neural crest
in chicken embryos was shown by kirby et al.,64
to lead to outflow tract malformations. although
the exact nature of neural crest cells in the outflow tract has been a matter of some debate, recent
studies involving transgenic mice provide support
for the theory that these cells are important in the
development of the rvot and septation of the outflow tracts.65
 xxxg895xxx  ( xxxg895xxx ) has been shown to modulate the development of the neural crest,66 and
recent studies have shown that conditional knockout (cko) of  xxxg895xxx  in neural crest cells leads to selective dilatation or bulging of the outflow tracts in
the mouse.  xxxg895xxx  is expressed in the cardiac neural
crest and neural tube, and its absence is known to
result in aberrant cardiac infundibulum and neural
crest formation.66 germline knockout (ko) of  xxxg895xxx 
in the mouse results in abnormal cardiac morphogenesis, including rvot abnormalities and perinatal death.67
liu et al. recently tested the hypothesis that
 xxxg895xxx  expression in the cardiac neural crest is
critical to normal development of the outflow
tracts using a cko strategy to generate mice with
neural-crest-restricted ko of  xxxg895xxx . the cko mice
displayed marked dilatation or bulging of the outflow tracts. the results suggested that  xxxg895xxx  expression is not required in the neural crest or dorsal
neural tube for normal outflow tract morphogenesis, but is critically important in the remainder
of the neural tube, where it may regulate the plasticity of non-crest neuron-epithelial cells that mediate the development of the outflow tracts.68 it
is tempting to speculate that  xxxg895xxx  defects limited
to this region of the heart may contribute to the
development of the brugada syndrome phenotype
by impairing electrotonic communication in the
rvot. this would exacerbate repolarization heterogeneities which contribute prominently to the
arrhythmogenic substrate, as well as to slowing of
conduction, which may facilitate the development
of reentry.
risk stratification
a great deal of focus and debate has centered
around the issue of risk stratification of patients
at risk for sudden cardiac death. it is generally
accepted that brugada syndrome patients presenting with aborted sudden death are at high risk for

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

recurrence and that they should be protected by an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (icd). there
is also little argument that patients presenting with
syncope, particularly those with a spontaneously
abnormal (type 1) ecg, are at higher risk.
in contrast, risk stratification of asymptomatic
patients diagnosed with the disease has met with
considerable debate.69–73 several invasive and
noninvasive parameters have been proposed for
identification of patients at risk of sudden death,
including the presence of spontaneous type 1
st-segment elevation, the characteristics of the s
wave,74 the presence of late potentials,75 and inducibility of vt/vf using pes. inducibility has
been the subject of several recent studies, and
although the results of the divergent groups are
gradually coming together, the positive predictive
value of the procedure continues to generate lively
debate.
before discussing the usefulness of these procedures in the assignment of risk, it would be
helpful to review the extent of the problem.
in 1998, brugada et al.76 reported that over a
34-month-follow-up period, 27% of previously
asymptomatic patients experienced a first vf or
sudden cardiac death. this figure corresponds
to an occurrence of life-threatening events of
approximately 10%/year. in 2002, with a mean
follow-up of 27 ± 29 months, the same authors69
reported that 8% of previously asymptomatic patients had become symptomatic; an occurrence
of a life-threatening event of 3.5%/year. in 2005,
brugada et al.71 reported that only 6% of asymptomatic patients displayed a first event during a
mean follow-up of 42 ± 42 months, corresponding
to an event rate of 1.7%/year. this progressive decline in first event rate in previously asymptomatic
patients most likely reflects a reduced severity of
phenotypes referred to the brugada registry in subsequent years.
in contrast, priori et al. in 200270 reported that
asymptomatic patients have a cumulative probability of 14% for developing a cardiac arrest by age
40, corresponding to an incidence of cardiac arrest
of 0.35%/year. in 2005, the same authors reported
a first event rate of 3% (4/132) over a 31-monthfollow-up period, corresponding to an event rate
of 1%/year.72
the reason behind the disparity in the data
generated by these two groups is not clearly evident. it was suggested by brugada et al.71 that
the difference may be due to the inclusion by priori and co-workers of patients with type 2 and 3
st-segment elevation, which is not considered diagnostic of the brugada syndrome.3–6 priori and
napolitano argue that exclusion of type 2 and 3
from the diagnosis of the syndrome can lead to
missed diagnosis of the disease.72 while this is

pace, vol. 29

clearly the case, it may be a rare occurrence, and
the exclusion appears justified on the basis that it
avoids a large number of false positive diagnoses.
the failure to exclude individuals with type 2 and
3 st-segment elevation suggests that the european
registry may contain many individuals who do not
have the syndrome.
while it stands to reason that this difference
may contribute to the discrepancy in the incidence of first events among asymptomatic patients reported by the two largest registries of brugada syndrome patients, a recent report by eckardt
and co-workers73 suggests that other factors may
be involved. these authors report that 1 out of
123 asymptomatic individuals with a type 1 ecg
(0.8%) had a first arrhythmic event during a 40
± 50 month follow-up. this translates into a first
event rate of 0.24% per year, considerably less than
the other two registries.
the major registry studies all agree that brugada syndrome patients at higher risk for the development of subsequent events are those presenting with a spontaneous type 1 st-segment elevation or brugada ecg and/or those with a previous vt/vf or scd.73 the registries also agree that
pes inducibility is greatest among patients with
previous vt/vf or syncope. approximately onethird of asymptomatic patients are inducible. in
the priori and napolitano72 and eckardt et al.73
studies, inducibility of vt/vf in asymptomatic
patients was not associated with risk. the lack
of association between inducibility and spontaneous vf in brugada patients was also reported
by a number of smaller studies, such as that of
kanda et al.77 in sharp contrast, brugada et al.78
found that the risk for developing vt/vf is much
greater in patients who were inducible during pes,
whether or not a type 1 st-segment elevation was
spontaneously present and whether or not they
were symptomatic. the reason for the marked disparity in the predictive power of pes inducibility among the different studies is not immediately apparent. the discrepancies may be due to
differences in patient characteristics and the use
of multiple testing centers with non-standardized
or non-comparable stimulation protocols.79 additional studies are needed to further define risk
stratification strategies for asymptomatic patients.
it is noteworthy that in experimental models
of the brugada syndrome involving the coronaryperfused wedge preparation, polymorphic vt is
readily inducible with a single s2, but only when
applied on the epicardial surface of the wedge. inducibility is not possible or much more difficult
when extra-stimulation is applied to the endocardial surface. the shorter refractory period of epicardium allows extra-stimuli direct access to the
vulnerable window across the ventricular wall,

october 2006

1137

antzelevitch

thus facilitating the induction of reentry. these
relationships suggest that pes applied to the epicardium may provide a more accurate assessment
of risk than the current approach in which stimuli
are applied to the endocardial surface. in support
of this hypothesis, carlsson et al. reported that a
brugada syndrome patient with recurrent syncope
due to polymorphic vt could not be induced with
rv endocardial stimulation. however, epicardial
stimulation from a left ventricular site through the
coronary sinus led to the development of polymorphic vt.80
recent studies have suggested that combined
electrocardiographic markers may be helpful in
risk stratification. atarashi and ogawa74 used the
width of the s wave and the st-segment elevation
magnitude, whereas morita et al.75 combined stsegment elevation and the presence of late potentials.
gehi et al.81 recently reported the results of a
meta-analysis of 30 prospective prognostic studies, including 1,545 patients with a brugada ecg,
to assess predictors of events. the overall event
rate at an average of 32 months follow-up was
10.0%, much higher for patients of asian versus
european origin. the meta-analysis suggested that
a history of syncope or scd, the presence of a spontaneous type i brugada ecg, and male gender predict a more malignant natural history. the findings
did not support the use of a family history of scd,
the presence of an  xxxg2028xxx  gene mutation, or electrophysiologic study (eps) to guide the management of patients with a brugada ecg.
the meta-analysis by gehi et al.81 pooled
data from studies that used very different criteria to identify patients with brugada syndrome.
moreover, the six studies that were used to evaluate the role of eps in risk stratification of patients were quite heterogeneous. consequently,
the results should be viewed with some reservation. a prospective study termed prelude (programmed electrical stimulation predictive), currently underway in italy, is designed to provide
further insight into the ongoing debate.
transmural dispersion of repolarization (tdr)
within the ventricular myocardium has been suggested to underlie arrhythmogenesis in a number
of syndromes, including brugada, short-qt, and
long-qt syndromes.82 differences in the timecourse of repolarization of these three ventricular
myocardial cell types (endocardial, epicardial, and
m cells) contribute prominently to inscription of
the electrocardiographic t wave.83 in isolated ventricular wedge preparations, the peak of the t wave
was shown to coincide with epicardial repolarization, and the end of the t wave with repolarization
of the m cells, so that tpeak-end (tp-e) interval
provides a measure of tdr.83–85 although tp-e on

1138

the surface ecg may not be equivalent to tdr, this
interval is thought to provide an index of tdr and
thus be helpful in forecasting risk for the development of life-threatening arrhythmias.83,84,86–88 evidence in support of this hypothesis has been provided in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, congenital
and acquired long qt, and other pathophysiological conditions.83,84,86–89
hevia and co-workers28 recently evaluated
tp-e as a risk factor for recurrence of lifethreatening cardiac events in patients with the
brugada syndrome. twenty-nine patients with the
ecg pattern of brugada syndrome and 29 healthy
age- and sex-matched controls were studied. qt,
qtc, qt dispersion, tp-e, and tp-e dispersion
were measured. eleven patients with the ecg pattern of brugada syndrome had a prolonged (>460
ms) qtc in v2, but usually not in inferior or left
leads. no patient had abnormally prolonged qt
dispersion. tp-e and tp-e dispersion were significantly prolonged in patients with recurrences
versus patients without events. thus, there was a
significant correlation between tp-e and tp-e dispersion and occurrence of life-threatening arrhythmic events in patients with the brugada syndrome,
suggesting that these parameters may be useful in
risk stratification of patients with the syndrome.
genetic factors underlying the brugada
syndrome
brugada syndrome is inherited via an autosomal dominant mode of transmission. the first gene
to be linked to the brugada syndrome is  xxxg2028xxx ,
the gene encoding for the alpha-subunit of the cardiac
sodium channel gene.90 figure 3 highlights the diversity of  xxxg2028xxx  mutations associated with the
brugada syndrome. of note, mutations in  xxxg2028xxx 
are also responsible for the  xxxg2028xxx  form of the longqt syndrome and cardiac conduction disease. a
number of mutations have been reported to cause
overlapping syndromes; in some cases, all three
phenotypes are present.91
over one hundred mutations in  xxxg2028xxx  have
been linked to the syndrome in recent years
(see antzelevitch et al.61 for references; also see
www.fsm.it/cardmoc). only a fraction of these mutations have been studied in expression systems
and shown to result in loss of function due either
to: (1) failure of the sodium channel to express;
(2) a shift in the voltage- and time-dependence
of sodium channel current (i na ) activation, inactivation, or reactivation; (3) entry of the sodium
channel into an intermediate state of inactivation
from which it recovers more slowly; or (4) accelerated inactivation of the sodium channel. in in
vitro expression systems, the premature inactivation of the sodium channel is sometimes observed
at physiological temperatures, but not at room

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 3. schematic of  xxxg2028xxx ,
the gene that encodes the (-subunit
of the sodium channel, illustrating
mutations linked to brugada
syndrome, long-qt3 syndrome,
conduction disease, and atrial
standstill.
some
mutations
are associated with combined
phenotypes. alpha = subunit

temperature.92 acceleration of i na inactivation
was still more accentuated at higher than physiological temperatures, suggesting that the syndrome may be unmasked, and that patients with
the brugada syndrome may be at an increased risk,
during a febrile state.92 a number of brugada patients displaying fever-induced polymorphic vt
have been identified since the publication of this
report.14,38,93–100
mutations in the  xxxg2028xxx  gene account for approximately 18–30% of brugada syndrome cases.
a higher incidence of  xxxg2028xxx  mutations has been
reported in familial than in sporadic cases.101 of
note, negative  xxxg2028xxx  results generally do not rule
out causal gene mutations, since the promoter region, cryptic splicing mutations, or presence of
gross rearrangements are generally not part of routine investigation. a recent report by hong et al.102
provided the first report of a dysfunctional sodium
channel created by an intronic mutation giving rise
to cryptic splice site activation in  xxxg2028xxx  in a family with the brugada syndrome. the deletion of
fragments of segments 2 and 3 of domain iv of
 xxxg2028xxx  caused complete loss of function.
bezzina and co-workers recently provided interesting evidence in support of the hypothesis
that an  xxxg2028xxx  promoter polymorphism common
in asians modulates variability in cardiac conduction, and may contribute to the high prevalence
of brugada syndrome in the asian population.103
sequencing of the  xxxg2028xxx  promoter identified a
haplotype variant consisting of 6 polymorphisms
in near-complete linkage disequilibrium that occurred at an allele frequency of 22% in asian subjects and was absent in whites and blacks. the results of the study demonstrate that sodium channel
transcription in the human heart may vary consid-

pace, vol. 29

erably among individuals and races, and be associated with variable conduction velocity and arrhythmia susceptibility.
a second locus on chromosome 3, close to
but distinct from  xxxg2028xxx , has been linked to the
syndrome57 in a large pedigree in which the syndrome is associated with progressive conduction
disease, a low sensitivity to procainamide, and a
relatively good prognosis. the gene was recently
identified as the  xxxg935xxx -like gene (gpd1l). a mutation in gpd1l
has been shown to result in a partial reduction of
i na .104
knowledge thus far gained through genetic
analysis suggests that identification of specific mutations may not be very helpful in formulating a
diagnosis or providing a prognosis. there are no
clear hotspots and mutations have been reported
throughout the  xxxg2028xxx  gene. it is not clear whether
some mutations are associated with a greater risk
of arrhythmic events or sudden death. genetic testing is recommended for support of the clinical diagnosis, for early detection of relatives at potential
risk, and particularly for the purpose of advancing
research and consequently our understanding of
genotype-phenotype relations.
cellular and ionic mechanisms underlying the
development of the brugada phenotype
the concept of phase 2 reentry, which is
a known trigger for the brugada syndrome, was
described in the early 1990s and evolved in
parallel with the clinical discovery of the brugada syndrome.105–108 studies conducted over the
past decade suggest that rebalancing of the currents active at the end of phase 1, leading to an

october 2006

1139

antzelevitch

figure 4. phase 2 reentry. reentrant activity induced
by exposure of a canine ventricular epicardial preparation (0.7 cm2 ) to simulated ischemia. microelectrode
recordings were obtained from four sites as shown in
the schematic (upper right). after 35 min of ischemia,
the action potential dome develops normally at site 4,
but not at sites 1, 2, or 3. the dome then propagates in a
clockwise direction re-exciting sites 3, 2, and 1 with progressive delays, thus generating a closely coupled reentrant extrasystole (156 ms) at site 1. in this example of
phase 2 reentry, propagation of the dome occurs in a direction opposite to that of phase 0, a mechanism akin
to reflection. bcl = 700 ms. modified from lukas and
antzelevitch119 with permission.

accentuation of the ap notch in rv epicardium
is responsible for the accentuated j wave or stsegment elevation associated with the brugada
syndrome.105–115 under normal conditions, the appearance of the epicardial ap notch is due principally to the interaction of two ion channel currents. the transient outward current (i to ), which
activates during phase 0, contributes most promi-

1140

nently to phase 1 of the ap, whereas the calcium
inward current is largely responsible for the second upstroke, giving rise to the ap dome.
amplification of epicardial and tdr secondary to the presence of genetic defects, pathophysiologic factors, and pharmacologic influences, leads to accentuation of the j wave and
eventually to loss of the ap dome, giving rise
to extrasystolic activity in the form of phase 2
reentry. activation of i to leads to a paradoxical
prolongation of apd in canine ventricular tissues,116 but to abbreviation of ventricular apd in
species that normally exhibit brief aps (e.g., mouse
and rat).117 pathophysiologic conditions (e.g., ischemia, metabolic inhibition) and some pharmacologic interventions (e.g., i na or i ca blockers or
i k−atp , i to , i kr , or i ks activators) can lead to marked
abbreviation of the ap in canine and feline118
ventricular cells where i to is prominent. under
these conditions, canine ventricular epicardium
exhibits an all-or-none repolarization as a result of
the shift in the balance of currents flowing at the
end of phase 1 of the ap. when phase 1 reaches
approximately −30 mv, all-or-none repolarization
of the ap ensues, leading to loss of the dome as the
outward currents overwhelm the inward currents.
loss of the ap dome generally occurs at some epicardial sites but not others, resulting in the development of a marked dispersion of repolarization within the epicardium as well as transmurally,
between epicardium and endocardium. propagation of the ap dome from the epicardial site at
which it is maintained to sites at which it is abolished can cause local re-excitation of the preparation. this mechanism, termed phase 2 reentry,
produces extrasystolic beats capable of initiating circus movement reentry119 (fig. 4). phase 2
reentry has been shown to occur when rv epicardium is exposed to: (1) k+ channel openers
such as pinacidil120 ; (2) sodium channel blockers such as flecainide121 ; (3) increased [ca2+]o122 ;
(4) calcium channel blockers such as verapamil;
(5) metabolic inhibition123 ; and (6) simulated
ischemia.119
exaggerated or otherwise abnormal j waves
have long been linked to idiopathic vf and
the brugada syndrome.1,19,42,112,124,125 the brugada
syndrome is characterized by exaggerated j wave
that manifests as an st-segment elevation in the
right precordial leads.1 a number of studies have
highlighted the similarities between the conditions that predispose to phase 2 reentry and those
that attend the appearance of the brugada syndrome. loss of the ap dome in epicardium, but
not endocardium, generates a transmural current
that manifests on the ecg as an st-segment elevation, similar to that encountered in patients
with the brugada syndrome.105,123,126 evidence in

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 5. ecg and arrhythmias with typical features of the brugada syndrome recorded from
canine right ventricular wedge preparations. (a) schematic of arterially perfused right ventricular
wedge preparation. (b) pressure-induced phase 2 reentry and vt. shown are transmembrane
action potentials simultaneously recorded from two epicardial (epi 1 and epi 2) and one m
region (m) sites, together with a transmural ecg. local application of pressure near epi 2 results
in loss of the action potential dome at that site but not at epi 1 or m sites. the dome at epi 1
then re-excites epi 2, giving rise to a phase 2 reentrant extrasystole which triggers a short run of
ventricular tachycardia. note the st-segment elevation due to loss of the action potential dome in
a segment of epicardium. (c) polymorphic vt/vf induced by local application of the potassium
channel opener pinacidil (10 mum) to the epicardial surface of the wedge. action potentials from
two epicardial sites (epi 1 and epi 2) and a transmural ecg were simultaneously recorded.
loss of the dome at epi 1 but not epi 2 creates a marked dispersion of repolarization, giving
rise to a phase 2 reentrant extrasystole. the extrasystolic beat then triggers a long episode of
ventricular fibrillation (22 sec). (right panel) addition of  xxxd1804xxx  ( xxxd1804xxx , 2 mm), a specific
i to blocker, to the perfusate restored the action potential dome at epi 1, thus reducing dispersion
of repolarization and suppressing all arrhythmic activity. bcl = 2,000 ms. (d) phase 2 reentry
gives rise to vt following addition of pinacidil (2.5 mum) to the coronary perfusate. transmembrane
action potentials form 2 epicardial sites (epi 1 and epi 2) and one endocardial site (endo), as well
as a transmural ecg were simultaneously recorded. (right panel)  xxxd1804xxx  (1 mm) markedly reduces
the magnitude of the action potential notch in epicardium, thus restoring the action potential
dome throughout the preparation and abolishing all arrhythmic activity. panel d is from yan and
antzelevitch 106 with permission.

support of a phase 2 reentrant mechanism in humans was recently provided by thomsen et al.127
and antzelevitch.128
autonomic neurotransmitters like acetylcholine facilitate loss of the ap dome129 by suppressing i ca and/or augmenting potassium current. beta-adrenergic agonists restore the dome by
augmenting i ca . sodium channel blockers also
facilitate loss of the canine rv ap dome via a
negative shift in the voltage at which phase 1

pace, vol. 29

begins.121,130 these findings are consistent with
accentuation of st-segment elevation in patients
with the brugada syndrome following vagal maneuvers or class i antiarrhythmic agents, as well
as normalization of the st-segment elevation following beta-adrenergic agents and phosphodiesterase
iii inhibitors.13,105,131 loss of the ap dome is
much more readily induced in right versus left
canine ventricular epicardium123,126,132 because of
the more prominent i to -mediated phase 1 in aps in

october 2006

1141

antzelevitch

figure 6. terfenadine-induced st-segment elevation, t-wave inversion, transmural and endocardial dispersion of repolarization, and phase 2 reentry. each panel shows transmembrane action
potentials from one endocardial (top) and two epicardial sites together with a transmural ecg
recorded from a canine arterially perfused right ventricular wedge preparation. (a) control (bcl
400 ms). (b) terfenadine (5 mum) accentuated the epicardial action potential notch creating a
transmural voltage gradient that manifests as a st-segment elevation or exaggerated j wave in
the ecg. first beat recorded after changing from bcl 800 ms to bcl 400 ms. (c) continued pacing at bcl 400 ms results in all-or-none repolarization at the end of phase 1 at some epicardial
sites but not others, creating a local epicardial dispersion of repolarization (edr) as well as a
transmural dispersion of repolarization (tdr). (d) phase 2 reentry occurs when the epicardial
action potential dome propagates from a site where it is maintained to regions where it has been
lost. modified from fish and antzelevitch107 with permission.

this region of the heart. this distinction is believed
to be the basis for why the brugada syndrome is a
rv disease.
thus, accentuation of the rv epicardial ap
notch underlies the st-segment elevation. eventual loss of the dome of the rv epicardial ap further exaggerates st-segment elevation. the vulnerable window created within the epicardium,
as well as transmurally, serves as the substrate
and phase 2 reentry provides the extrasystole that
serves as the trigger which precipitates episodes of
vt and vf in the brugada syndrome. evidence in
support of this hypothesis was recently provided
in an arterially perfused canine rv experimental
model of the brugada syndrome (fig. 5).106 the
vt and vf generated in these preparations is usually polymorphic, resembling a rapid form of tdp.
this activity may be mechanistically related to the
migrating spiral wave shown to generate a pattern
resembling tdp associated with a normal or longqt interval.133,134
much of the focus in the past has been on the
ability of a reduction in sodium channel current
to unmask the brugada syndrome and create an
1142

arrhythmogenic substrate. a recent report shows
that a combination of i na and i ca block is more effective than i na inhibition alone in precipitating
the brugada syndrome in the arterially perfused
wedge preparation (fig. 6).107 high concentrations
of terfenadine (5 mum) produce a potent block of
i na and i ca , leading to accentuation of the epicardial ap notch following acceleration of the rate
from a basic cycle length of 800 to 400 ms. the
dramatic accentuation of the notch was due to the
effect of the drug to depress phase 0, augment the
magnitude of phase 1, and delay the appearance of
the second upstroke. with continued rapid pacing,
phase 1 becomes more accentuated, until all-ornone repolarization occurs at the end of phase 1 at
some epicardial sites but not others, leading to the
development of both epicardial dispersion of repolarization (edr) and tdr (fig. 6c). propagation
of the dome from the region where it is maintained
to the region at which it is lost results in the development of local phase 2 reentry (fig. 6d). figure 7
shows the ability of terfenadine-induced phase
2 reentry to generate an extrasystole, couplet,
and polymorphic vt/vf. figure 7d illustrates an

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 7. spontaneous and programmed electrical stimulationinduced polymorphic vt in rv
wedge preparations pretreated
with terfenadine (5–10 mum). (a)
phase 2 reentry in epicardium
gives rise to a closely coupled
extrasystole. (b) phase 2 reentrant extrasystole triggers a brief
episode of polymorphic vt. (c)
phase 2 reentry followed by a
single circus movement reentry in
epicardium gives rise to a couplet.
(d) extrastimulus (s1-s2 = 250
ms) applied to epicardium triggers
a polymorphic vt. modified from
fish and antzelevitch107 with
permission.

example of pes to initiate vt/vf under similar
conditions.
the electrocardiographic manifestations of
the brugada syndrome have been attributed to: (1)
conduction delay in the rv epicardial free wall in
the region of the outflow tract (rvot)135 and/or (2)
premature repolarization of the rv epicardial ap
secondary to loss of the ap dome, or a combination
of the two.136 the cellular mechanisms thought to
be responsible for the development of the brugada
phenotype via hypothesis 2 is schematically illustrated in figure 8.137,138
under physiological conditions, the st segment is isoelectric because of the absence of transmural voltage gradients at the level of the ap
plateau (fig. 8a). accentuation of the rv notch
under pathophysiologic conditions leads to exaggeration of transmural voltage gradients and thus
to accentuation of the j wave or to j point elevation. when epicardial repolarization precedes repolarization of the cells in the m and endocardial
regions, the t wave remains positive. the result
is a saddleback configuration of the repolarization
waves (fig. 8b). further accentuation of the notch
may be accompanied by a prolongation of the epi-

pace, vol. 29

cardial ap such that the direction of repolarization
across the rv wall and transmural voltage gradients are reversed, leading to the development of
a coved-type st-segment elevation and inversion
of the t wave (fig. 8c), typically observed in the
ecg of brugada patients. a delay in epicardial activation may also contribute to inversion of the t
wave. the downsloping st-segment elevation observed in the experimental wedge models often
appears as an r’, suggesting that the appearance
of a right bundle branch block (rbbb) morphology in brugada patients may be due at least in part
to early repolarization of rv epicardium, rather
than major impulse conduction block in the right
bundle.
a rigorous application of rbbb criteria reveals that a large majority of rbbb-like morphologies encountered in cases of brugada syndrome do
not fit the criteria for rbbb.139 moreover, attempts
by miyazaki and co-workers to record delayed activation of the rv in brugada patients met with
failure.13
it is important to point out that although
the typical brugada morphology is present in
figure 8b,c, an arrhythmogenic substrate is

october 2006

1143

antzelevitch

figure 8. schematic representation of right ventricular epicardial action potential changes proposed to underlie the electrocardiographic manifestation of the brugada syndrome. modified
from antzelevitch 137 with permission.

absent. the arrhythmogenic substrate is thought
to develop when a further shift in the balance of
current leads to loss of the ap dome at some epicardial sites but not others (fig. 8d)). loss of the
ap dome in epicardium but not endocardium results in the development of a marked tdr and
refractoriness, responsible for the development of
a vulnerable window during which a premature
impulse or extrasystole can induce a reentrant arrhythmia. conduction of the ap dome from sites
at which it is maintained to sites at which it is
lost causes local re-excitation via a phase 2 reentry
mechanism, leading to the development of a very
closely coupled extrasystole, which captures the
vulnerable window across the wall, thus triggering
a circus movement reentry in the form of vt/vf
(fig. 8e).106,119 the phase 2 reentrant beat fuses
with the negative t wave of the basic response.
because the extrasystole originates in epicardium,
the qrs complex is largely comprised of a q wave,
which serves to accentuate the negative deflection
of the inverted t wave, giving the ecg a more symmetrical appearance. this morphology is often observed in the clinic preceding the onset of polymorphic vt.
studies involving the arterially perfused rv
wedge preparation provide evidence in support

1144

of these hypotheses.106 a high resolution optical
mapping system that allows simultaneous recording of transmembrane aps from 256 sites along
the transmural surface of the arterially perfused
canine rv wedge preparation has been used by
shimizu et al.140 to demonstrate that a steep repolarization gradient between the region at which
the dome is lost and the region at which it is maintained is essential for the development of a closely
coupled phase 2 reentrant extrasystole. this study
also showed that reentry initially rotates in the epicardium and gradually shifts to a transmural orientation, responsible for nonsustained polymorphic
vt or vf.
a recent report by kurita et al., in which
monophasic ap electrodes were positioned on the
epicardial and endocardial surfaces of the rvot
in patients with the brugada syndrome, provides
further support.111
the marked accentuation of the epicardial ap
dome and the development of concealed phase
2 reentry suggest that activation forces may extend beyond the qrs in brugada patients. indeed, signal averaged ecg (saecg) recordings
have demonstrated late potentials in patients with
the brugada syndrome, especially in the anterior
wall of the rvot.60,141–145 the basis for these late

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

potentials, commonly ascribed to delayed conduction within the ventricle, is largely unknown. endocardial recordings have been unrevealing. nagase and co-workers143 introduced a guide wire
into the conus branch of the right coronary artery
to record signals from the epicardial surface of the
anterior wall of the rvot in patients with the
brugada syndrome. the unipolar recordings displayed delayed potentials, which coincided with
late potentials recorded in the saecg, particularly
after administration of class ic antiarrhythmic
agents. the authors conclude that recordings from
the conus branch of the right coronary artery can
identify an “epicardial abnormality” in the rvot,
which is accentuated in the presence of ic agents,
thus uncovering part of the arrhythmogenic substrate responsible for vt/vf in brugada syndrome,
which may be related to the second upstroke or a
concealed phase 2 reentrant beat. late potentials
are often regarded as being representative of delayed activation of the myocardium, but in the case
of the brugada syndrome, other possibilities exist
as discussed above. for example, the second upstroke of the epicardial ap, thought to be greatly
accentuated in brugada syndrome,137 might be capable of generating late potentials when rvot
activation is otherwise normal. moreover, the occurrence of phase 2 reentry, especially when concealed (i.e., when it fails to trigger transmural reentry), may contribute to the generation of delayed
unipolar and late saecg potentials.
the rate-dependence of the ecg sign can be
used to discriminate between these two hypotheses. if the brugada ecg sign is due to delayed
conduction in the rvot, acceleration of the rate
would be expected to further aggravate conduction and thus accentuate the st-segment elevation
and the rbbb morphology of the ecg. if, on the
other hand, the brugada ecg sign is secondary to
accentuation of the epicardial ap notch, at some
point leading to loss of the ap dome, acceleration
of the rate would be expected to normalize the
ecg, by restoring the ap dome and reducing the
notch. this occurs because the transient outward
current, which is at the heart of this mechanism, is
slow to recover from inactivation and is less available at faster rates. the fact of the matter is that
brugada patients usually display a normalization
of their ecg or no change when heart rate is increased, thus favoring the second hypothesis. further evidence in support of this hypothesis derives
from the recent observations of shimizu and coworkers.146 using a unipolar catheter introduced
into the great cardiac vein, they recorded unipolar
activation recovery intervals (ari), a measure of
local apd, from the epicardial surface of the rvot
in a 53-year-old brugada patient. ari in the rvot
was observed to abbreviate dramatically whenever

pace, vol. 29

the st segment was elevated in v2 following a
pause or the administration of a sodium channel
blocker. additional support for the hypothesis derives from the demonstration by watanabe and coworkers147 that quinidine suppresses late potentials recorded in a patient with brugada syndrome.
this effect of the drug is presumably due to inhibition of i to , leading to diminution of the epicardial
ap notch and normalization of the repolarization
heterogeneities. if the late potentials were due to
delayed conduction, quinidine-induced i na inhibition would be expected to accentuate the appearance of the late potentials.
thus, the available data, both basic and clinical, point to transmural voltage gradients that develop secondary to accentuation of the epicardial
notch and loss of the ap dome as being in large
part responsible for the brugada ecg signature.
gender-based differences in the manifestation of
brugada syndrome
although the genetic mutation responsible
for the brugada syndrome is equally distributed
between the sexes, the clinical phenotype is 8
to 10 times more prevalent in males than in females. the basis for this sex-related distinction
has been shown to be due to a more prominent
i to -mediated ap notch in the rv epicardium of
males versus females148 (figs. 9 and 10). the more
prominent i to causes the end of phase 1 of the
rv epicardial ap to repolarize to more negative
potentials in tissue and arterially perfused wedge
preparations from males, facilitating loss of the ap
dome and the development of phase 2 reentry and
polymorphic vt.
the proposed cellular mechanism for the brugada syndrome is summarized in figure 11. the
available data support the hypothesis that the brugada syndrome results from amplification of heterogeneities intrinsic to the early phases of the ap
among the different transmural cell types. the amplification is secondary to a rebalancing of currents
active during phase 1, including a decrease in i na
or i ca , or augmentation of any one of a number
of outward currents. st-segment elevation similar to that observed in patients with the brugada
syndrome occurs as a consequence of the accentuation of the ap notch, eventually leading to loss
of the ap dome in rv epicardium, where i to is
most prominent. loss of the dome gives rise to
both a tdr as well as edr. the transmural dispersion is responsible for the development of stsegment elevation and the creation of a vulnerable window across the ventricular wall, whereas
the epicardial dispersion gives to phase 2 reentry
which provides the extrasystole that captures the
vulnerable window, thus precipitating vt/vf. the

october 2006

1145

antzelevitch

figure 9. sex-based and interventricular differences in i to . (a) mean i-v relationship for i to recorded from rv epicardial cells isolated from hearts of male and female dogs. (inset) representative i to current traces and voltage protocol.
i to density was significantly greater in male versus female rv epicardial cells. no sex differences were observed in
lv. (b) transmembrane action potentials recorded from isolated canine rv epicardial male and female tissue slices.
bcls 300, 500, 800, and 2,000 ms. (c) rate-dependence of phase 1 amplitude and voltage at end of phase 1 (v/phase
1, mv) in males (solid squares) versus females (solid circles). modified from di diego et al. 148 with permission.

vt generated is usually polymorphic, resembling
a very rapid form of tdp.
modulating factors and acquired forms of
brugada syndrome
a number of factors modulate the electrocardiographic and arrhythmic manifestations of the
brugada syndrome. st-segment elevation in the
brugada syndrome is often dynamic. the brugada ecg may often be concealed, but can be unmasked or modulated by sodium channel blockers,
a febrile state, vagotonic agents, alpha-adrenergic agonists, beta-adrenergic blockers, tricyclic or tetracyclic
antidepressants, first generation antihistaminics
( xxxd1892xxx ), a combination of glucose
and insulin, hyperkalemia, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, and by alcohol and cocaine toxicity
(fig. 12).11–13,149–156 these agents may also induce acquired forms of the brugada syndrome
(table iv). although a definitive list of drugs to
avoid in the brugada syndrome has not yet been
formulated, the list of agents in table iv may provide some guidance. one of the more recent additions to this group is lithium. this widely used
drug is a potent blocker of cardiac sodium channels and can unmask patients with the brugada
syndrome.157
myocardial infarction or acute ischemia due
to vasospasm involving the rvot mimics stsegment elevation similar to that in brugada syndrome. this effect is secondary to the depression
of i ca and the activation of i k−atp during ischemia,
and suggests that patients with congenital and possibly acquired forms of brugada syndrome may be
at a higher risk for ischemia-related sudden cardiac
death.158 although the coexistence of brugada syn-

1146

drome and vasospastic angina in the same patient
is not rare, chinushi et al. have failed to observe an
enhanced susceptibility to vf nor a proarrhythmic
effect of ca-antagonist in this setting.159
vt/vf and sudden death in the brugada syndrome usually occur at rest and at night. circadian
variation of sympatho-vagal balance, hormones,
and other metabolic factors are likely to contribute to this circadian pattern. bradycardia, due
to altered sympatho-vagal balance or other factors,
may contribute to arrhythmia initiation.32,160,161
abnormal123 i-mibg uptake in 8 (17%) of the 17
brugada syndrome patients but none in the control group was demonstrated by wichter et al.162
there was segmental reduction of 123 i-mibg in
the inferior and the septal left ventricular wall,
indicating presynaptic sympathetic dysfunction.
of note, imaging of the right ventricle, particularly the rvot, is difficult with this technique, so
that insufficient information is available concerning sympathetic function in the regions known to
harbor the arrhythmogenic substrate. moreover,
it remains unclear what role the reduced uptake
function plays in the arrhythmogenesis of the brugada syndrome. if indeed the rvot is similarly affected, this defect may indeed alter the symapthovagal balance in favor of the development of an
arrhythmogenic substrate.106,129
hypokalemia has been implicated as a contributing cause for the high prevalence of suds in
the northeastern region of thailand where potassium deficiency is endemic.163155 serum potassium in the northeastern population is significantly lower than that of the population in
bangkok, which lies in the central part of thailand where potassium is abundant in the food.

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 10. terfenadine induces brugada phenotype more readily in male than female rv wedge
preparations. each panel shows action potentials recorded from 2 epicardial sites and 1 endocardial site, together with a transmural ecg. control recordings were obtained at a bcl of 2,000
ms, whereas terfenadine data were recorded at a bcl of 800 ms after a brief period of pacing at
a bcl of 400 ms. (a) terfenadine (5 mum)-induced, heterogeneous loss of action potential dome,
st-segment elevation, and phase 2 reentry (arrow) in a male rv wedge preparation. (b) terfenadine fails to induce brugada phenotype in a female rv wedge preparation. (c) polymorphic
vt triggered by spontaneous phase 2 reentry in a male preparation. (d) incidence of phase 2
reentry in male (6 of 7) versus female (2 of 7) rv wedge preparations when perfused with 5 mum
terfenadine for up to 2 hours. modified from di diego et al. 148 with permission.

a recent case report highlights the ability of hypokalemia to induce vf in a 60-year-old man
who had asymptomatic brugada syndrome, without a family history of sudden cardiac death.155
this patient was initially treated for asthma by
steroids, which lowered serum potassium from
3.8 mmol/l on admission to 3.4 and 2.9 mmol/l
on the 7th day and 8th day of admission, respectively. both were associated with unconsciousness. vf was documented during the last
episode, which reverted spontaneously to sinus
rhythm.

pace, vol. 29

the thai ministry of public health report
(1990) found an association between a large meal
of glutinous rice (“sticky rice”) or carbohydrates
ingested on the night of death in sunds patients.163 consistent with this observation, a recent
study by nogami et al. found that glucose and insulin could unmask the brugada ecg.154 another
possibility is that sudden death in these patients
is due to the increased vagal tone produced by
the stomach distention. a recent study by ikeda
et al.164 has shown that a full stomach after a
large meal can unmask a type i ecg, particularly

october 2006

1147

antzelevitch

figure 11. proposed mechanism
for the brugada syndrome. a shift
in the balance of currents serves to
amplify existing heterogeneities by
causing loss of the action potential
dome at some epicardial, but not
endocardial, sites. a vulnerable
window develops as a result of the
dispersion of repolarization and refractoriness within epicardium, as
well as across the wall. epicardial
dispersion leads to the development of phase 2 reentry, which provides the extrasystole that captures
the vulnerable window and initiates vt/vf via a circus movement
reentry mechanism. modified from
antzelevitch138 with permission.

figure 12. factors predisposing to
the electrocardiographic and arrhythmic manifestations of the
brugada syndrome. modified from
nademanee et al. 190 with permission.

1148

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

in brugada syndrome patients at high risks for
arrhythmic events, thus suggesting that this technique may be of diagnostic and prognostic value.
premature inactivation of the sodium channel in  xxxg2028xxx  mutations associated with the brugada syndrome has been shown to be accentuated
at higher temperatures,92 suggesting that a febrile
state may unmask the brugada syndrome. indeed, several case reports have emerged recently,
demonstrating that febrile illness could reveal the
brugada ecg and precipitate vf.14,93,94,165–167 a recent report from keller et al.168 has identified a
missense mutation, f1344s, in  xxxg2028xxx  in a patient with brugada syndrome and fever-induced
vt/vf. expression of f1344s showed a shift in the
voltage-dependence of activation, which was further accentuated at high temperatures mimicking
fever. thus fever may also cause a loss of function in i na by producing a shift in the voltagedependence of activation.
anecdotal data point to hot baths as a possible precipitating factor. of note, the northeastern part of thailand, where the brugada syndrome
is most prevalent, is known for its very hot climate. a study is underway to assess whether this
extreme climate influences the prognosis of the
disease.
approach to therapy
device therapy
an icd is the only proven effective device
treatment for the disease (table v).169,170 recommendations for icd implantation5,6 are presented
in table vi (from reference 5 with permission) and
summarized as follows:
(1) symptomatic patients displaying the type
1 st-segment elevation or brugada ecg (either
spontaneously or after sodium channel blockade)
who present with aborted sudden death should receive an icd as a class i indication without additional need for eps. similar patients presenting
with related symptoms such as syncope, seizure,
or nocturnal agonal respiration should also undergo icd implantation as a class i indication after non-cardiac causes of these symptoms have
been carefully ruled out. eps is recommended in
symptomatic patients only for the assessment of
supraventricular arrhythmia.
(2) asymptomatic patients displaying a brugada ecg (spontaneously or after sodium channel block) should undergo eps if there is a family history of sudden cardiac death suspected to
be due to brugada syndrome. eps may be justified
when the family history is negative for sudden cardiac death if the type 1 st-segment elevation occurs spontaneously. if inducible for ventricular arrhythmia, the patient should receive an icd. this
was recommended as a class iia indication for pa-

pace, vol. 29

table v.
device and pharmacologic approach to therapy of the
brugada syndrome
devices and ablation
icd169
? ablation or cryosurgery171
? pacemaker222
pharmacologic approach to therapy
ineffective
amiodarone76
beta-blockers76
class ic antiarrhythmics
flecainide15
propafenone210
? disopyramide173
class ia antiarrhythmics
procainamide12
effective for treatment of electrical storms
beta-adrenergic agonists—isoproterenol13,22
 xxxg1695xxx  inhibitors—cilostazol131
quinidine223
effective general therapy
quinidine40,106,175–177,179–181,223
experimental therapy
i to blockers—cardioselective and ion channel-specific
quinidine106
4-aminopyridine106
tedisamil184
ave0118187

tients presenting with a spontaneous type i stsegment elevation and as a class iib for patients
who display a type i st-segment elevation only after sodium block challenge. more recent data (discussed above) have called these recommendations
into question and suggest that it might be more appropriate to consider both as class iib indications.
asymptomatic patients who have no family
history and who develop a type 1 st-segment elevation only after sodium channel blockade should
be closely followed-up. as additional data become
available, these recommendations will no doubt
require further fine-tuning.
although arrhythmias and sudden cardiac
death generally occur during sleep or at rest
and have been associated with slow heart rates,
a potential therapeutic role for cardiac pacing
remains largely unexplored. haissaguerre and
co-workers171 reported that focal radiofrequency
ablation aimed at eliminating the ventricular premature beats that trigger vt/vf in the brugada
syndrome may be useful in controlling arrhythmogenesis. however, data relative to a cryosurgical

october 2006

1149

antzelevitch

table vi.
indications for icd implantation in patients with the brugada syndrome

1150

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 13. effects of i to blockers  xxxd1804xxx  and quinidine on
pinacidil-induced phase 2 reentry and vt in the arterially perfused rv wedge preparation. in both examples,
2.5 mm pinacidil produced heterogeneous loss of ap
dome in epicardium, resulting in st-segment elevation,
phase 2 reentry, and vt (left);  xxxd1804xxx  (a) and quinidine
(b) restored epicardial ap dome, reduced both transmural and epicardial dispersion of repolarization, normalized the st segment, and prevented phase 2 reentry
and vt in continued presence of pinacidil. from yan
and antzelevitch 106 with permission.

approach or the use of ablation therapy are very
limited at this point in time.
pharmacologic approach to therapy
icd implantation is the mainstay of therapy
for the brugada syndrome. although feasible, implantation is challenging in infants and is not an
adequate solution for patients residing in regions
of the world where an icd is unaffordable. a pharmacologic solution is desirable as an alternative to
device therapy in these cases, as well as in minimizing the firing of the icd in patients with frequent events.5,61,172
the quest for a pharmacologic treatment has
been focused on rebalancing of the ion channel
current active during the early phases of the epicardial ap in the right ventricle, so as to reduce
the magnitude of the ap notch and/or restore

pace, vol. 29

the ap dome. table v lists the various pharmacologic agents thus far investigated. antiarrhythmic agents, such as amiodarone and beta blockers, have been shown to be ineffective.76 class
ic antiarrhythmic drugs (such as  xxxd2113xxx  and
propafenone) and class ia agents, such as procainamide, are contraindicated because of their
effects to unmask the brugada syndrome and induce arrhythmogenesis. disopyramide is a class
ia antiarrhythmic that has been demonstrated to
normalize st-segment elevation in some brugada
patients but to unmask the syndrome in others.173
because the presence of a prominent transient outward current, i to , is fundamental to the
mechanism underlying the brugada syndrome, the
most prudent general approach to therapy, regardless of the ionic or genetic basis for the disease, is to partially inhibit i to . cardioselective and
i to -specific blockers are not currently available.
 xxxd1804xxx  is an agent that is ion-channel
specific at low concentrations, but is not cardioselective in that it inhibits i to in the nervous system. although it is effective in suppressing arrhythmogenesis in wedge models of the brugada
syndrome106 (fig. 13), it is unlikely to be of clinical benefit because of neurally mediated adverse
effects.
an agent currently on the market in the united
states and other regions of the world with significant i to blocking properties is quinidine. accordingly, we suggested several years ago that this agent
may be of therapeutic value in the brugada syndrome.50 quinidine has been shown to be effective in restoring the epicardial ap dome, thus normalizing the st segment and preventing phase 2
reentry and polymorphic vt in experimental models of the brugada syndrome (fig. 13).106,174 clinical evidence of the effectiveness of quinidine in
normalizing st-segment elevation in patients with
the brugada syndrome has been reported as well
(fig. 14).175–178 quinidine has also been reported
to be effective in suppressing arrhythmogenesis in
an infant too young to receive an icd.40
a prospective study of 25 brugada syndrome
patients orally administered quinidine bisulfate
(1483 ± 240 mg), reported by belhassen and
viskin,177 evaluated the effectiveness of quinidine in preventing inducible and spontaneous vf.
there were 15 symptomatic patients (7 cardiac arrest survivors and 7 with unexplained syncope)
and 10 asymptomatic patients. all 25 patients
had inducible vf at baseline electrophysiological
study. quinidine prevented vf induction in 22 of
the 25 patients (88%). after a follow-up period of
6 months to 22.2 years, all patients were alive.
of 19 patients treated with oral quinidine for 6
to 219 months (56 ± 67 months), none developed
arrhythmic events. administration of quinidine

october 2006

1151

antzelevitch

figure 14. twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ecg) tracings in an
asymptomatic 26-year-old man
with the brugada syndrome. (left)
baseline: type 2 ecg (not diagnostic) displaying a “saddleback-type”
st-segment elevation is observed
in v2. (center) after intravenous
administration of 750 mg procainamide, the type 2 ecg is
converted to the diagnostic type 1
ecg consisting of a “coved-type”
st-segment elevation. (right) a
few days after oral administration
of quinidine bisulfate (1,500
mg/day, serum quinidine level
2.6 mg/l), st-segment elevation
is attenuated in the right precordial leads. vf could be induced
during control and procainamide
infusion, but not after quinidine.
from belhassen et al. 175 with
permission.

was associated with a 36% incidence of side effects, principally diarrhea, which resolved after
drug discontinuation. the authors concluded that
quinidine effectively suppresses vf induction as
well as spontaneous arrhythmias in patients with
brugada syndrome, and may be useful as an adjunct to icd therapy or as an alternative to icd
in cases in which an icd is refused, is unaffordable, or under other circumstances in which icd
implantation is not feasible. these results are consistent with those reported for the same group
in prior years 175,179 and more recently by other
investigators.180–182 the study by hermida and
co-workers was the first to report the results of
prospective, although relatively small, clinical trials.180 a recent relatively small study by mizusawa
et al.183 showed that low-dose quinidine (300–600
mg) can prevent electrophysiologic induction of
vf and has a potential as an adjunctive therapy
for brugada syndrome in patients with frequent
icd discharges. there is a clear need for a large,
randomized, controlled clinical trial to assess the
effectiveness of quinidine, preferably in patients
with frequent events who have already received an
icd.
there is a clear need for a more cardioselective and i to -specific blocker as an addition to

1152

the limited therapeutic armamentarium currently
available to combat this disease. another agent
being considered for this purpose is the drug tedisamil, currently being evaluated for the treatment of atrial fibrillation. tedisamil may be more
potent than quinidine because it lacks the inward current blocking actions of quinidine, while
potently blocking i to . the effect of tedisamil to
suppress phase 2 reentry and vt in a wedge
model of the brugada syndrome is illustrated in
figure 15.184
quinidine and tedisamil are both capable of
suppressing the substrate and trigger for the brugada syndrome via their inhibition of i to . both,
however, also block i kr and thus have the potential to induce an acquired form of the long-qt syndrome. thus, these agents may substitute one form
of polymorphic vt for another, particularly under
conditions that promote tdp, such as bradycardia and hypokalemia. this effect of quinidine is
minimized at high plasma levels, because at these
concentrations quinidine block of i na counters the
effect of i kr block to increase tdr, the substrate
for the development of tdp arrhythmias.84,185,186
high doses of quinidine (1,000–1,500 mg/day) are
recommended in order to effect i to block, without
inducing tdp.

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

figure 15. effects of i to block with
tedisamil to suppress phase 2 reentry induced by terfenadine in an arterially perfused canine rv wedge
preparation. (a) control, bcl 800
ms. (b) terfenadine (5 mum) induces
st-segment elevation as a result of
heterogeneous loss of the epicardial action potential dome, leading to phase 2 reentry which triggers an episode of poly vt (bcl
= 800 ms). (c) addition of tedisamil (2 mum) normalizes the st
segment and prevents loss of the
epicardial action potential dome
and suppresses phase 2 reentry induced and polymorphic vt (bcl
= 800 ms). from antzelevitch and
fish172 with permission.

another potential therapeutic candidate is an
agent reported to be a relatively selective i to and
i kur blocker, ave0118.187 figure 16 shows the effect of ave0118 to normalize the ecg and sup-

press phase 2 reentry in a wedge model of the
brugada syndrome. this drug has the advantage
that it does not block i kr , and therefore does not
prolong the qt interval or have the potential to

figure 16. effects of i to blockade
with ave0118 to suppress phase
2 reentry induced by terfenadine
in an arterially perfused canine
rv wedge preparation. (a) control,
bcl 800 ms. (b) terfenadine (5 mum)
induces st-segment elevation as a
result of heterogeneous loss of the
epicardial action potential dome,
leading to phase 2 reentry which
triggers a closely coupled extrasystole (bcl = 800 ms). (c) addition
of ave0118 (7 mum) prevents loss
of the epicardial action potential
dome and phase 2 reentry-induced
arrhythmias (bcl = 800 ms). from
antzelevitch172 with permission.

pace, vol. 29

october 2006

1153

antzelevitch

figure 17. effect of dmlsb to suppress the arrhythmogenic substrate of the brugada syndrome in three experimental models. phase 2 reentry was induced in three
separate models of the brugada syndrome. terfenadine
(5 mum, a), verapamil (5 mum, b), or pinacidil (6 mum, c)
induce heterogeneous loss of the epicardial action potential dome and st-segment elevation. phase 2 reentry
occurs as the dome is propagated from epi 1 to epi 2,
triggering either a closely coupled extrasystole or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. in all 3 models, addition of dmlsb (10 mum) normalizes the st segment and
abolishes phase 2 reentry and resultant arrhythmias.
from fish et al.115 with permission.

1154

induce tdp. the disadvantage of this particular drug is that it undergoes first-pass hepatic
metabolism and is therefore not effective with oral
administration.
appropriate clinical trials are needed to establish the effectiveness of all of the above pharmacologic agents, as well as the possible role of
pacemakers.
agents that increase the calcium current, such
as beta-adrenergic agents like  xxxd2401xxx , are useful as well.106,131,137  xxxd2401xxx , sometimes in
combination with quinidine, has been shown to
be effective in normalizing st-segment elevation
in patients with the brugada syndrome and in
controlling electrical storms, particularly in children.22,175,176,181,188,189 a recent addition to the
pharmacological armamentarium is the  xxxg1695xxx  inhibitor,  xxxd1698xxx ,131 which normalizes the st segment, most likely by augmenting calcium current (i ca ), as well as by reducing i to
secondary to an increase in heart rate.
another pharmacologic approach is to augment a component of i na that is active during phase
1 of the epicardial ap. dimethyl lithospermate b
(dmlsb) is an extract of danshen, a traditional
chinese herbal remedy, which slows inactivation
of i na , leading to increased inward current during
the early phases of the ap. figure 17 shows the effectiveness of dmlsb in eliminating the arrhythmogenic substrate responsible for the brugada syndrome in three different experimental models of
the syndrome.115 the brugada syndrome phenotype was created in canine arterially perfused rv
wedge preparations using either terfenadine or verapamil to inhibit i na and i ca , or pinacidil to activate
i k−atp . terfenadine, verapamil, and pinacidil each
induced all-or-none repolarization at some epicardial sites but not others, leading to st-segment elevation, as well as an increase in both edr and tdr
from 12.9 ± 9.6 ms to 107.0 ± 54.8 ms and 22.4 ±
8.1 ms to 82.2 ± 37.4 ms, respectively (p < 0.05,
n = 9). under these conditions, phase 2 reentry developed, as the epicardial ap dome propagated from sites where it was maintained to sites
at which it was lost, generating closely coupled
extrasystoles and vt/vf. addition of dmlsb (10
mum) to the coronary perfusate restored the epicardial ap dome, reduced both edr and tdr, and
abolished phase 2 reentry-induced extrasystoles
and vt/vf in 9/9 preparations. our data suggest
that dmlsb may be a candidate for pharmacologic
treatment of brugada syndrome in cases in which
an icd is not feasible or affordable, or as an adjunct
to icd use.
acknowledgment: supported by grant hl47678 from
nhlbi and nys and florida grand lodge f. & a. m.

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome

references
1. brugada p, brugada j. right bundle branch block, persistent st
segment elevation and sudden cardiac death: a distinct clinical
and electrocardiographic syndrome: a multicenter report. j am
coll cardiol 1992; 20:1391–1396.
2. antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada j, brugada r, shimizu w, gussak i, perez riera ar. brugada syndrome. a decade of progress.
circ res 2002; 91:1114–1119.
3. wilde aa, antzelevitch c, borggrefe m, et al. proposed diagnostic
criteria for the brugada syndrome: consensus report. eur heart j
2002; 23:1648–1654.
4. wilde aa, antzelevitch c, borggrefe m, et al. proposed diagnostic
criteria for the brugada syndrome: consensus report. circulation
2002; 106:2514–2519.
5. antzelevitch c, brugada p, borggrefe m, et al. brugada syndrome.
report of the second consensus conference. endorsed by the heart
rhythm society and the european heart rhythm association. circulation 2005; 111:659–670.
6. antzelevitch c, brugada p, borggrefe m, et al. brugada syndrome:
report of the second consensus conference. heart rhythm 2005;
2:429–440.
7. skinner jr, chung sk, montgomery d, mcculley ch, crawford j,
french j, rees mi. near-miss sids due to brugada syndrome. arch
dis child 2005; 90:528–529.
8. brugada p, brugada r, antzelevitch c, nademanee k, towbin j,
brugada j. the brugada syndrome. in: gussak i, antzelevitch c
(eds.): cardiac repolarization. bridging basic and clinical sciences. totowa, nj, humana press, 2003, pp. 427–446.
9. nademanee k. sudden unexplained death syndrome in southeast
asia. am j cardiol 1997; 79(6a):10–11.
10. vatta m, dumaine r, varghese g, et al. genetic and biophysical
basis of sudden unexplained nocturnal death syndrome (sunds), a
disease allelic to brugada syndrome. hum mol genet 2002; 11:337–
345.
11. brugada p, brugada j, brugada r. arrhythmia induction by antiarrhythmic drugs. pacing clin electrophysiol 2000; 23:291–292.
12. brugada r, brugada j, antzelevitch c, kirsch ge, potenza d, towbin ja, brugada p. sodium channel blockers identify risk for sudden death in patients with st-segment elevation and right bundle branch block but structurally normal hearts. circulation 2000;
101:510–515.
13. miyazaki t, mitamura h, miyoshi s, soejima k, aizawa y, ogawa
s. autonomic and antiarrhythmic drug modulation of st segment
elevation in patients with brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol
1996; 27:1061–1070.
14. antzelevitch c, brugada r. fever and the brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2002; 25:1537–1539.
15. shimizu w, antzelevitch c, suyama k, et al. effect of sodium channel blockers on st segment, qrs duration, and corrected qt interval in patients with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol
2000; 11:1320–1329.
16. priori sg, napolitano c, gasparini m, et al. clinical and genetic
heterogeneity of right bundle branch block and st-segment elevation syndrome: a prospective evaluation of 52 families. circulation
2000; 102:2509–2515.
17. wolpert c, echternach c, veltmann c, et al. intravenous drug challenge using  xxxd2113xxx  and  xxxd96xxx  in patients with brugada syndrome. heart rhythm 2005; 2:254–260.
18. gurevitz o, glikson m. cardiac resynchronization therapy: a new
frontier in the management of heart failure. isr med assoc j 2003;
5:571–575.
19. kalla h, yan gx, marinchak r. ventricular fibrillation in a patient
with prominent j (osborn) waves and st segment elevation in the
inferior electrocardiographic leads: a brugada syndrome variant?
j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2000; 11:95–98.
20. ogawa m, kumagai k, yamanouchi y, saku k. spontaneous onset
of ventricular fibrillation in brugada syndrome with j wave and
st-segment elevation in the inferior leads. heart rhythm 2005;
2:97–99.
21. horigome h, shigeta o, kuga k, isobe t, sakakibara y, yamaguchi
i, matsui a. ventricular fibrillation during anesthesia in association
with j waves in the left precordial leads in a child with coarctation
of the aorta. j electrocardiol 2003; 36:339–343.
22. shimizu w, matsuo k, takagi m, et al. body surface distribution
and response to drugs of st segment elevation in brugada syndrome: clinical implication of eighty-seven-lead body surface potential mapping and its application to twelve-lead electrocardiograms. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2000; 11:396–404.

pace, vol. 29

23. sangwatanaroj s, prechawat s, sunsaneewitayakul b, sitthisook
s, tosukhowong p, tungsanga k. new electrocardiographic leads
and the procainamide test for the detection of the brugada sign in
sudden unexplained death syndrome survivors and their relatives.
eur heart j 2001; 22:2290–2296.
24. shin sc, ryu s, lee jh, et al. prevalence of the brugada-type ecg
recorded from higher intercostal spaces in healthy korean males.
circ j 2005; 69:1064–1067.
25. alings m, wilde a. “brugada” syndrome: clinical data and suggested pathophysiological mechanism. circulation 1999; 99:666–
673.
26. bezzina c, veldkamp mw, van den berg mp, et al. a single na(+)
channel mutation causing both long-qt and brugada syndromes.
circ res 1999; 85:1206–1213.
27. pitzalis mv, anaclerio m, iacoviello m, et al. qt-interval prolongation in right precordial leads: an additional electrocardiographic
hallmark of brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 2003; 42:1632–
1637.
28. castro hevia j, antzelevitch c, tornes bárzaga f, dorantes sanche
m, dorticos balea f, zayas molina r, qvinones perez ma, faya
rodriguezy. tpeak-tend and tpeak-tend dispersion as risk factors
for ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation in patients with
the brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 2006; 47:1828–34.
29. smits jp, eckardt l, probst v, et al. genotype-phenotype relationship in brugada syndrome: electrocardiographic features differentiate  xxxg2028xxx -related patients from non- xxxg2028xxx -related patients. j
am coll cardiol 2002; 40:350–356.
30. morita h, kusano-fukushima k, nagase s, et al. atrial fibrillation
and atrial vulnerability in patients with brugada syndrome. j am
coll cardiol 2002; 40:1437–1444.
31. takehara n, makita n, kawabe j, sato n, kawamura y, kitabatake
a, kikuchi k. a cardiac sodium channel mutation identified in
brugada syndrome associated with atrial standstill. j intern med
2004; 255:137–142.
32. kasanuki h, ohnishi s, ohtuka m, et al. idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation induced with vagal activity in patients without obvious
heart disease. circulation 1997; 95:2277–2285.
33. proclemer a, facchin d, feruglio ga, nucifora r. recurrent ventricular fibrillation, right bundle-branch block and persistent st
segment elevation in v1-v3: a new arrhythmia syndrome? a clinical case report (see comments). g ital cardiol 1993; 23:1211–
1218.
34. makiyama t, akao m, tsuji k, et al. high risk for bradyarrhythmic complications in patients with brugada syndrome caused by
 xxxg2028xxx  gene mutations. j am coll cardiol 2005; 46:2100–2106.
35. scornik fs, desai m, brugada r, guerchicoff a, pollevick gd,
antzelevitch c, perez gj. functional expression of ”cardiac-type”
na(v)1.5 sodium channel in canine intracardiac ganglia. heart
rhythm 2006; 3:842–850.
36. shimada m, miyazaki t, miyoshi s, soejima k, hori s, mitamura h, ogawa s. sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia in a patient with brugada syndrome. jpn circ j 1996; 60:364–
370.
37. pinar be, garcia-alberola a, martinez sj, sanchez munoz jj, valdes
cm. spontaneous sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
after administration of  xxxd96xxx  in a patient with brugada syndrome (see comments). pacing clin electrophysiol 2000; 23:407–
409.
38. dinckal mh, davutoglu v, akdemir i, soydinc s, kirilmaz a,
aksoy m. incessant monomorphic ventricular tachycardia during
febrile illness in a patient with brugada syndrome: fatal electrical
storm. europace 2003; 5:257–261.
39. mok ns, chan ny. brugada syndrome presenting with sustained
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia1. int j cardiol 2004; 97:307–
309.
40. probst v, evain s, gournay v, marie a, schott jj, boisseau p, le
mh. monomorphic ventricular tachycardia due to brugada syndrome successfully treated by hydroquinidine therapy in a 3-yearold child. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2006; 17:97–100.
41. sastry bk, narasimhan c, soma rb. brugada syndrome with
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia in a one-year-old child. indian heart j 2001; 53:203–205.
42. bjerregaard p, gussak i, kotar sl, gessler je. recurrent syncope in
a patient with prominent j-wave. am heart j 1994; 127:1426–1430.
43. sugai ma. pathological study on sudden and unexpected death,
especially on the cardiac death autopsied by medical examiners in
tokyo. acta pathol jpn 1959; 9(suppl.):723–752.

october 2006

1155

antzelevitch
44. nademanee k, veerakul g, nimmannit s, et al. arrhythmogenic
marker for the sudden unexplained death syndrome in thai men.
circulation 1997; 96:2595–2600.
45. corrado d, nava a, buja g, et al. familial cardiomyopathy underlies syndrome of right bundle branch block, st segment elevation
and sudden death. j am coll cardiol 1996; 27:443–448.
46. corrado d, basso c, buja g, nava a, rossi l, thiene g. right bundle
branch block, right precordial st-segment elevation, and sudden
death in young people. circulation 2001; 103:710–717.
47. frustaci a, priori sg, pieroni m, et al. cardiac histological substrate in patients with clinical phenotype of brugada syndrome.
circulation 2005; 112:3680–3687.
48. thiene g, basso c, calabrese f, angelini a, valente m. twenty
years of progress and beckoning frontiers in cardiovascular pathology. cardiovasc pathol 2005; 14:165–169.
49. saffitz je. structural heart disease,  xxxg2028xxx  gene mutations, and
brugada syndrome: a complex menage a trois. circulation 2005;
112:3672–3674.
50. antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada j, brugada r, nademanee k,
towbin ja. clinical approaches to tachyarrhythmias. the brugada
syndrome. armonk, ny, futura publishing company, inc., 1999.
51. royer a, van veen ta, le bs, et al. mouse model of  xxxg2028xxx -linked
hereditary lenegre’s disease: age-related conduction slowing and
myocardial fibrosis. circulation 2005; 111:1738–1746.
52. bezzina cr, rook mb, groenewegen wa, et al. compound heterozygosity for mutations (w156x and r225w) in  xxxg2028xxx  associated with severe cardiac conduction disturbances and degenerative
changes in the conduction system. circ res 2003; 92:159–168.
53. antzelevitch c. brugada syndrome: historical perspectives and observations. eur heart j 2002; 23:676–678.
54. remme ca, wever efd, wilde aam, derksen r, hauer rnw. diagnosis and long-term follow-up of brugada syndrome in patients
with idiopathic ventricular fibrillation. eur heart j 2001; 22:400–
409.
55. perez riera ar, antzelevitch c, schapacknik e, dubner s, ferreira
c. is there an overlap between brugada syndrome and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia? j electrocardiol
2005; 38:260–263.
56. antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada j, brugada r. the brugada syndrome. from cell to bedside. curr probl cardiol 2005; 30:9–54.
57. weiss r, barmada mm, nguyen t, et al. clinical and molecular
heterogeneity in the brugada syndrome. a novel gene locus on
chromosome 3. circulation 2002; 105:707–713.
58. ahmad f, li d, karibe a, et al. localization of a gene responsible for
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia to chromosome 3p23.
circulation 1998; 98:2791–2795.
59. takagi m, aihara n, kuribayashi s, et al. localized right ventricular
morphological abnormalities detected by electron-beam computed
tomography represent arrhythmogenic substrates in patients with
the brugada syndrome. eur heart j 2001; 22:1032–1041.
60. antzelevitch c. late potentials and the brugada syndrome. j am
coll cardiol 2002; 39:1996–1999.
61. antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada j, brugada r. the brugada syndrome: from bench to bedside. oxford, blackwell futura, 2005.
62. papavassiliu t, wolpert c, fluchter s, et al. magnetic resonance
imaging findings in patients with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc
electrophysiol 2004; 15:1133–1138.
63. bartelings mm, gittenberger-de groot ac. the outflow tract of the
heart—embryologic and morphologic correlations. int j cardiol
1989; 22:289–300.
64. kirby ml, gale tf, stewart de. neural crest cells contribute to
normal aorticopulmonary septation. science 1983; 220:1059–1061.
65. gittenberger-de groot ac, bartelings mm, deruiter mc, poelmann
re. basics of cardiac development for the understanding of congenital heart malformations. pediatr res 2005; 57:169–176.
66. ewart jl, cohen mf, meyer ra, et al. heart and neural tube defects
in transgenic mice overexpressing the  xxxg895xxx  gap junction gene. development 1997; 124:1281–1292.
67. reaume ag, de sousa pa, kulkarni s, et al. cardiac malformation in neonatal mice lacking connexin43. science 1995; 267:1831–
1834.
68. liu f, shneider a, liu s, shah b, st.amand t, epstein ae, gutstein
de. loss of connexin43 in the neural tube leads to a late phase of
delamination and migration of neural tube cells and cardiac abnormalities. (abstract) proceedings of keystone symposium: “molecular mechanisms of cardiac disease and regeneration” 2006 (in
press).
69. brugada j, brugada r, antzelevitch c, towbin j, nademanee k,
brugada p. long-term follow-up of individuals with the electrocar-

1156

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.

78.

79.

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.

86.
87.
88.
89.

90.
91.

92.

diographic pattern of right bundle-branch block and st-segment
elevation in precordial leads v(1) to v(3). circulation 2002; 105:73–
78.
priori sg, napolitano c, gasparini m, et al. natural history of brugada syndrome: insights for risk stratification and management.
circulation 2002; 105:1342–1347.
brugada p, brugada r, brugada j. patients with an asymptomatic
brugada electrocardiogram should undergo pharmacological and
electrophysical testing. circulation 2005; 112:279–285.
priori sg, napolitano c. management of patients with brugada syndrome should not be based on programmed electrical stimulation.
circulation 2005; 112:285–291.
eckardt l, probst v, smits jp, et al. long-term prognosis of individuals with right precordial st-segment-elevation brugada syndrome. circulation 2005; 111:257–263.
atarashi h, ogawa s, for the idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
investigators. new ecg criteria for high-risk brugada syndrome.
circ j 2003; 67:8–10.
morita h, takenaka-morita s, fukushima-kusano k, et al. risk
stratification for asymptomatic patients with brugada syndrome.
circ j 2003; 67:312–316.
brugada j, brugada r, brugada p. right bundle-branch block and
st-segment elevation in leads v 1 through v 3 . a marker for sudden
death in patients without demonstrable structural heart disease.
circulation 1998; 97:457–460.
kanda m, shimizu w, matsuo k, et al. electrophysiologic characteristics and implications of induced ventricular fibrillation in
symptomatic patients with brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol
2002; 39:1799–1805.
brugada j, brugada r, brugada p. determinants of sudden cardiac
death in individuals with the electrocardiographic pattern of brugada syndrome and no previous cardiac arrest. circulation 2003;
108:3092–3096.
eckardt l, kirchhof p, johna r, haverkamp w, breithardt g,
borggrefe m. wolff-parkinson-white syndrome associated with
brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2001; 24:1423–
1424.
carlsson j, erdogan a, schulte b, neuzner j, pitschner hf. possible role of epicardial left ventricular programmed stimulation in
brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2001; 24:247–249.
gehi ak, duong td, metz ld, gomes ja, mehta d. risk stratification of individuals with the brugada electrocardiogram: a metaanalysis. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2006; 17:577–583.
antzelevitch c. tpeak-tend interval as an index of transmural dispersion of repolarization. eur j clin invest 2001; 31:555–557.
yan gx, antzelevitch c. cellular basis for the normal t wave and
the electrocardiographic manifestations of the long qt syndrome.
circulation 1998; 98:1928–1936.
antzelevitch c, shimizu w, yan gx, et al. the m cell: its contribution to the ecg and to normal and abnormal electrical function
of the heart. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1999; 10:1124–1152.
fish jm, di diego jm, nesterenko vv, antzelevitch c. epicardial
activation of left ventricular wall prolongs qt interval and transmural dispersion of repolarization: implications for biventricular
pacing. circulation 2004; 109:2136–2142.
emori t, antzelevitch c. cellular basis for complex t waves and
arrhythmic activity following combined i(kr) and i(ks) block. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:1369–1378.
watanabe n, kobayashi y, tanno k, et al. transmural dispersion of
repolarization and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. j electrocardiol
2004; 37:191–200.
milberg p, reinsch n, wasmer k, et al. transmural dispersion of
repolarization as a key factor of arrhythmogenicity in a novel intact
heart model of  xxxg2028xxx . cardiovasc res 2005; 65:397–404.
shimizu m, ino h, okeie k, et al. t-peak to t-end interval may
be a better predictor of high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with a  xxxg2309xxx  mutation than
qt dispersion. clin cardiol 2002; 25:335–339.
chen q, kirsch ge, zhang d, et al. genetic basis and molecular
mechanisms for idiopathic ventricular fibrillation. nature 1998;
392:293–296.
grant ao, carboni mp, neplioueva v, starmer cf, memmi m,
napolitano c, priori sg. long qt syndrome, brugada syndrome,
and conduction system disease are linked to a single sodium channel mutation. j clin invest 2002; 110:1201–1209.
dumaine r, towbin ja, brugada p, et al. ionic mechanisms responsible for the electrocardiographic phenotype of the brugada
syndrome are temperature dependent. circ res 1999; 85:803–
809.

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome
93. saura d, garcia-alberola a, carrillo p, pascual d, martinezsanchez j, valdes m. brugada-like electrocardiographic pattern induced by fever. pacing clin electrophysiol 2002; 25:856–859.
94. porres jm, brugada j, urbistondo v, garcia f, reviejo k, marco p.
fever unmasking the brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2002; 25:1646–1648.
95. mok ns, priori sg, napolitano c, chan ny, chahine m, baroudi
g. a newly characterized  xxxg2028xxx  mutation underlying brugada
syndrome unmasked by hyperthermia. j cardiovasc electrophysiol
2003; 14:407–411.
96. ortega-carnicer j, benezet j, ceres f. fever-induced st-segment elevation and t-wave alternans in a patient with brugada syndrome.
resuscitation 2003; 57:315–317.
97. patruno n, pontillo d, achilli a, ruggeri g, critelli g. electrocardiographic pattern of brugada syndrome disclosed by a febrile illness: clinical and therapeutic implications. europace 2003; 5:251–
255.
98. peng j, cui yk, yuan fh, yi sd, chen zm, meng sr. [fever and
brugada syndrome: report of 21 cases.]. di yi jun yi da xue xue
bao 2005; 25:432–434.
99. dulu a, pastores sm, mcaleer e, voigt l, halpern na. brugada
electrocardiographic pattern in a postoperative patient. crit care
med 2005; 33:1634–1637.
100. aramaki k, okumura h, shimizu m. chest pain and st elevation
associated with fever in patients with asymptomatic brugada syndrome fever and chest pain in brugada syndrome. int j cardiol
2005; 103:338–339.
101. schulze-bahr e, eckardt l, breithardt g, et al. sodium channel gene
( xxxg2028xxx ) mutations in 44 index patients with brugada syndrome:
different incidences in familial and sporadic disease. hum mutat
2003; 21:651–652.
102. hong k, guerchicoff a, pollevick gd, et al. cryptic 5’ splice site
activation in  xxxg2028xxx  associated with brugada syndrome. j mol cell
cardiol 2005; 38:555–560.
103. bezzina cr, shimizu w, yang p, et al. common sodium channel
promoter haplotype in asian subjects underlies variability in cardiac conduction. circulation 2006; 113:338–344.
104. london b, sanyal s, michalec m, et al. ab16-1: a mutation in the
 xxxg935xxx -like gene (gpd1l) causes
brugada syndrome. (abstract) heart rhythm 2006; 3:s32.
105. yan gx, antzelevitch c. cellular basis for the electrocardiographic
j wave. circulation 1996; 93:372–379.
106. yan gx, antzelevitch c. cellular basis for the brugada syndrome
and other mechanisms of arrhythmogenesis associated with st segment elevation. circulation 1999; 100:1660–1666.
107. fish jm, antzelevitch c. role of sodium and calcium channel block
in unmasking the brugada syndrome. heart rhythm 2004; 1:210–
217.
108. fish jm, antzelevitch c. cellular and ionic basis for the sex-related
difference in the manifestation of the brugada syndrome and progressive conduction disease phenotypes. j electrocardiol 2003;
36:173–179.
109. antzelevitch c, fish j. electrical heterogeneity within the ventricular wall. basic res cardiol 2001; 96:517–527.
110. gima k, rudy y. ionic current basis of electrocardiographic waveforms: a model study. circ res 2002; 90:889–896.
111. kurita t, shimizu w, inagaki m, et al. the electrophysiologic
mechanism of st-segment elevation in brugada syndrome. j am
coll cardiol 2002; 40:330–334.
112. yan gx, lankipalli rs, burke jf, musco s, kowey pr. ventricular
repolarization components on the electrocardiogram: cellular basis
and clinical significance. j am coll cardiol 2003; 42:401–409.
113. antzelevitch c. modulation of transmural repolarization. ann n y
acad sci 2005; 1047:314–323.
114. fish jm, antzelevitch c. link between hypothermia and the brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2004; 15:942–944.
115. fish jm, welchons d, kim ys, lee sh, ho wk, antzelevitch c.
dimethyl lithospermate b, an extract of danshen, suppresses arrhythmogenesis associated with the brugada syndrome. circulation 2006; 113:1393–400.
116. litovsky sh, antzelevitch c. rate dependence of action potential
duration and refractoriness in canine ventricular endocardium differs from that of epicardium: role of the transient outward current.
j am coll cardiol 1989; 14:1053–1066.
117. kilborn mj, fedida d. a study of the developmental changes in outward currents of rat ventricular myocytes. j physiol (lond) 1990;
430:37–60.
118. furukawa y, akahane k, ogiwara y, chiba s. k+-channel blocking
and anti-muscarinic effects of a novel piperazine derivative, ino
2628, on the isolated dog atrium. eur j pharm 1991; 193:217–222.

pace, vol. 29

119. lukas a, antzelevitch c. phase 2 reentry as a mechanism of initiation of circus movement reentry in canine epicardium exposed to
simulated ischemia. cardiovasc res 1996; 32:593–603.
120. di diego jm, antzelevitch c. pinacidil-induced electrical heterogeneity and extrasystolic activity in canine ventricular tissues.
does activation of atp-regulated potassium current promote phase
2 reentry? circulation 1993; 88:1177–1189.
121. krishnan sc, antzelevitch c.  xxxd2113xxx -induced arrhythmia in
canine ventricular epicardium. phase 2 reentry? circulation 1993;
87:562–572.
122. di diego jm, antzelevitch c. high [ca2+ ]-induced electrical heterogeneity and extrasystolic activity in isolated canine ventricular
epicardium. phase 2 reentry. circulation 1994; 89:1839–1850.
123. antzelevitch c, sicouri s, lukas a, et al. clinical implications of
electrical heterogeneity in the heart: the electrophysiology and
pharmacology of epicardial, m, and endocardial cells. in: podrid
pj, kowey pr (eds.): cardiac arrhythmia: mechanism, diagnosis
and management. baltimore, md, william & wilkins, 1995, pp.
88–107.
124. aizawa y, tamura m, chinushi m, et al. idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation and bradycardia-dependent intraventricular block. am
heart j 1993; 126:1473–1474.
125. aizawa y, tamura m, chinushi m, et al. an attempt at electrical
catheter ablation of the arrhythmogenic area in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation. am heart j 1992; 123:257–260.
126. lukas a, antzelevitch c. differences in the electrophysiological
response of canine ventricular epicardium and endocardium to ischemia: role of the transient outward current. circulation 1993;
88:2903–2915.
127. thomsen pe, joergensen rm, kanters jk, et al. phase 2 reentry in
man. heart rhythm 2005; 2:797–803.
128. antzelevitch c. in vivo human demonstration of phase 2 reentry.
heart rhythm 2005; 2:804–806.
129. litovsky sh, antzelevitch c. differences in the electrophysiological response of canine ventricular subendocardium and subepicardium to acetylcholine and  xxxd2401xxx . a direct effect of
acetylcholine in ventricular myocardium. circ res 1990; 67:615–
627.
130. krishnan sc, antzelevitch c. sodium channel block produces
opposite electrophysiological effects in canine ventricular epicardium and endocardium. circ res 1991; 69:277–291.
131. tsuchiya t, ashikaga k, honda t, arita m. prevention of ventricular fibrillation by  xxxd1698xxx , an oral phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
in a patient with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol
2002; 13:698–701.
132. di diego jm, sun zq, antzelevitch c. i to and action potential notch
are smaller in left vs. right canine ventricular epicardium. am j
physiol 1996; 271:h548–h561.
133. pertsov am, davidenko jm, salomonsz r, baxter wt, jalife j. spiral
waves of excitation underlie reentrant activity in isolated cardiac
muscle. circ res 1993; 72:631–650.
134. asano y, davidenko jm, baxter wt, gray ra, jalife j. optical
mapping of drug-induced polymorphic arrhythmias and torsade
de pointes in the isolated rabbit heart. j am coll cardiol 1997;
29:831–842.
135. tukkie r, sogaard p, vleugels j, de groot ik, wilde aa, tan hl.
delay in right ventricular activation contributes to brugada syndrome. circulation 2004; 1272–1277.
136. antzelevitch c, fish j, di diego jm. cellular mechanisms underlying the brugada syndrome. in: antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada
j, brugada r (eds.): the brugada syndrome: from bench to bedside. oxford, blackwell futura, 2004, pp. 52–77.
137. antzelevitch c. the brugada syndrome: ionic basis and arrhythmia
mechanisms. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:268–272.
138. antzelevitch c. the brugada syndrome: diagnostic criteria and cellular mechanisms. eur heart j 2001; 22:356–363.
139. gussak i, antzelevitch c, bjerregaard p, towbin ja, chaitman br.
the brugada syndrome: clinical, electrophysiologic, and genetic
aspects. j am coll cardiol 1999; 33:5–15.
140. shimizu w, aiba t, kamakura s. mechanisms of disease: current
understanding and future challenges in brugada syndrome. nat
clin pract cardiovasc med 2005; 2:408–414.
141. futterman lg, lemberg l. brugada. am j crit care 2001; 10:360–
364.
142. fujiki a, usui m, nagasawa h, mizumaki k, hayashi h, inoue
h. st segment elevation in the right precordial leads induced
with class ic antiarrhythmic drugs: insight into the mechanism
of brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1999; 10:214–
218.
143. nagase s, kusano kf, morita h, et al. epicardial electrogram of the

october 2006

1157

antzelevitch

144.

145.

146.

147.
148.
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.
155.
156.
157.
158.

159.

160.

161.

162.
163.

164.
165.

166.
167.

right ventricular outflow tract in patients with the brugada syndrome: using the epicardial lead. j am coll cardiol 2002; 39:1992–
1995.
eckardt l, bruns hj, paul m, et al. body surface area of st elevation
and the presence of late potentials correlate to the inducibility of
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc
electrophysiol 2002; 13:742–749.
ikeda t, takami m, sugi k, mizusawa y, sakurada h, yoshino h.
noninvasive risk stratification of subjects with a brugada-type electrocardiogram and no history of cardiac arrest. ann noninvasive
electrocardiol 2005; 10:396–403.
shimizu w, aiba t, kurita t, kamakura s. paradoxic abbreviation
of repolarization in epicardium of the right ventricular outflow tract
during augmentation of brugada-type st segment elevation. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:1418–1421.
watanabe h, chinushi m, osaki a, et al. elimination of late potentials by quinidine in a patient with brugada syndrome. j electrocardiol 2006; 39:63–66.
di diego jm, cordeiro jm, goodrow rj, et al. ionic and cellular
basis for the predominance of the brugada syndrome phenotype in
males. circulation 2002; 106:2004–2011.
babaliaros vc, hurst jw. tricyclic antidepressants and the brugada syndrome: an example of brugada waves appearing after the
administration of desipramine. clin cardiol 2002; 25:395–398.
goldgran-toledano d, sideris g, kevorkian jp. overdose of cyclic
antidepressants and the brugada syndrome. n engl j med 2002;
346:1591–1592.
tada h, sticherling c, oral h, morady f. brugada syndrome mimicked by tricyclic antidepressant overdose. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:275.
pastor a, nunez a, cantale c, cosio fg. asymptomatic brugada
syndrome case unmasked during  xxxd1892xxx  infusion. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:1192–1194.
ortega-carnicer j, bertos-polo j, gutierrez-tirado c. aborted sudden death, transient brugada pattern, and wide qrs dysrrhythmias
after massive cocaine ingestion. j electrocardiol 2001; 34:345–349.
nogami a, nakao m, kubota s, et al. enhancement of j-st-segment
elevation by the glucose and insulin test in brugada syndrome.
pacing clin electrophysiol 2003; 26:332–337.
araki t, konno t, itoh h, ino h, shimizu m. brugada syndrome with ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation related to hypokalemia. circ j 2003; 67:93–95.
akhtar m, goldschlager nf. brugada electrocardiographic pattern
due to tricyclic antidepressant overdose. j electrocardiol 2006;
39:336–339.
darbar d, yang t, churchwell k, wilde aa, roden dm. unmasking
of brugada syndrome by lithium. circulation 2005; 112:1527–1531.
noda t, shimizu w, taguchi a, et al. st-segment elevation and
ventricular fibrillation without coronary spasm by intracoronary
injection of acetylcholine and/or  xxxd2021xxx  maleate in patients
with brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 2002; 40:1841–1847.
chinushi m, furushima h, tanabe y, washizuka t, aizawaz y.
similarities between brugada syndrome and ischemia-induced stsegment elevation. clinical correlation and synergy. j electrocardiol 2005; 38(suppl.):18–21.
proclemer a, facchin d, feruglio ga, nucifora r. recurrent ventricular fibrillation, right bundle-branch block and persistent st
segment elevation in v1-v3: a new arrhythmia syndrome? a clinical case report (see comments). g ital cardiol 1993; 23:1211–1218.
mizumaki k, fujiki a, tsuneda t, sakabe m, nishida k, sugao
m, inoue h. vagal activity modulates spontaneous augmentation
of st elevation in daily life of patients with brugada syndrome. j
cardiovasc electrophysiol 2004; 15:667–673.
wichter t, matheja p, eckardt l, et al. cardiac autonomic dysfunction in brugada syndrome. circulation 2002; 105:702–706.
nimmannit s, malasit p, chaovakul v, susaengrat w, vasuvattakul
s, nilwarangkur s. pathogenesis of sudden unexplained nocturnal
death (lai tai) and endemic distal renal tubular acidosis. lancet
1991; 338:930–932.
ikeda t, abe a, yusa s, et al. the full stomach test as a novel
diagnostic technique for identifying patients at risk for brugada
syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2006; 17:602–607.
gonzalez rebollo g, madrid h, carcia a, garcia de casto a, moro
am. reccurrent ventricular fibrillation during a febrile illness in a
patient with the brugada syndrome. rev esp cardiol 2000; 53:755–
757.
madle a, kratochvil z, polivkova a. [the brugada syndrome].
vnitr lek 2002; 48:255–258.
kum l, fung jwh, chan wwl, chan gk, chan ys, sanderson je.

1158

168.
169.

170.
171.
172.
173.

174.
175.
176.
177.

178.

179.

180.
181.
182.

183.

184.

185.
186.
187.
188.
189.

190.

brugada syndrome unmasked by febrile illness. pacing clin electrophysiol 2002; 25:1660–1661.
keller di, huang h, zhao j, et al. a novel  xxxg2028xxx  mutation, f1344s,
identified in a patient with brugada syndrome and fever-induced
ventricular fibrillation. cardiovasc res 2006; 70:521–529.
brugada j, brugada r, brugada p. pharmacological and device approach to therapy of inherited cardiac diseases associated with
cardiac arrhythmias and sudden death. j electrocardiol 2000;
33(suppl.):41–47.
brugada p, brugada r, brugada j, geelen p. use of the prophylactic implantable cardioverter defibrillator for patients with normal
hearts. am j cardiol 1999; 83:98d–100d.
haissaguerre m, extramiana f, hocini m, et al. mapping and ablation of ventricular fibrillation associated with long-qt and brugada
syndromes. circulation 2003; 108:925–928.
antzelevitch c, fish jm. therapy for the brugada syndrome. in:
kass r, clancy ce (eds.): handbook of experimental pharmacology.
new york, springer-verlag, 2006, pp. 305–330.
chinushi m, aizawa y, ogawa y, shiba m, takahashi k. discrepant
drug action of disopyramide on ecg abnormalities and induction
of ventricular arrhythmias in a patient with brugada syndrome. j
electrocardiol 1997; 30:133–136.
grant ao. electrophysiological basis and genetics of brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2005; 16(suppl. 1):s3–s7.
belhassen b, viskin s, antzelevitch c. the brugada syndrome: is an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator the only therapeutic option?
pacing clin electrophysiol 2002; 25:1634–1640.
alings m, dekker l, sadee a, wilde a. quinidine induced electrocardiographic normalization in two patients with brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2001; 24:1420–1422.
belhassen b, viskin s. pharmacologic approach to therapy of brugada syndrome: quinidine as an alternative to icd therapy? in:
antzelevitch c, brugada p, brugada j, brugada r (eds.): the brugada syndrome: from bench to bedside. oxford, blackwell futura,
2004, 202–211.
marquez mf, rivera j, hermosillo ag, iturralde p, colin l, moragrega jl, cardenas m. arrhythmic storm responsive to quinidine in
a patient with brugada syndrome and vasovagal syncope. pacing
clin electrophysiol 2005; 28:870–873.
belhassen b, viskin s, fish r, glick a, setbon i, eldar m. effects
of electrophysiologic-guided therapy with class ia antiarrhythmic
drugs on the long-term outcome of patients with idiopathic ventricular fibrillation with or without the brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1999; 10:1301–1312.
hermida js, denjoy i, clerc j, et al. hydroquinidine therapy in
brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 2004; 43:1853–1860.
mok ns, chan ny, chi-suen ca. successful use of quinidine in
treatment of electrical storm in brugada syndrome. pacing clin
electrophysiol 2004; 27:821–823.
marquez mf, rivera j, hermosillo ag, iturralde p, colin l, moragrega jl, cardenas m. arrhythmic storm responsive to quinidine in
a patient with brugada syndrome and vasovagal syncope. pacing
clin electrophysiol 2005; 28:870–873.
mizusawa y, sakurada h, nishizaki m, hiraoka m. effects of lowdose quinidine on ventricular tachyarrhythmias in patients with
brugada syndrome: low-dose quinidine therapy as an adjunctive
treatment. j cardiovasc pharmacol 2006; 47:359–364.
fish jm, extramiana f, antzelevitch c. tedisamil abolishes the
arrhythmogenic substrate responsible for vt/vf in an experimental model of the brugada syndrome. (abstract) heart rhythm 2004;
1(1s): xxxd2777xxx .
antzelevitch c, shimizu w. cellular mechanisms underlying the
long qt syndrome. curr opin cardiol 2002; 17:43–51.
belardinelli l, antzelevitch c, vos ma. assessing predictors of
drug-induced torsade de pointes. trends pharmacol sci 2003;
24:619–625.
fish jm, extramiana f, antzelevitch c. ave0118, an i to and i kur
blocker, suppresses vt/vf in an experimental model of the brugada syndrome. (abstract) circulation 2004; 110:iii–193.
suzuki h, torigoe k, numata o, yazaki s. infant case with a malignant form of brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2000;
11:1277–1280.
tanaka h, kinoshita o, uchikawa s, et al. successful prevention of
recurrent ventricular fibrillation by intravenous  xxxd2401xxx  in a
patient with brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2001;
24:1293–1294.
nademanee k, veerakul g, schwab m. predisposing factors in the
brugada syndrome. in: antzelevitch c, brugada p (eds.): brugada
syndrome. elmsford, blackwell publishing, 2004, 157–165.

october 2006

pace, vol. 29

brugada syndrome
191. wang k, asinger rw, marriott hj. st-segment elevation in conditions other than acute myocardial infarction. n engl j med 2003;
349:2128–2135.
192. myers gb. other qrs-t patterns that may be mistaken for myocardial infarction. iv. alterations in blood potassium; myocardial
ischemia; subepicardial myocarditis; distortion associated with arrhythmias. circulation 1950; 2:75–93.
193. abbott ja, cheitlin md. the nonspecific camel-hump sign. jama
1976; 235:413–414.
194. hersch c. electrocardiographic changes in head injuries. circulation 1961; 23:853–860.
195. perloff jk, henze e, schelbert hr. alterations in regional myocardial metabolism, perfusion, and wall motion in duchenne muscular dystrophy studied by radionuclide imaging. circulation 1984;
69:33–42.
196. read dh, harrington dd. experimentally induced thiamine deficiency in beagle dogs: clinical observations. am j vet res 1981;
42:984–991.
197. notarstefano p, pratola c, toselli t, ferrari r. atrial fibrillation and recurrent ventricular fibrillation during hypokalemia in
brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2005; 28:1350–
1353.
198. merrill jp, levine hd, somerville w, smith s. clinical recognition
and treatment of acute potassium intoxication. ann intern med
1950; 33:797–830.
199. ortega-carnicer j, benezet j, ruiz-lorenzo f, alcazar r. transient
brugada-type electrocardiographic abnormalities in renal failure
reversed by dialysis. resuscitation 2002; 55:215–219.
200. douglas ps, carmichael ka, palevsky pm. extreme hypercalcemia
and electrocardiographic changes. am j cardiol 1984; 54:674–675.
201. sridharan mr, horan lg. electrocardiographic j wave of hypercalcemia. am j cardiol 1984; 54:672–673.
202. osborn jj. experimental hypothermia: respiratory and blood ph
changes in relation to cardiac function. am j physiol 1953;
175:389–398.
203. noda t, shimizu w, tanaka k, chayama k. prominent j wave
and st segment elevation: serial electrocardiographic changes
in accidental hypothermia. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2003; 14:
223.
204. tarin n, farre j, rubio jm, tunon j, castro-dorticos j. brugada-like
electrocardiographic pattern in a patient with a mediastinal tumor.
pacing clin electrophysiol 1999; 22:1264–1266.
205. tomcsanyi j, simor t, papp l. images in cardiology. haemopericardium and brugada-like ecg pattern in rheumatoid arthritis.
heart 2002;87:234.
206. sanatani s, mahkseed n, vallance h, brugada r. the brugada ecg
pattern in a neonate. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2005; 16:342–
344.
207. krishnan sc, josephson me. st segment elevation induced by class
ic antiarrhythmic agents: underlying electrophysiologic mechanisms and insights into drug-induced proarrhythmia. j cardiovasc
electrophysiol 1998; 9:1167–1172.

pace, vol. 29

208. gasparini m, priori sg, mantica m, napolitano c, galimberti p,
ceriotti c, simonini s.  xxxd2113xxx  test in brugada syndrome: a reproducible but risky tool. pacing clin electrophysiol 2003; 26:338–
341.
209. takenaka s, emori t, koyama s, morita h, fukushima k, ohe
t. asymptomatic form of brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 1999; 22:1261–1263.
210. matana a, goldner v, stanic k, mavric z, zaputovic l, matana
z. unmasking effect of propafenone on the concealed form of the
brugada phenomenon. pacing clin electrophysiol 2000; 23:416–
418.
211. rolf s, bruns hj, wichter t, et al. the  xxxd96xxx  challenge in brugada syndrome: diagnostic impact, safety, and recommended protocol. eur heart j 2003; 24:1104–1112.
212. tada h, nogami a, shimizu w, naito s, nakatsugawa m, oshima
s, taniguchi k. st segment and t wave alternans in a patient with
brugada syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2000; 23:413–415.
213. sarkozy a, caenepeel a, geelen p, peytchev p, de zutter m, brugada p. cibenzoline induced brugada ecg pattern. europace 2005;
7:537–539.
214. aouate p, clerc j, viard p, seoud j. propranolol intoxication revealing a brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2005; 16:348–
351.
215. matsuo k, shimizu w, kurita t, inagaki m, aihara n, kamakura s.
dynamic changes of 12-lead electrocardiograms in a patient with
brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1998; 9:508–512.
216. bigwood b, galler d, amir n, smith w. brugada syndrome following tricyclic antidepressant overdose. anaesth intensive care
2005; 33:266–270.
217. bolognesi r, tsialtas d, vasini p, conti m, manca c. abnormal
ventricular repolarization mimicking myocardial infarction after
heterocyclic antidepressant overdose. am j cardiol 1997; 79:242–
245.
218. rouleau f, asfar p, boulet s, dube l, dupuis jm, alquier p, victor
j. transient st segment elevation in right precordial leads induced
by psychotropic drugs: relationship to the brugada syndrome. j
cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:61–65.
219. lopez-barbeito b, lluis m, delgado v, jimenez s, az-infante e,
nogue-xarau s, brugada j. diphenhydramine overdose and brugada sign. pacing clin electrophysiol 2005; 28:730–732.
220. littmann l, monroe mh, svenson rh. brugada-type electrocardiographic pattern induced by cocaine. mayo clin proc 2000; 75:845–
849.
221. shimizu w. acquired forms of the brugada syndrome. j electrocardiol 2005; 38(suppl.):22–25.
222. van den berg mp, wilde aa, viersma tjw, brouwer j, et al. possible bradycardic mode of death and successful pacemaker treatment
in a large family with features of long qt syndrome type 3 and brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2001; 12:630–636.
223. haghjoo m, arya a, heidari a, sadr-ameli ma. suppression of
electrical storm by oral quinidine in a patient with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2005; 16:674.

october 2006

1159

