support care cancer (2007) 15: 63–71
doi 10.1007/s00520-006-0180-0

origina l arti cle

mellar davis
vincent maida
paul daeninck
joseph pergolizzi

the emerging role of cannabinoid
neuromodulators in symptom management

received: 27 september 2006
accepted: 9 october 2006
published online: 1 december 2006
# springer-verlag 2006

v. maida
university of toronto,
toronto, on, canada

a symposium, the emerging role of
cannabinoid neuromodulators in symptom
management, was held during the
multinational association of symptom care
in cancer 18th international symposium,
june 23, 2006, in toronto, ontario, canada.
the following summarizes the presentations
of the panel members.
m. davis (*)
the harry r. horvitz center
for palliative medicine,
cleveland clinic,
9500 euclid avenue,
cleveland, oh 44195, usa
e-mail: davism6@ccf.org
v. maida
william osler health center,
toronto, on, canada

p. daeninck
departments of internal and family
medicine, university of manitoba,
winnipeg, mb, canada
p. daeninck
cancercare manitoba,
st. boniface site,
winnipeg, mb, canada
p. daeninck
winnipeg regional
palliative care program,
winnipeg, ma, canada
j. pergolizzi
johns hopkins university
school of medicine,
baltimore, md, usa
j. pergolizzi
coalition of pain education (cope),
national institute of pain,
new york, ny, usa

abstract introduction: the cannabinoids nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) and  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol) are indicated for the
management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (cinv) in
cancer patients who have failed to
respond adequately to conventional
antiemetic therapy. discussion: the
endocannabinoid (cb) system interacts with numerous other systems and
pharmaceutical cannabinoids target
ubiquitous  xxxg479xxx  and cb2 receptors in
the central nervous system and periphery, relieving nausea and vomiting and pain. summary: the benefits
of this novel class of medications in
cancer may extend beyond cinv, as
indicated by data from preclinical
studies and animal models.
keywords cannabinoids .
chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting .  xxxg479xxx  and cb2 receptors .
pain

j. pergolizzi
naples anesthesia and pain associates,
naples, fl, usa

introduction
in 2000, there were 10 million new cancer cases globally
and the incidence is projected to reach 15 million by 2020,
an increase of 50% [24]. this unprecedented rise in cancer
is due primarily to an aging population and worldwide
trends in smoking prevalence. the impact of cancer on
mortality is staggering. malignant tumors in 2000
accounted for 12% of 56 million deaths [24]. even in

industrialized, more affluent nations, 50% of those
diagnosed with cancer will die of the disease. in developing
countries, 80% of people present with late stage, incurable
disease.
from diagnosis through the course of treatment, cancer
patients are at risk for a multitude of symptoms, including
side effects from its treatment (table 1) [1]. one or a
combination of symptoms and treatment-related side
effects cause distress and limit function. unfortunately,

64

table 1 symptoms of cancer and side effects of its treatment [1]
symptoms and side effects
gastrointestinal problems
nausea and vomiting (symptom of the disease, unknown etiology,
post-operative nausea and vomiting [ponv] and chemotherapyinduced nausea and vomiting [cinv])
ascites
diarrhea
bowel obstruction
pain
metabolic abnormalities
anorexia and malnutrition
psychological problems
anxiety, depression
oral problems
candida, treatment-induced mucositis, xerostomia
respiratory problems
dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, hiccups
skin problems
fungating lesions, pressure ulcers, pruritus
insomnia
weakness and fatigue
eaton–lambert syndrome, neutropenia, anemia

clinicians frequently fail to manage symptoms and side
effects adequately. for example, two thirds of patients are
not given antiemetics according to guidelines and pain is
poorly treated in as many as four of every five cancer
patients [9]. managing symptoms and side effects is a
complicated process that often involves multiple therapies.
an effective strategy would be to target therapy such that
one drug treats more than one symptom or treatmentrelated side effect.
the commercially available cannabinoids, nabilone
( xxxd2687xxx ) and  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol), target ubiquitous
cannabinoid (cb) receptors in the central ( xxxg479xxx ) and
peripheral ( xxxg479xxx  and cb2) nervous systems. cannabinoids
are established treatment for chemotherapy-induced nausea
and vomiting (cinv) and aids-related anorexia [5, 12,
20].  xxxd1943xxx  27 mg/ml and cannabidiol
25 mg/ml (nsativex) received an approval with conditions
from health canada in april 2005 as adjunctive therapy for
neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis [17]. potential
benefits in cancer patients extend beyond established
uses to include analgesia, anti-tumor effects, mood elevation, muscle relaxation and relief from insomnia [22].
understanding the mechanism of action of cannabinoids
and reviewing what is currently known about symptom
benefits in cancer and side effects of therapy can provide a
pathway to their judicious use. current studies assist in

providing evidence for potential uses of this class of drugs
in supportive care of cancer.

the endogenous cannabinoid system: an overview
though there are no silver bullets or panaceas in supportive
oncology, using drugs that work through novel pathways
and possess a broad range of benefits may allow effective
treatment of multiple symptoms or side effects with one
medication. there are three types of cannabinoids:
botanical, which includes marijuana and hashish; endogenous, including anandamide, 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-ag)
and palmitoylethanolamine (pea); and the pharmaceutical
cannabinoids nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ),  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol) [5]
and  xxxd1943xxx  27 mg/ml and cannabidiol
25 mg/ml (nsativex) [11]. there is an abundance of
scientific information on cannabinoids, which assists in
elucidating various aspects of the pharmaceutical products,
including their mechanism of action and established and
potential uses in humans.
endocannabinoid systems and signaling were identified
in invertebrate species and have, therefore, survived
500 million years of human evolution [6]. moreover,
 xxxg479xxx  receptors are more than tenfold more prevalent in the
brain than opioid receptors [4]. two cannabinoid receptors
were identified in humans— xxxg479xxx  and cb2.  xxxg479xxx  receptors,
which are found in the central nervous system (cns)
tissue, are neuromodulatory [8]. the cb2 receptors are
located in non-neural tissue with the exception of some
expression in the microglia. the highest concentration of
these receptors, which are believed to be immunomodulatory, are located in the spleen. the affinity of the
endogenous cannabinoid anandamide is weak for both
 xxxg479xxx  and cb2 receptors; however, nabilone and  xxxd1943xxx 
exhibit greater affinity for both receptors.
the cannabinoid system interacts with several other
systems, indicating the broad spectrum of its activity
(table 2) [15]. while these data are derived from animals,
potential application to humans is intriguing. for example,
cannabinoid interaction with serotonergic receptors may
explain, in part, the benefits of cannabinoids on migraine.
although the anti-inflammatory effects of cannabinoids are
not well-recognized, they possess 20-fold more antiinflammatory capacity than aspirin and about twofold
more so than hydrocortisone. the potential for synergy
between the cannabinoid system and the opioid system,
specifically mu and kappa opioid receptors, was also demonstrated [7, 18, 21]. in humans, such synergism might translate
into improved efficacy at lower doses of both agents.

pharmacokinetics and metabolism of oral cannabinoids
the pharmacokinetics of nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) and  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol) are similar with the exception of the number

65

table 2 interaction between cannabinoids and other systems [15]
system

effects of interaction

glutamate
gaba
serotonin
adrenergic
opioid
dopamine (d)

inhibit release from presynaptic sites
inhibit release from presynaptic sites
potentiate 5-ht2a and inhibit 5-ht2a
 xxxg479xxx  synergy with  xxxg831xxx -agonists
interact synergistically with mu+kappa receptors
inhibit d1 via  xxxg479xxx 
activate d2 via  xxxg479xxx 
neuroprotective direct anti-oxidant effects
reduce “excito-toxicity” via  xxxg479xxx  decrease in
glutamate release
inhibits  xxxg1564xxx 
antiinhibit  xxxd1903xxx  synthesis
inflammatory  xxxg479xxx -induced decrease in calcitonin gene-related
peptide and  xxxg1564xxx 
cb2-induced decrease in histamine and bradykinin

5-ht=5-hydroxytryptamine

of metabolites and the duration of action (table 3) [5, 12].
nabilone has substantially fewer metabolites, which might
lower the patient’s risk for toxicity and side effects. the
duration of action of nabilone is substantially longer than
that of  xxxd1943xxx  as well. due to the longer duration of
action, nabilone offers twice-daily dosing, while  xxxd1943xxx  is given every 4 to 6 h [5, 12]. this longer duration of
action also might make nabilone a more useful medication
for chronic therapy.
cannabinoids are metabolized principally via the
cytochrome p450 (cyp450) 2c9 isoenzyme [13]. neither
nabilone nor  xxxd1943xxx  induces cyp450 isoenzymes;
however,  xxxd1943xxx  inhibits the cyp450 3a4 isoen-

 xxxg1282xxx . thus, the risk for interactions between nabilone and
drugs metabolized via the cyp450 3a4 pathway is low.
this is important because many of the chemotherapy
drugs are metabolized via cyp450 3a4.

the role of cannabinoids in emesis
emesis is mediated by multiple neurotransmitters and
receptors including serotonin, dopamine,  xxxg2240xxx ,
histamine, endorphins, acetylcholine, gamma- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba) and cannabinoids [2]. to control vomiting,
and perhaps particularly nausea, more than one receptor
may need to be blocked. unlike other systems, the
endocannabinoid system works through a retrograde
pathway to inhibit neurotransmitters. the term “omnineuromodulation” was used to describe the mechanism of
action of pharmaceutical cannabinoids in emesis because
they are thought to directly inhibit or modulate neurotransmitters via agonism of ubiquitous  xxxg479xxx  receptors
located in the cns and gut. cannabinoids directly block
emesis via agonism of  xxxg479xxx  receptors and indirectly by
inhibiting other neurotransmitter release.
a substantial proportion of patients continue to experience cinv despite taking conventional antiemetic
therapy. in a study in which patients received  xxxd203xxx ,
dexamethasone and ondansetron, more than one half
(56%) experienced persistent cinv and one half (50%)
reported delayed cinv (fig. 1) [14]. nausea and
vomiting that breaks through standard prophylactic antiemetic therapy is a management challenge, the importance of which is underscored by the adverse impact of
refractory cinv on quality of life and function [23]. a
major concern is discontinuance of chemotherapy due to
the negative effects of persistent cinv (case study: part
1 below).

table 3 pharmacokinetic overview of cannabinoids [5, 12]

oral dosing
source
formulation

onset of action (min)
peak plasma
concentrations
(tmax) (h)
duration of action (h)

nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx )

 xxxd1943xxx  (marinol)

1–2 mg 1–3 h before chemotherapy and two
times per day for up to 48 h afterwards
synthetic delta9-thc analog
crystalline powder capsule

60–90
2

5 mg/m2 1–3 h before chemotherapy and every 2–4 h
afterwards for a total of 4–6 doses per day
synthetic delta9-thc
capsule formulated with sesame oil, among other
ingredients (contraindicated in patients with a
hypersensitivity to sesame oil)
30–60
2–4

8–12

4–6 for psychoactive effects

66

fig. 1 nausea and vomiting
persist in a substantial
proportion of patients receiving
first-line therapy [14]

% of patients in whom cinv persisted*

56%
50%

36%

acute cinv

delayed cinv

overall

treatment regimen:  xxxd203xxx , ondansetron, and dexamethasone
*% not achieving total control, defined as no emesis, no rescue therapy, and no nausea

case study: part 1

effective management of persistent cinv

challenges in managing symptoms of cancer therapy:
persistent cinv

conventional antiemetic therapy was modified due to the
patient’s continued nausea and vomiting. during the fourth
cycle of chemotherapy, modification in the antiemetic
regimen failed to adequately control nausea and vomiting
and the patient indicated that the side effect was prolonged
for 3 days after chemotherapy. although the patient had
remained active throughout previous treatments, the nausea
and vomiting associated with her current therapy restricted
her activities. despite limited activity, she had lost weight.
during the visit, the patient was listless and voiced concern
about the next chemotherapy cycle and her fear of the side
effects. she questioned whether the chemotherapy was
even worth undergoing, considering the impact of its side
effects on her functioning and quality of life.
the cannabinoid, nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ), was added to the
patient’s antiemetic regimen. she was given 1 mg the
evening before chemotherapy and a second dose 3 h before
its administration. she continued to receive nabilone after
the subsequent chemotherapy cycle to control nausea and
vomiting thought to be secondary to other medications she
was taking. at the next visit, the patient reported feeling
substantially better. her spirits were improved and she had
gained 3 lbs.
cannabinoids control refractory cinv. a systematic
analysis of 30 randomized, comparative trials of cannabinoids (oral nabilone, 16 trials; oral  xxxd1943xxx , 11 trials;
intramuscular levonatrodol, 1 trial) with placebo or other
antiemetics ( xxxd3018xxx , metoclopramide, chlorprom
azine, haloperidol,  xxxd1927xxx , and  xxxd115xxx ) confirmed

patient history
four years earlier, a 57-year-old woman was diagnosed as
having breast cancer. she underwent right modified radical
mastectomy and received 6 cycles of chemotherapy, which
she tolerated well. approximately 3 months ago, the
patient complained of lower back “soreness”, which had
worsened over 2 weeks and some “clumsiness” of her left
leg. while she was somewhat concerned, she attributed her
symptoms to overtraining for the local marathon. however,
1 month later, the patient awakened with severe back pain
and was unable to get out of bed. her husband brought her
to the emergency department (ed) where she was found to
have bilateral weakness of both legs (greater in the left leg
than in the right leg).
magnetic resonance imaging (mri) was performed and
demonstrated an l1 pathologic fracture with a soft tissue
mass impinging on the cauda equina. despite surgery and
radiation, which re-established neurological function, mild
weakness remained. bone scan and x-rays showed multiple lytic bony lesions consistent with metastatic disease.
work-up, including cerebral mri, showed no organ
disease. the patient began taxane-based chemotherapy
2 weeks later. she was taking conventional antiemetic
therapy,  xxxd3561xxx  for bony metastases and opioid
therapy to control her back pain.

67

fig. 2 control of nausea and
vomiting with cannabinoids: a
systematic review [20]

cannabinoid
control (placebo or active)

event rate (%)

70%

66%
59%

57%

57%
45%

43%
34%

vs placebo

vs active

vs placebo

nausea

their efficacy in cinv [20]. composite data of event rates
(vomiting or nausea) found lower breakthrough nausea and
vomiting with cannabinoids (fig. 2). the number needed to
treat (nnt) for complete control of nausea and vomiting
compared with active controls was 6.4 and 8.0, respectively.
patients preferred cannabinoid therapy over both placebo and
other antiemetics (nnt, 1.6 and 2.8, respectively).

the role of cannabinoids in pain
preclinical investigation has documented the benefits of
both  xxxg479xxx  and  xxxg480xxx  agonists in several types of
pain (table 4) [11]. these receptor agonists produce

vs active

vomiting

specific biochemical effects in the periphery and cns in
response to tissue injury or inflammation (table 5) [11].
while much remains unknown about their mechanisms in
humans, their analgesic activity in various types of pain
and their effects on neurotransmitters provide antinociception through multiple pathways and implicate
potential benefits in the treatment of one or more types
of pain. as an example,  xxxg479xxx  induces a decrease in the
 xxxg1564xxx , a factor involved in neuroplasticity
and neuropathic pain. benefits of cannabinoid therapy
were demonstrated in patients with multiple sclerosisrelated central neuropathic pain in one study. the nnt for
50% pain relief was 3.5 [19].

table 4 preclinical studies: effects of cannabinoids on various types of pain [11]
effects showed in
preclinical studies

type of pain
acute

visceral

chronic

neuropathic

anti-nociceptive
hyperalgesia

–
–

–
–

–
 xxxg479xxx  blocks pain
facilitation from
the rvm and blocks wind-up

anti-inflammatory

–

–

cb2 receptors play
an important role

–
up-regulation of  xxxg479xxx  receptors
animal studies support a role for
cb2 receptors in peripheral
tissues, microglia
cb2 receptors play an important
role in immunocytes upregulated
 xxxg479xxx  on a beta fibers, blocks
allodynia at dorsal horn

allodynia

–

comparison with
opioids

comparable in potency
and efficacy to coma
codeine

– = significant evidence
rvm rostral ventromedial medulla

due to the up-regulation
of  xxxg479xxx  receptors
greater potency and efficacy
in both inflammatory and
neuropathic pain

–

68

table 5 effects of cannabinoid receptors in response to tissue
injury or inflammation [11]
 xxxg479xxx  effects

cb2 effects

↓cgrp
↓ngf
↓plasma extravasation
↓hyperalgesia
↓edema

↓mast cell degranulation
↓histamine
↓5-ht
↓ngf sensitization
↓neutrophil migration
↓no production by macrophages

cgrp=calcitonin gene-related peptide
5-ht=5-hydroxytryptamine
ngf= xxxg1564xxx 
no= xxxd2738xxx 

synergy between cannabinoids and opioids
studies in animal models have revealed synergy between
cannabinoids and opioids, as evidenced, in part, by crosstalk between both receptors [3]. if such synergy is
translatable to humans, cannabinoids may be opioidsparing, reduce the risk for adverse effects and improve
opioid-resistant pain. roberts et al. conducted a study
examining the effect of delta9-thc plus morphine on sensory
pain [16]. in this double-blind, four-treatment, four-period,
four-sequence, crossover study, 13 volunteers were given
delta9-thc 5 mg or placebo, followed by 0.02 mg/kg/iv
morphine or placebo 90 min later. the subjects rated pain
associated with thermal stimuli to the skin on three visual
analogue scales (vas) 15 min after the administration of
morphine or placebo. this study demonstrated synergistic
reduction in the affective component to pain with the
combination of an opioid and cannabinoid with no serious
or unexpected side effects.
while no randomized, controlled studies in pain
management have used opioids with cannabinoids, anecdotal evidence suggests synergistic analgesia, particularly
in patients with central and peripheral neuropathic pain
(case study: part 2 below).

case study: part 2
cannabinoids and pain management in the cancer
patient
the patient complained of new-onset pain in her feet and
lower legs, which began after the first cycle of taxane
chemotherapy and grew more intense. she described the
pain as “burning” and “tingling” and said it seemed to
worsen at night. the pain, similar to the nausea and
vomiting, was impacting her quality of life significantly.
because the pain worsened with walking, the patient was

unable to do even light housekeeping or go shopping.
opioid therapy appeared to provide little relief for the
patient’s neuropathic pain.
nabilone was titrated to 2 mg bid over 1 week. at her
next visit, the patient reported significant decrease in her
neuropathic pain. she was able to complete the full course
of chemotherapy. at follow-up, metastatic disease was
stable. the patient continued to take  xxxd3561xxx , but
the morphine was tapered and finally discontinued. she
continued to take nabilone at the therapeutic dosage. her
attitude was upbeat and she reported a return to her usual
activities.
the case study demonstrates the benefits of cannabinoids in the management of multiple symptoms. nabilone
controlled both treatment-related cinv and taxane-induced peripheral neuropathy. while it was not indicated for
the treatment of neuropathic pain in cancer patients,
nabilone alleviated her neuropathic pain. the relief of her
symptoms and side effects allowed her to resume activities,
resulted in weight gain and improved her outlook. it is
important to note that she was able to complete the full
course of chemotherapy and receive the benefits of tumor
response.

evidence-based medicine: supporting the use
of cannabinoids for symptom management
indications for cannabinoids other than cinv and aidsrelated cachexia require evidence of their therapeutic
benefits, tolerability and safety. current studies evaluating
the use of nabilone in cancer patients are looking for
multiple benefits. these include, among others, improved
sleep, pain, nausea and synergy with opioids. phase iv
studies, which are underway in the us, should elucidate the
incremental benefits that are attained when adding nabilone
to the treatment regimen.

nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) phase iv studies
a proof-of-principle investigation is being conducted in
patients with refractory cinv. this multicenter study,
involving 10 sites in the international oncology network
(ion), will enroll 80 patients receiving moderately
emetogenic chemotherapy for the first time. patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (paciltaxel plus carboplatin),
breast cancer (cyclophosphamide plus doxorubicin) and
colorectal cancer (folfox) will be enrolled. during the
first chemotherapy cycle, patients will complete a baseline
vas for nausea and pain and then record the number and
time of emetic episodes, use of rescue medications, vas
for nausea and pain, side effects, and a quality-of-life
questionnaire daily for 5 days and after chemotherapy. all
patients will initially receive guideline-recommended antiemetic therapy, consisting of a 5-ht3 antagonist plus

69

table 6 primary and secondary endpoints of phase iv chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting study
endpoints of phase iv chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
primary
complete response
no emesis and no rescue medication for 5 days post-chemotherapy
secondary
percentage of subjects with no:
emesis
nausea (vas<5 mm)/significant nausea (vas<25 mm)
time to first emesis
decrease in:
pain
analgesia
quality of life (flic questionnaire)
flic=functional living index-cancer

dexamethasone [10]. during cycle 2, nabilone, 1 mg 3 to
4 h before chemotherapy and 1 mg in the evening, will be
added to the day 1 regimen of patients who experience at
least one vomiting episode and/or significant nausea. on
days 2 through 4, the nabilone dose will be increased by
1 mg/day up to 2 mg twice daily, as tolerated. patients will
complete the same questionnaires and rating scales as for
cycle 1. the primary and secondary endpoints are listed in
table 6.
three 15-week, phase iv, multicenter open-label pain
studies will be conducted in specific patient populations.
all three trials will have the same design, objective and
methods (table 7). patients will be on stable doses of
analgesics during a screening period, which will be

table 7 nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) pilot pain studies: design, objective
and methods
nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) pain studies
design
15-week, phase iv, multicenter, open-label (n=23)
objective
safety and efficacy of nabilone
methods
nabilone 1 mg/day, titrated up to 2 mg bid based on patient
response
two-phased
screening/pre-treatment
treatment

followed by a 3-week titration period during which
nabilone will be increased from 1 to 2 mg twice daily
based upon response. the primary criterion for entry into
these studies is pain severity of at least 40 mm on a 100mm pain vas. the primary endpoint of all three studies is
the average pain score at target site. secondary endpoints
include:
–
–
–
–
–

worst pain score
pain at night score
quality of life
patient satisfaction
safety—adverse events and vital signs

summary
the findings from these studies should help more fully
elucidate the benefits, distinct advantages and any
disadvantages of cannabinoids. patient tolerability and
safety will be assessed in all studies. this information will
be instrumental in establishing the roles of cannabinoids in
symptom management of the cancer patient.

table 8 safety overview of cannabinoids [5, 12]
nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx )

 xxxd1943xxx  (marinol)

contraindications
history of hypersensitivity
history of hypersensitivity to any
to any cannabinoid
cannabinoid or sesame oil
most commonly occurring adverse effects
drowsiness
asthenia
vertigo
palpitations
dry mouth
tachycardia
euphoria
vasodilatation/facial flush
ataxia
abdominal pain
headache
nausea
concentration difficulties
vomiting
amnesia
ataxia
confusion
depersonalization
dizziness
euphoria
paranoid reaction
somnolence
thinking abnormal
cannabinoids should not be taken with alcohol, sedatives,
hypnotics, or other psychotomimetic substances

70

questions and comments
the symposium concluded with questions from the
audience regarding the use of cannabinoids in symptom
management. the responses of the panel and their insights
are below.
q: are there any differences between nabilone
( xxxd2687xxx ) and  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol) that would suggest
the use of one over the other?
three differences that might influence the decisionmaking are: the number of metabolites, duration of action
and cyp450 inhibition. the longer duration of action
associated with nabilone allows this medication to be given
twice daily. generally, the dosing strategy should be “start
low and go slow”, meaning begin therapy at 1 mg and
titrate upward depending upon each patient’s response.
generally, nabilone can be titrated quicker in younger vs
older patients. it is important to note that all patients should
be monitored initially—by healthcare professionals or
other responsible adults who have received information on
the drug. the lack of cyp450 inhibition associated with
nabilone and no observation of any significant drug–drug
interactions to date is important in cancer patients who are
often receiving several different medications.
q: what are the side effects/toxicities associated with
cannabinoids?
a: it is important to keep in mind that all medications
have side effects, including cannabinoids. the most

common occurring side effects of these medications are
drowsiness, vertigo, dry mouth, euphoria (feeling “high”),
ataxia, headache and concentration difficulties (table 8) [5,
12]. as there is a potential for hypotension and reflex
tachycardia, these medications should be used with caution
in elderly, frail patients and other at-risk patients. it is
interesting to note that tolerance develops to the side effects,
especially in patients with a history of cannabis experience,
but not to the beneficial effects of cannabinoids.
regarding the potential for psychotomimetic effects, dr.
maida related his review of 25 years of cannabinoid use in
canada. of more than 250,000 prescriptions, approximately only seven were associated with psychotomimetic
effects and all of these resolved within 24 h.
q: are there patients who do not respond to cannabinoid
therapy?
a: a minority of patients do not respond as favorably to
cannabinoid therapy as do the majority. generally, these
patients are older or female, though there are no data to
explain why. as with all medications, it is important to
individualize treatment and select patients for drug therapy
based on their needs and limitations.
q: should patients who are taking a cannabinoid for the
management of refractory cinv drive a vehicle?
a: due to the sedative effects of cannabinoids, it is best
patients have someone else drive them to and from their
chemotherapy appointments. canadian studies, however,
showed little effects of nabilone on driving.

references
1. abrahm jl (2005) a physician’s guide
to pain and symptom management in
cancer patients, 2nd edn. johns
hopkins university press, baltimore,
md
2. andrews pl, naylor rj, joss ra
(1998) neuropharmacology of emesis
and its relevance to anti-emetic therapy.
consensus and controversies.
support care cancer 6:197–203
3. cichewicz dl (2004) synergistic interactions between cannabinoid and
opioid analgesics. life sci 74:1317–
1324
4. cloning the receptor (autumn 2005)
o’shaughnessy’s journal of the california cannabis medical research
group. available at: http://www.ccrmg.
org
5.  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol®) (2005)
prescribing information. solvay
pharmaceuticals, marietta, ga

6. green s, newman z, nordquist s
(2005) pharmacological evidence for
cannabinoid receptors in glutamatergic
synapses at the crayfish neuromuscular
junction. pioneering neuroscience
6:55–61
7. hohmann ag, briley em, herkenham
m (1999) pre- and postsynaptic
distribution of cannabinoid and mu
opioid receptors in rat spinal cord.
brain res 822:17–25
8. kalant h (2001) medicinal use of
cannabis: history and current status.
pain res manag 6:80–91
9. khatcheressian j, cassel jb, lyckholm
l, coyne p, hagenmueller a, smith tj
(2005) improving palliative and
supportive care in cancer patients.
oncology (williston park) 19:1365–
1376
10. kris mg, hesketh pj, somerfield mr
et al (2006) american society of
clinical oncology guideline for
antiemetics in oncology: update 2006.
available at: http://www.asco.org
11. lynch me (2005) preclinical science
regarding cannabinoids as analgesics:
an overview. pain res manag
10(suppl a):7a–14a

12. nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ™) (2006) prescribing information. valeant pharmaceuticals international, san diego, ca
13. nahas g, harvey dj, sutin k et al
(2002) a molecular basis of the therapeutic and psychoactive properties of
cannabis ( xxxd1943xxx ).
prog neuropsychopharmacol biol
psychiatry 26:721–730
14. poli-bigelli s, rodrigues-pereira j,
carides ad et al (2003) addition of the
 xxxg2240xxx  receptor antagonist  xxxd203xxx  to standard antiemetic therapy
improves control of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. results
from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in latin america.
cancer 97:3090–3098
15. russo eb (2002) the role of
cannabis and cannabinoids in pain
management. in: weiner rs (ed). pain
management: a practical guide for
clinicians, 6th edn. crc press, boca
raton, fl, pp 357–375

71

16. roberts jd, gennings c, shih m
(2006) synergistic affective analgesic
interaction between  xxxd1943xxx  and morphine. eur j
pharmacol 530:54–58
17. sativex® oromucosal spray (2006).
available at: http://www.gwpharm.
com/sativex.asp
18. strangman nm, walker jm (1999)
cannabinoid win 55,212-2 inhibits the
activity-dependent facilitation of spinal
nociceptive responses. j neurophysiol
82:472–477

19. svendsen kb, jensen ts, bach fw
(2004) does the cannabinoid  xxxd1943xxx  reduce central pain in multiple
sclerosis? randomised double blind
placebo controlled crossover trial. bmj
329:253
20. tramer mr, carroll d, campbell fa,
reynolds dj, moore ra, mcquay hj
(2001) cannabinoids for control of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting: quantitative systematic
review. bmj 323:16–21
21. walker jm, hohmann ag, martin wj,
strangman nm, huang sm, tsou k
(1999) the neurobiology of cannabinoid analgesia. life sci 65:665–673

22. walsh d, nelson ka, mahmoud fa
(2003) established and potential therapeutic applications of cannabinoids in
oncology. support care cancer
11:137–143
23. wiser w, berger a (2005) practical
management of chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting. oncology
(williston park) 19:637–645
24. world health organization (april 3,
2003) global cancer rates could increase by 50% to 15 million by 2020.
available at: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/news/releases/2003/pr27/
en/index.html

