0888-8809/07/$15.00/0
printed in u.s.a.

molecular endocrinology 21(2):359–375
copyright © 2007 by the endocrine society
doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0337

the role of extranuclear signaling actions of
 xxxg1737xxx  in mediating progesterone
regulation of gene expression and the cell cycle
viroj boonyaratanakornkit, eileen mcgowan, lori sherman, michael a. mancini, boris j. cheskis,
and dean p. edwards
department of molecular and cellular biology (v.b., m.a.m., d.p.e.), baylor college of medicine,
houston, texas 77030; garvan institute of medical research (e.m.), cancer research program,
darlinghurst, new south wales 2010, australia; university of colorado health sciences center
cancer center (l.s.), aurora, colorado 80045; and wyeth womens health research institute
(b.j.c.), collegeville, pennsylvania 19426
human  xxxg1737xxx  (pr) contains a motif that interacts with the sh3 domain of src and
mediates rapid activation of src and downstream
mapk ( xxxg1369xxx /-2) without relying on the transcriptional activity of the receptor. here we investigated
the role and intracellular location of this nontranscriptional activity of pr. progestin activation of
src/mapk occurred outside the nucleus with the b
isoform of pr that was distributed between the
cytoplasm and nucleus, but not with pr-a that was
predominantly nuclear. breast cancer cells stably
expressing wild-type pr-b or pr-b with disrupting
point mutations in the sh3 domain binding motif
(pr-b⌬sh3) that do not affect the transcriptional
activity of pr, were compared for effects of progestin on endogenous target gene expression and
cell proliferation. progestin induction of the cyclin

d1 gene, which lacks a progesterone response
element, was dependent on pr activation of the
src/mapk pathway, whereas induction of the sgk
(serum and glucocorticoid regulated kinase) gene
that contains a functional progesterone response
element was unaffected by mutations that interfere
with pr activation of src. progestin induction of
cell cycle progression was also abrogated in cells
expressing pr-b⌬sh3, and no effect of progestin
on  xxxg366xxx  expression and cell cycle was observed in the presence of pr-a. these results highlight the importance of pr activation of the src/
mapk signaling pathway for progesteroneinduced transcription of select target genes and
cell cycle progression. (molecular endocrinology
21: 359–375, 2007)

p

tiation and proliferative effects and is essential for
stimulating ductal side branching, and development of
lobuloalveolar structures required for milk protein production during pregnancy (1–6). progesterone and pr
are also involved in mammary tumorigenesis and
growth of mammary epithelial-derived cancer cells.
pr knockout (prko) mice are less susceptible than
wild-type mice to induction of mammary tumors in
response to chemical carcinogens, and the synthetic
progestin  xxxd2554xxx  (mpa) induces mammary adenocarcinomas in female balb/c
mice (7, 8). in women, administration of combined
estrogen and progestin hormone replacement therapy
for postmenopausal symptoms increased the risk of
breast cancer relative to women taking estrogen alone
(9, 10). in pr-positive breast cancer cell lines, progestins have a biphasic effect on proliferation, inducing
quiescent cells to enter the cell cycle and progress
through one or multiple rounds of cell division followed
by arrest in early g1 (11–15). several g1-s phase cell
cycle proteins are transiently up-regulated by progestins including c-fos, c-myc, and cyclins e and d1,
leading to accumulation and increased activity of the
 xxxg411xxx / xxxg366xxx  complex and hyperphosphorylation of
rb (11–15). growth arrest is associated with induction

rogesterone plays an important role in development, growth, and maintenance of female
reproductive tissues, and its biological actions are mediated by the  xxxg1737xxx  (pr), a member of
the steroid/nuclear  xxxg1603xxx  superfamily. in
the mammary gland, progesterone has both differenfirst published online november 30, 2006
abbreviations:  xxxg366xxx ,  xxxg366xxx ; cdk, cyclin-dependent
kinase; dbd, dna binding domain; dcc-fbs, 5% fetal bovine serum that had been treated with dextran-coated charcoal; egf,  xxxg681xxx ; er,  xxxg730xxx ;
frap, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching;  xxxg861xxx ,
 xxxg861xxx ; gfp, green
fluorescent protein; gre, glucocorticoid response element;
lbd, ligand binding domain; mmtv, mouse mammary tumor
virus; mpa,  xxxd2554xxx ; mpr, novel
membrane g protein-coupled receptor; nf, nuclear factor;
nls, nuclear localization sequences; ntd, amino terminal
domain; pi3k, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; pr,  xxxg1737xxx ; pre, progesterone response element; prko,
pr knockout; sds, sodium  xxxd3215xxx ; sgk, serum and
glucocorticoid regulated kinase; sv, simian virus; yfp, yellow
fluorescent protein.
molecular endocrinology is published monthly by the
endocrine society (http://www.endo-society.org), the
foremost professional society serving the endocrine
community.
359

360 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

of cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitors p18ink and
p21, and decreased expression and activity of cdk
complexes (13, 16, 17). depending on the culture conditions, progestins can also promote sustained proliferation of human breast cancer cells (18), protect cells
against apoptosis (19), and affect cell adhesion and
migration (20).
human pr is expressed from a single gene as two
proteins, pr-a (molecular weight ⫽ 82,000) and pr-b
(molecular weight ⫽ 98,000); sharing identical sequences in the ligand binding domain (lbd) and dna
binding domain (dbd) and part of the amino terminal
domain (ntd), except for the first 164 amino acids that
are missing in pr-a (21). the two pr isoforms have
distinct functional activities in vitro and in vivo. studies
of transgenic and pr isoform selective knockout mice
have shown that pr-b is more important for proliferative effects of progesterone in the mammary gland,
whereas pr-a is the more important isoform for functional response to progesterone in the ovary and
uterus (22–24). pr-b is generally a stronger transcriptional activator than pr-a (25), and microarray experiments have identified pr isoform selective target
genes, as well as targets regulated by both receptors
(26). disruption of the normal ratio of pr-a to pr-b
has been detected in human breast cancers, and pr-a
rich tumors have worse disease-free survival rates and
tend to develop resistance to tamoxifen (27, 28).
in addition to direct transcriptional effects mediated
by nuclear pr, progestins can rapidly activate the
src/ras/mapk ( xxxg1369xxx /-2) signaling pathway in breast
cancer and mammary epithelial cells under conditions
that correlate with progestin-induced proliferation or
cell cycle arrest (15, 29–31). progestins have also been
shown to activate the  xxxg1219xxx /-2/stat3 signaling pathway
in a manner dependent on src in c4hd mouse mammary tumor cells and to be correlated with progestin
stimulation of growth (32). these effects of progestins
on cell signaling pathways in the absence of transcription are dependent on conventional pr, suggesting
pr has dual functions as a nuclear transcription factor
and as an activator of cell signaling molecules. we
previously defined the presence of a polyproline motif
(amino acids 421–428) in the ntd of human pr that
mediates direct interaction of pr with the sh3 domain
of the nonreceptor  xxxg2198xxx , src, and activates
src by an sh3 domain displacement mechanism (31).
point mutations (p422a, p423a, p427a) in this motif

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

abrogated the ability of pr to interact with and activate
src in cell-free assays and within cells but had no
detectable effect on other functional activities of pr
including progestin binding, specific dna binding and
progestin-dependent transcriptional activation of progesterone response element (pre) controlled reporter
genes (31, 33). conversely, mutations in the dna binding domain or in a phosphorylation site, p294, which
cripples transcriptional activity of pr, have no effect
on rapid progestin activation of src (15, 31, 33). thus,
the ability of pr to interact with src appears to be
separable from other functions of receptor and is dissociable by point mutations in the polyproline motif.
in the present study, we investigated the role of pr
activation of src through coupling with the sh3 domain, in mediating effects of progestin on cell functions. we also examined the intracellular location of
this functional property of pr. results show that progestin activation of the src/mapk signaling pathways
occurs outside the nucleus with pr-b only and not
with pr-a, and is required for progestin induction of
 xxxg366xxx  gene expression and cell cycle progression
of breast cancer cells.

results
a and b isoforms of pr exhibit differential
subcellular localization and ability to mediate
progestin activation of src/mapk
to determine cellular responses to progestin that require interaction of pr with the sh3 domain of src, we
have transiently or stably expressed wild-type pr, or
pr bearing point mutations (⌬sh3) in the sh3 domain
interaction motif into pr-negative cells. target tissues
for progesterone naturally express both pr-a and
pr-b; thus, to study the function of each isoform
independently also requires their ectopic expression in
a pr null cell background. pr-negative variants of
t47d (t47dy and t47dc42) and mcf-7 (mcf-7c412) breast cancer cells are attractive experimental systems for analysis of ectopically expressed pr as they
should contain all the necessary cofactors and signaling pathways to mount an appropriate response to
progestins. the t47dc42 (34) and mcf-7c4-12 (35)
cells are also  xxxg730xxx  (er) negative, thus

fig. 1. stable expression of pr in breast cancer cells
a, upper panel, immunoblot analysis of t47dc42 breast cancer cells stably transfected with pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3, or pr-a as
compared with nontransfected t47dc42 and endogenous pr-a and pr-b in t47d cells. lower panel, immunoblot analysis of
mcf-7c4-12 cells stably transfected with gfp-pr-b, or gfp-pr-a as compared with nontransfected mcf-7c4-12 cells and
endogenous pr in the t47d cells. b, t47dc42 cells stably expressing pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3, or pr-a in the upper panel, or
mcf-7c4-12 cells stably expressing gfp-pr-b or gfp-pr-a in the lower panel were transduced for 24 h with adenovirus
encoding (moi ⫽ 5) an mmtv-luc reporter. cells were then treated with either vehicle (ethanol) or 10 nm r5020 for 24 h and cell
lysates were assayed for luciferase activity. values represent relative luciferase activity as the mean from three replicate
experiments ⫾ sem. c, same as b except analyzing r5020 induction of mmtv-luc in cells expressing gfp-pr-b or nontagged
pr-b. d, same as c except cells were treated for 5 or 10 min with 10 nm r5020 and mapk activation was detected by immunoblot
with a phosphospecific p42/ xxxd1355xxx  antibody vs. an antibody that detects total mapk (cell signaling technology, beverly, ma).

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 361

362

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

enabling analysis of pr actions independent of er,
whereas t47dy cells have very low er (36).
wild-type pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3 or a vector control expressing lacz were stably transfected into these prnegative breast cancer cells. additionally, pr-a was
stably transfected in t47dc42 cells and green fluorescent protein (gfp)-pr-a and gfp-pr-b were expressed in mcf-7c4-12 cells. cells isolated from each
group were selected based on a uniform immunostaining pattern of pr in the majority of cells (not shown),
equivalent expression of pr protein as detected by
immunoblotting (fig. 1a), and function with respect to
progestin-induction of gene transcription and rapid
activation of the src/mapk signaling pathway. in
t47dc42 cells, pr-a, pr-b, and pr-b⌬sh3 proteins
were all expressed at equivalent levels, slightly lower
than that of endogenous pr in standard t47d cells,
whereas no pr was detected in parental t47dc42
cells (fig. 1a). gfp-pr-a and gfp-pr-b in mcf7c4-12 were also expressed at similar levels as endogenous pr in parental t47d cells, but as expected
the fusion proteins exhibited a slower mobility on sodium  xxxd3215xxx  (sds) gels (fig. 1a, lower panel).
pr-b and pr-b⌬sh3 expressed in t47dc42 cells
mediated equivalent induction of a mouse mammary
tumor virus (mmtv)-luc reporter gene by the synthetic
progestin r5020 (10 nm), whereas pr-a as expected
exhibited a much lower transcriptional activity than
pr-b (fig. 1b). pr-b and pr-b⌬sh3 expressed in
t47dy cells exhibited the same properties and relationships as in t47dc42 cells (not shown). gfptagged receptors were fully functional with respect to
r5020 induction of mmtv-luc, (fig. 1, b and c) and
rapid activation of mapk when compared directly with
nontagged receptors (fig. 1, b–d). thus, as previously
reported, the gfp tag did not measurably alter transcriptional or nontranscriptional activity of pr (37).
pr-a and -b have identical sh3 domain interaction
polyproline motifs in their ntd, and we previously
showed that both pr isoforms are capable of efficiently interacting with sh3 domains and activating
src tyrosine kinases in cell-free assay (31). however,
our previous studies on progestin activation of src
within cells were done with the b isoform of pr only
(31, 33). to determine whether pr-a in cells can mediate rapid progestin stimulation of src kinase, steroid
receptor-negative cos-7 cells were transiently cotransfected with human pr-b or -a along with  xxxg2198xxx .
kinase activity was assayed by immunoprecipitation
of total  xxxg2198xxx  followed by 32p-atp incorporation into
enolase as a src substrate (31). as shown in fig. 2a, a
short 2-min treatment with progestin stimulated an
increase in src kinase activity in cells expressing
pr-b, but not in cells expressing pr-a. similar results
were observed in t47dc42 cells that stably expressed
pr-a or pr-b using an elisa to detect activated src
based on phosphorylation of tyrosine 418 in the activation loop (fig. 2b). activation of src by short-term
treatment with r5020 (2–5 min) was observed only in
cells expressing pr-b and was similar to that stimu-

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

lated by  xxxg681xxx  (egf). little or no
activation of src by r5020 was observed in cells expressing pr-a or pr-b⌬sh3 (fig. 2b). consistent with
the effect on src, r5020 stimulated a rapid (5–10 min)
activation of map kinase ( xxxg1369xxx /-2) in cells expressing
pr-b, but had little to no effect in cells expressing
pr-a or pr-b⌬sh3 (fig. 2c). induction of mapk activity by r5020 was blocked by the src inhibitor  xxxd1307xxx 
indicating a dependency on src for mapk activation
(fig. 2c). it should be noted that progestin-induced
activation of mapk is more transient and less robust
than that of egf used as a positive control (fig. 2c).
the more transient response is likely due to progestins
and egf activating the src/mapk signaling pathway
by a different mechanism and quenching by translocation of some cytoplasmic pr to the nucleus.
one possible explanation for the inability of pr-a to
activate src and mapk within cells is a different intracellular localization than pr-b. to address this question, we examined localization of stably expressed
gfp-pr-a and gfp-pr-b by direct fluorescence confocal microscopy in either live or fixed cells. gfp-pr-b
in fixed mcf-7c4-12 cells, as analyzed by digital deconvoluted fluorescence microscopy, was found to be
distributed between the nucleus and cytoplasm in the
absence of hormone. addition of progestin for 60 min
(before fixation) caused an increased accumulation of
gfp-pr-b in the nucleus, but substantial amounts
remained in the cytoplasm after hormone treatment
(fig. 3a). in contrast, gfp-pr-a was almost exclusively nuclear in the presence and absence of progestin (fig. 3a). to determine whether this different localization of pr-a and pr-b could be caused by the gfp,
nontagged pr-a and pr-b expressed in t47dc42
cells were also analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence with the pr-specific monoclonal antibody,
1294. nontagged pr-a was almost exclusively nuclear in the presence and absence of r5020, whereas
nontagged pr-b exhibited a distribution between the
nucleus and cytoplasm (fig. 3b). similar results were
observed in cos-7 cells by transiently expressing
nontagged pr-b or pr-a (fig. 3c), except that cytoplasmic staining of pr-b was more punctate and
some staining at the cell periphery was observed suggesting both cytoplasmic and membrane localization
under these conditions. in cells stably expressing
pr-b, a fairly homogeneous cytoplasmic staining was
observed with no evidence of staining at the cell membrane. nonetheless, the major difference between
pr-a and pr-b under all conditions examined was a
predominant nuclear localization of pr-a, whereas
pr-b exhibited a distribution between nuclear and
extranuclear sites.
we also analyzed localization of gfp-pr in live cells
and quantitated the ratio of receptor distribution between the nucleus and cytoplasm. cells were treated
with vehicle (ethanol) or 10 nm r5020 for 2 h, and live
cells were imaged using a laser confocal microscope
(zeiss ls510; carl zeiss microimaging inc., thornwood, ny). gfp fluorescence intensities of the whole

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 363

cell and the nucleus (n ⫽ 15–20 cells) were measured
and the percent nuclear fluorescence was calculated
(fig. 4). consistent with fixed cells, gfp-pr-b was
distributed between the nucleus and cytoplasm in the
absence and presence of hormone, with 51.5 ⫾ 8 and
65.7 ⫾ 8% nuclear fluorescence intensities, respectively. in contrast, pr-a localized mainly to the nucleus
in the absence of hormone with little change after
hormone addition, exhibiting 87.5 ⫾ 5 and 87.8 ⫾ 7%
nuclear fluorescence, respectively. gfp-pr-b⌬sh3
displayed a similar distribution between the cytoplasm
and nucleus as wild-type pr-b in the absence of progestin (fig. 3b); however, a strong cytoplasmic-nuclear translocation occurred with hormone. in live
cells, gfp-pr-b⌬sh3 in the absence of hormone exhibited 60% (60.9 ⫾ 0.9%) nuclear fluorescence and
this increased to 87% (87.3 ⫾ 8%) after hormone
treatment (fig. 4). to begin to address the mechanism
underlying the distinct localization of pr-a and pr-b,
we analyzed the mobility of gfp-tagged receptors
stably expressed in living cells by the technique of
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (frap).
based on the half-time of recovery of a laser-induced
bleached area over the cell nucleus, pr-b exhibited a
faster mobility (t1/2 of 2.5 ⫾ 0.09 sec) than pr-a (t1/2 of
4.7 ⫾ 0.85) or pr-b⌬sh3 (t1/2 of 4.0 ⫾ 1.05) in the
presence of hormone (see supplemental figure 1,
which is published as supplemental data on the endocrine society’s journals online web site at http://
mend.endojournals.org), indicating a correlation between slower mobility and greater nuclear retention of
pr-a. these data, taken together, indicate that localization outside the nucleus is required for pr to activate src, and that differences in intracellular trafficking
contribute to the greater cytoplasmic localization and
nontranscriptional signaling activity of pr-b.

fig. 2. pr-b but not pr-a mediates r5020 activation of src
a, cos-7 cells were transfected with pr-b or pr-a and
src kinase activity was measured before and after treatment
of cells for 2 min with 10 nm r5020. immunoprecipitated src
(upper panels) from cell lysates was assayed by 32p incorporation into the substrate enolase followed by sds-gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. total src protein (lower
panel) was detected by immunoblot with a src-specific antibody (327) antibody. b, t47dc42 cells expressing pr-b,
pr-a or pr-b⌬sh3 were treated with vehicle (ethanol), 10 nm
r5020 for 2 and 5 min, or egf (25 ng/ml) for 10 min. activated
src [src-py (418)] was determined by a src [py418] elisa kit
(biosource) as described in materials and methods. data are
average determination from three replicates ⫾ sem. c, upper
panel, t47dc42 cells expressing pr-b, pr-a or pr-b⌬sh3
were treated with vehicle (ethanol), 10 nm r5020 for 2 and 5
min, or egf (25 ng/ml) for 10 min. activated mapk ( xxxg1369xxx /-2)
was detected by immunoblot with phosphospecific p42/ xxxd1355xxx 
antibody (cell signaling technology) and total mapk was
detected with a pan antibody (cell signaling technology).
lower panel, t47dc42 expressing pr-b were treated with 10
nm r5020 for 5 min in the presence or absence of the src
kinase inhibitor,  xxxd1307xxx  (10 ␮m). data are representative of at
least three independent experiments.

progestin activation of src is an extranuclear
function of pr
to further address the role of pr localization in progestin
activation of src, the nuclear localization sequences
(nls) of pr were removed by deleting the second zincfinger in the dna binding domain and part of the hinge
region (amino acids 591–644). these deletions are analogous to nls mutants described previously in rabbit pr
(38). ectopically expressed pr-b⌬nls and pr-a⌬nls in
cos-7 cells exhibited exclusive cytoplasmic localization
in the presence and absence of hormone as shown by
indirect immunofluorescence staining with a pr-specific
antibody (fig. 5a). the nls pr mutants had no transcriptional activity with respect to progestin induction of
a pre luciferase controlled reporter gene (data not
shown), indicating that if there is a small amount of
nuclear pr it is not of functional consequence. pr-b⌬nls
mediated progestin-induced activation of src to a similar
extent as wild-type pr-b, whereas no progestin activation of src was mediated by wild-type pr-a, unless it
was forced to the cytoplasm by mutation of the nls (fig.
5a). interestingly, a more pronounced activation of src

364 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

fig. 3. intracellular localization of pr-a and pr-b

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 365

fig. 4. quantitation of receptor localization in live cells
t47d cells stably expressing gfp-pr-b, gfp-pr-b⌬sh3,
or gfp-pr-a were treated with ethanol or 10 nm r5020 for
2 h. live cells were imaged as described in materials and
methods. fluorescence intensities of whole cells and nuclei
were measured and percentage of nuclear fluorescence intensities were calculated. values represent average percentage of nuclear fluorescence intensities from 15–20 cells. * and
**, statistically significant differences (p ⬍ 0.05) as determined by student’s t test between the indicated treatment
groups as compared with unliganded pr-b.

by progestin was not observed with either pr-a⌬nls or
pr-b⌬nls as compared with wild-type pr-b, even
though more receptors are present in the cytoplasm than
wild-type pr-b. these results suggest that kinases and
cell signaling machinery rather than the concentration of
extranuclear pr are limiting for progestin-induced activation of src (fig. 5a).
in a reciprocal experiment, pr-b was forcedly targeted to the nucleus by tagging receptor with three
sv40nlss (pr-bnuc). as verified by indirect immunofluorescence staining, pr-bnuc showed predominantly nuclear localization in the presence or absence
of hormone with little evidence of the cytoplasmic
staining observed with native pr-b (fig. 5b). as opposed to wild-type pr-b, pr-bnuc failed to mediate
rapid progestin activation providing further evidence
that progestin activation of src requires extranuclear
localization of pr (fig. 5b). we also attempted to
forcedly target pr-b to the cell membrane by tagging
it with palmitoylation sequences (pr-bmem). although
pr-bmem in cos-7 cells did not localize exclusively
to the cell membrane, it exhibited a disproportionately
higher localization in the cell membrane relative to
cytoplasmic localization as compared with wild-type
pr-b; yet, the magnitude of progestin activation of src

fig. 5. activation of csrc is an extranuclear function of pr
a, cos-7 cells were transiently transfected with pr-b,
pr-a, or the same receptors with a deletion of the nuclear
localization sequences (⌬nls) as described in materials and
methods. cells were treated for 2 min with vehicle (⫺) or
r5020 (10 nm) and src kinase activity (upper panels) and total
src (bottom panel) were measured as fig. 2a. lower panels
show immunofluorescence staining of pr-b⌬nls and pra⌬nls with a pr-specific antibody (1294) in the absence and
presence of 10 nm r5020 (2 h). b, upper panel, a schematic
of pr constructs: pr-bnuc with n-terminal yfp-tag and
c-terminal 3xsv40 nls: pr-bmem with n-terminal yfp and
palmitoylation (pal) sequences from neuromodulin. cells
transiently transfected with pr-bmem were treated for 2 min
with vehicle (⫺) or r5020 (10 nm) and total src protein levels
(lower panel) and src kinase activity were detected as in figs.
2a and 5a. lower panels are indirect immunofluorescence
staining of pr with 1294 mab in cells transfected with prbnuc or pr-bmem and then treated without or with r5020 for
2 h.

was comparable for pr-bmem and wild-type pr-b
(fig. 5b). because pr-bmem is not exclusively membrane, we cannot determine whether it activates src in
the cytoplasm or in the cell membrane. however,
these results provide further evidence that src activation is mediated by pr outside the nucleus and that
src signaling complexes must be limiting whether pr

a, mcf-7c4-12 cells stably expressing gfp-pr-b or gfp-pr-a were treated with vehicle [ethanol (etoh)] or r5020 (10 nm)
for 2 h. cells were then fixed and examined by a digital deconvoluted fluorescence microscope. figures represent a single
z-section of each image. b, same as a except t47dc42 stably expressing nontagged pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3, or pr-a were treated
with vehicle (ethanol) or r5020 (10 nm) for 2 h and pr was detected by indirect immunofluorescence with a pr-specific
monoclonal antibody, 1294. c, same as b except cos-7 cells were transiently transfected with pr-b or pr-a, and treated with
vehicle (ethanol) or r5020 for 2 h.

366 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

is located in the cytoplasm or associated with the cell
membrane.
progestin activation of src mediated by pr-sh3
domain interaction is sufficient to induce
activation of a mapk-dependent nuclear
transcription factor, elk-1
because mapk is capable of phosphorylating and
activating certain nuclear transcription factor targets
suggests that activation of the src/mapk signaling
pathway may provide an alternate means for progesterone to regulate gene transcription independent of
the direct nuclear transcriptional activity of pr. to test
this possibility and determine whether transient activation of src/mapk by progestin is sufficient enough
to be of functional consequence, we analyzed the
effect of progestin on activation of a mapk-dependent
transcription factor target, elk-1. the c-terminal transcriptional activation domain of elk-1 fused to the
heterologous dna binding domain of gal-4 translocates to the nucleus and mediates transcription of a
gal4-responsive reporter gene (7x uas-luc) in response to phosphorylation by mapk (39). t47d cells
stably expressing different forms of pr were cotransfected with gal4dbd-elk-1 and a 7xuas-luciferase
reporter. in cells expressing pr-b, treatment with
r5020 induced an elk-1-mediated transactivation that
was nearly as efficient as that induced by egf (fig. 6).
no progestin induction was observed in cells expressing pr-b⌬sh3, or that lacked pr-b (fig. 6). progestindependent activation of elk-1 was blocked by the src
kinase inhibitor,  xxxd1307xxx , but not the inactive analog pp3,
and by the mek inhibitor  xxxd3462xxx , indicating this response to progesterone is dependent on both src and

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

mapk (fig. 6). consistent with the inability of pr-a to
mediate activation of src/mapk, progestin-dependent
elk-1 activation was not observed in cells expressing
pr-a (data not shown). similar results of progestin
activation of elk-1 were extended to endometrium carcinoma cells (hec-1b) cotransfected with different
forms of pr and gal4dbd elk-1 (data not shown).
because the reporter gene lacks a pre and has a dna
binding site only for the elk-1 construct, enables the
conclusion that progesterone induction is pre independent via mapk-dependent phosphorylation of
elk-1 (fig. 6). these results show that the transient
activation of src and mapk mediated by the sh3
domain interaction motif of pr, is sufficient to influence gene transcription through mapk-dependent activation of other transcription factors.
progestin induction of the endogenous  xxxg366xxx 
gene is dependent on pr-b coupling with the
sh3 domain of src
the elk-1 results prompted us to determine whether
endogenous target genes can also be regulated
through cytoplasmic signaling pathways activated by
pr through its sh3 domain binding motif. two known
target genes were analyzed,  xxxg366xxx  ( xxxg366xxx ) that
lacks a progesterone response element (pre) (40–42),
and sgk (serum and glucocorticoid regulated kinase)
that contains a functional glucocorticoid response element (gre)/pre that mediates glucocorticoid or progesterone induction of transcription (43–45). pr-negative t47dc42 cells stably expressing pr-a, pr-b,
pr-b⌬sh3, or lacz as a vector control were treated
with vehicle (ethanol) or 10 nm r5020 (6 h), rna was
prepared and  xxxg366xxx  and sgk mrna levels were

fig. 6. progestin-induced transactivation of elk-1 is dependent on the sh3 domain binding motif of pr, src, and mapk
t47dc42 cells stably expressing pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3 or gfp (no pr vector control) were transiently transfected with gal4dbdelk1 and a 7xuas-luc reporter gene and then treated with and without 10 nm r5020 for 16 h. a, some cells were pretreated for
30 min with the mek inhibitor uo126 (30 ␮m). b, other cells were pretreated with the src inhibitor  xxxd1307xxx  (10 ␮m), or the inactive
analog, pp3 (10 ␮m). cells were also treated with egf (50 ng/ml) as a positive control. values represent fold r5020 or egf
induction of luciferase expression and are the mean of at least three independent determinations ⫾ sem.

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

determined by quantitative real time rt-pcr. in cells
containing pr-b, r5020 induced a 4- to 5-fold stimulation of  xxxg366xxx  expression, whereas no induction
was obtained in cells lacking pr or expressing prb⌬sh3 (fig. 7a). in contrast, sgk was induced 20- to
25-fold by progestin in the presence of either wild-type
pr-b or pr-b⌬sh3 (fig. 7a). both genes are primary
transcriptional targets, as progestin induction was not
inhibited by the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (fig. 7b). to further investigate the role of signaling pathways, cells expressing pr-b were pretreated with uo126 or  xxxd1307xxx  for 30 min before r5020.
both mapk and  xxxg2198xxx  inhibitors partially blocked
r5020 induction of  xxxg366xxx  gene expression. the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (pi3k) inhibitor  xxxd2523xxx 
also attenuated progestin-induced activation of cyclin
d1. gene expression. these inhibitors had no significant effect on progestin induction of sgk (fig. 7c). in

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 367

cells expressing pr-a, treatment with r5020 did not
induce expression of  xxxg366xxx , but sgk expression was
induced, although to a lesser extent than mediated by
pr-b. (fig. 7d). these data indicate that progesterone
regulation of  xxxg366xxx  gene expression is mediated by
pr activation of cell membrane/cytoplasmic signaling
pathways that can converge upon and activate other
nuclear transcription factor targets. the data with
pharmacological inhibitors further indicates the involvement of multiple kinase cascades including src/
mapk and pi3k/akt signaling pathways.
progestin induction of cell cycle progression is
dependent on the src sh3 domain binding motif
of pr
because  xxxg366xxx  plays a key role in cell cycle progression through g1-s, we asked whether pr activation of

fig. 7. progestin-induction of sgk and  xxxg366xxx  genes is mediated by distinct pathways
a, t47dc42 cells expressing pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3, or no pr (lac-z as vector control) were treated with vehicle (⫺) or r5020 (10
nm) for 6 h, total rna was prepared and analyzed for sgk and  xxxg366xxx  mrna by real time quantitative rt-pcr as described
in materials and methods. data were expressed as  xxxg366xxx  or sgk rna relative to  xxxg861xxx  rna. b, same as a, except that cells
from t47dc42 cells expressing wild-type pr-b were treated with ⫾ 10 nm r5020 for 6 h in the presence and absence of 10 ␮g/ml
cycloheximide. c, same as a, except cells expressing wild-type pr-b were pretreated for 30 min with the src, inhibitor ( xxxd1307xxx , 10
␮m), the mek inhibitor uo126 (30 ␮m), or the pi3k inhibitor  xxxd2523xxx  (30 ␮m). d, same as a except comparison of sgk and cyclin
d1 rna expression was between cells expressing pr-b and pr-a. all values represent the mean of at least three independent
experiments ⫾ sem.

368 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

signaling pathways through coupling with sh3 domain
of src and perhaps other signaling molecules has a
role in the well-known biphasic effect of progestins on
cell cycle progression. quiescent t47dc42 expressing pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3 or pr-a grown on 2.5% charcoal-stripped fetal bovine serum, were treated with
r5020 and analyzed at different times by flow cytometry to determine the distribution of cells in phases of
the cell cycle. in cells expressing pr-b, treatment with
progestin for 24 h resulted in a substantial (70%) in-

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

crease of cells in g2/m ⫹s that declined slightly at
48 h of hormone treatment (fig. 8a). by 72 h of treatment with r5020, the percentage of cells in g2/ m ⫹
s decreased below that of the starting cell population
in the absence of hormone, whereas the percentage of
cells in g1 phase increased (fig. 8a). progestin stimulation of cell cycle progression was substantially reduced in cells expressing pr-b⌬sh3 or pr-a and no
effect of progestin was observed in the absence of pr
(lacz control). the cell cycle arrest phase (72–96 h)

fig. 8. progestin-induced cell cycle progression mediated by pr-b is dependent on the sh3 domain interaction motif
a, t47dc42 cells stably expressing pr-b, pr-a, pr-b⌬sh3 or no receptor (lacz control) were treated for the times indicated
with 10 nm r5020, harvested and subjected to cell cycle analyses by flow cytometry as described in materials and methods. the
y-axis represents change in percentage of cells in g2m and s phase as compared with the zero time control. the figure shows
a single representative experiment of three independent experiments. b, time course of progestin induction of  xxxg366xxx  mrna.
t47dc42 cells expressing pr-b and treated with ⫾ 10 nm r5020 for indicated times were analyzed for expression of ccdn1
mrna by real-time quantitative rt-pcr as described in materials and methods. data were expressed as fold r5020 induction
of  xxxg366xxx  rna expression after normalization to  xxxg861xxx  rna.

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

induced by r5020 was also diminished in cells expressing pr-a or pr-⌬sh3 as compared with wildtype pr-b. a time course of progestin induction of
 xxxg366xxx  mrna expression showed that stimulation
was first observed at 3 h, peaked at 8–10 h and declined thereafter (fig. 8b). this transient induction of
 xxxg366xxx  gene expression correlated with the biphasic
effect of progestin on inducing cell cycle progression
followed by arrest in g1. taken together, these results
support the conclusion that pr activation of a src/
mapk/ xxxg366xxx  signaling pathway, independent of
the transcriptional activity of pr, has a key role in
mediating the effect of progesterone on the cell cycle
in breast cancer cells.

discussion
steroid receptors have been extensively characterized as ligand-dependent transcriptional activators
that bind to hormone response elements in the regulatory regions of target genes and recruit coactivators that facilitate chromatin remodeling and assembly of the transcription complex (46, 47). more
recently, they have been described to also function
as mediators of rapid steroid activation of protein
kinase signaling pathways independent of their transcriptional activity (48). an important question is the
biological significance of the nontranscriptional activity of steroid receptors. to gain insights into this
question, we have analyzed the influence of point
mutations in pr that disrupts interaction with sh3
domain of src and other signaling molecules without
affecting transcriptional activity, on progesterone
regulation of gene expression and induction of cell
cycle progression.
progesterone is known to induce transcriptional activation of  xxxg366xxx , but this target gene lacks a pre
and the mechanism of regulation has not been well
defined (15, 40–42). we show here that progestin induction of  xxxg366xxx  gene expression is dependent on
pr coupling with sh3 domain of src. induction occurred only with wild-type pr-b, not with pr-b⌬sh3
or pr-a that are unable to activate src or mapk, and
was sensitive to mapk and src inhibitors (fig. 7).
however, progestin induction was only partially
blocked by the mek inhibitor  xxxd3462xxx  or the src inhibitor ( xxxd1307xxx ), indicating involvement of src/mapk as well
as other signaling pathways. progestins have been
reported to induce activation of the pi3k/akt pathway
in breast cancer cells (40) and we previously showed
that pr binds to sh3 domains of a select group of
other kinases including the p85 subunit of pi3k (31).
thus, mutations in the sh3 domain interaction motif of
pr likely disrupt progestin activation of other signaling
pathways. indeed, the pi3k inhibitor  xxxd2523xxx  substantially reduced progestin induction of  xxxg366xxx 
gene expression suggesting an involvement of p13k/
akt (fig. 7). the  xxxg366xxx  promoter has regulatory

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 369

elements for multiple transcription factors including
specificity protein-1, camp response element binding
protein, c-jun, nuclear factor (nf)-␬b and ets, any of
which could be nuclear targets of progestin-activated
signaling pathways (41, 49–51). kurachi and colleagues (40) reported that mpa induction of  xxxg366xxx 
expression in breast cancer cells was dependent on
activation of a pi3k/akt/nf␬b␣ nongenomic signaling
pathway. whether mpa stimulated binding of nf␬b␣
to the  xxxg366xxx  promoter was not explored. based on
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, pr was reported to be recruited to the  xxxg366xxx  promoter
through tethering with c-jun bound to an ap-1 site (41).
the tethered pr/c-jun complex itself could be a nuclear target of a progesterone activate membrane/
cytoplasmic signaling pathways; an interesting possibility that has not been explored. further studies will
be needed to more completely define the mechanisms, signaling pathways and other transcription factor targets that mediate progestin induction of the
 xxxg366xxx  gene.
the sgk gene contains a functional gre/pre in the
upstream promoter, is inducible by either glucocorticoids or progestins, and glucocorticoid induction was
shown to be dependent on gr binding to the gre/
pre (43–45). by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we have detected a progestin-dependent pr recruitment to this region of the sgk promoter indicating
that progesterone regulation is also mediated by pr
interaction with the gre/pre (unpublished observations from melvin, v., v. boonyaratanakornkit, and
d. p. edwards). progestin induction of sgk was mediated equally by wild-type pr-b and pr-b⌬sh3 (fig.
7a), and was insensitive to pharmacological inhibitors
of src, mapk, and p13 kinase (fig. 7c). thus, rapid
activation of src/mapk and other signaling pathways
was of no consequence for progestin induction of sgk.
whether pr activation of signaling pathways as a general rule is required for target genes lacking pres, and
not for genes regulated by direct pr binding with
pres, remains to be determined. gene expression
microarray experiments are currently being conducted
with breast cancer cells expressing wt pr-b and prb⌬sh3 to identify and categorize progesterone-regulated target genes in this manner. the ability of pr to
regulate gene expression by activation of signaling
pathways that converge on other transcription factors
potentially provides a mechanism to expand the diversity of progesterone target genes.
 xxxg366xxx  is a key cell cycle regulatory protein that
promotes g1-s phase transition and is an important
mitogenic sensor linking intracellular signals to the cell
cycle machinery (52, 53). therefore, as a potential
cellular consequence of progestin induction of cyclin
d1 expression through pr activation of signaling pathways, we examined cell cycle regulation. progestin
stimulation of cell cycle progression was observed in
cells expressing pr-b but was minimal in the presence of pr-b⌬sh3 or pr-a that are not capable of
activating src/mapk signaling (figs. 2 and 6) or in-

370

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

ducing  xxxg366xxx  gene expression (fig. 7). consistent
with the biphasic effect of progestins on cell cycle to
stimulate entry and progression followed by arrest in
g1, induction of  xxxg366xxx  mrna was transient. although the decline of  xxxg366xxx  mrna occurred earlier
than the peak induction of cells in g2/m ⫹ s at 48 h,
 xxxg366xxx  protein levels stimulated by r5020 in breast
cancer cells was reported to remain elevated out to
48 h (15). these results indicate that pr activation of
signal transduction pathways by coupling with the
sh3 domain of src, or perhaps other signaling molecules, is involved in mediating the proliferative effects
of progesterone on breast cancer cells through induction of key cell cycle regulatory genes.  xxxg366xxx  as a
progesterone target gene regulated in this manner is of
potential relevance because it is required for normal
mammary gland development (54), is frequently overexpressed in breast cancer (55), its overexpression in
mice promotes development of mammary tumors (56),
and inactivation of  xxxg366xxx  protects against mammary tumor formation induced by neu and ras oncogenes (57). gene amplification accounts for only approximately 30% of the overexpression of  xxxg366xxx  in
breast cancer (58) suggesting that epigenetic factors
such as progesterone up-regulation of gene expression also plays a role.
alternative mechanisms for how progesterone induces rapid activation of src and mapk have been
reported. the ntd of pr-b has been shown to physically associate with the lbd of unliganded er␣ and it
was proposed that unliganded er␣, not pr in the
complex, directly activates src in response to binding
progesterone (59). however, progestin-induced activation of the src/mapk signaling pathway that leads
to  xxxg366xxx  expression and cell cycle progression was
obtained here with t47dc42 cells that lack er␣. thus,
our results support the importance of the direct interaction of pr with sh3 domain of src without the need
for an intermediate interaction through unliganded
er␣. a novel membrane g protein-coupled receptor
(mpr) has been identified that binds progesterone and
was reported to mediate progestin-induced oocyte
maturation in sea trout and activation of mapk and
inhibition of camp production in pr-negative mda231 breast cancer cells and in human myometrial cells
(60, 61). the relationship between mpr and conventional pr in mediating progestin-induced activation of
the src/mapk/ xxxg366xxx  signaling pathway observed
here has not been explored. whether mpr is expressed in t47d or mcf-7 cells is not known. if mpr
is not expressed, our data would indicate that conventional pr alone is sufficient for response to progesterone and mpr plays no role. if mpr is expressed, this raises the possibility of a functional
cooperation between mpr and conventional pr. more
studies will be needed to determine the biological
significance of mpr in mediating nongenomic actions
of progesterone in breast cancer cells.
the a and b isoforms of pr have distinct transcriptional activities that can vary in a cell type- and pro-

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

moter context-dependent manner (24). here we show
that pr-a and pr-b also have different activities with
respect to progestin activation of signaling pathways.
pr-b, but not pr-a, was able to mediate progestin
activation of src and mapk (fig. 2). pr-a also failed to
mediate progestin induction of mapk-dependent
elk-1 transactivation (fig. 6), endogenous  xxxg366xxx 
expression (fig. 7) and cell cycle progression (fig. 8).
the inability of pr-a to mediate some of these effects
has been observed previously (29, 40). migliaccio et al.
(29) suggested that the region of the ntd unique to
pr-b must be responsible for mediating activation of
 xxxg2198xxx . however, the polyproline motif that interacts
with sh3 domain of src lies within a region of the ntd
common to both pr isoforms. our results suggest the
inability of pr-a to activate src is due to a different
intracellular localization than pr-b. in both live and
fixed cells, pr-b localized to both the nucleus and
cytoplasm in the presence and absence of progestin,
whereas pr-a was mainly nuclear (figs. 3 and 4). lim
et al. (62) using transiently transfected gfp-pr-b and
gfp-pr-a in different cell types also observed a more
nuclear localization of pr-a. this difference was questioned to be due to a property of transiently expressed
pr that might not be observed with endogenous pr,
or with stably expressed receptors in replicating cells
(62). our data showing that the differential localization
of pr-a and pr-b was similar whether receptors were
expressed transiently or stably in replicating cells suggests this is a fundamental property of the pr isoforms. the mechanism responsible for differential subcellular localization of pr-a and pr-b is not known.
pr-a and pr-b have been proposed to adopt distinct
conformations that influence the nls and nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling (62). consistent with this idea, the
slower intranuclear mobility of pr-a than pr-b observed by frap assay (supplemental figure 1) suggested that pr-a may have unique interactions with
other proteins, or the nuclear matrix, that promotes a
more efficient nuclear retention.
experiments that forcedly targeted pr to different
intracellular locations provided evidence that pr activation of src occurs outside of the nucleus. deletion of
the nls of pr-a forcing it to localize to the cytoplasm,
enabled pr-a to mediate progestin-induced activation
of  xxxg2198xxx , whereas wild-type pr-a that is mostly nuclear does not activate src (fig. 5a). conversely, pr-b
forcedly targeted to the nucleus with multiple simian
virus (sv) 40 nls tags failed to mediate progestin
activation of src (fig. 5b) as does native pr-b that is
distributed between the cytoplasm and nucleus (figs.
3 and 4). to determine whether the cell membrane or
the cytoplasm is the compartment outside of the nucleus where pr activates signaling pathways, we attempted to target pr to the plasma membrane by
tagging it with palmitoylation sequences. although
prmem mediated progestin-induced activation of src,
it did not localize exclusively in the cell membrane,
some cytoplasmic localization was also observed (fig.
5b). thus, src activation could be mediated by either

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

pr in the membrane or in the cytoplasm; the distinction cannot made under these conditions. however,
the fact that the magnitude of progestin-induced activation mediated by prmem, which is disproportionately much higher in the cell membrane, was similar to
that of wild-type pr-b, suggested the src cellular
signaling machinery is limiting and that only small
amounts of pr are required in the membrane or the
cytoplasm to generate a response.
biochemical cell fractionation and immunocytochemistry experiments have provided evidence for association of a small subpopulation of cellular er (both
ectopically expressed and endogenous er) with the
plasma membrane in different cell types. studies have
further shown that er associates with cell membranes
through interaction with other proteins such as  xxxg346xxx , striatin, shc, or  xxxg1145xxx  and through lipid
modification of er by palmitoylation (see review in ref.
63). similar studies of whether and how pr localizes to
plasma membrane in mammalian cells have not been
done. with breast cancer cells that stably express
receptors, we found that localization of pr-b outside
the nucleus was fairly homogenous throughout the
cytoplasm with little evidence of pr in the plasma
membrane (fig. 3, a and b). however, some punctate
cell membrane immunostaining was detected with
transiently transfected pr-b in cos-1 cells (fig. 3c).
further studies are needed to determine whether a
subpopulation of pr in mammalian cells associates
with the plasma membrane and whether src activation
is mediated by pr at the cell membrane or by transient
interaction with signaling molecules in the cytoplasm.

materials and methods
materials
r5020 (promegestone) was obtained from dupont/new england nuclear products (boston, ma). 1294/h9 is a mouse
monoclonal antibody that recognizes both human pr-a and
pr-b isoforms (64). mmtv-luciferase adenovirus was a gift
from sergio onate, university of pittsburgh and ␣327 is a
mouse monoclonal antibody that recognizes total  xxxg2198xxx  (gift
from dr. j. brugge, harvard medical school).
plasmid constructions
pr-b cdna were inserted into ecori and smai sites of
pegfp-c1 to create pgfp-pr-b. to create pgfp-pr-bmpro
and pgfp-pr-a, pr-bmpro or pr-a cdna were inserted in
xhoi/ecori and ecori/psti sites of pegfp-c2, respectively.
to create pyfppr-bnuc, the stop codon in pr-b cdna
was first mutated from tga to tgt in vitro using pfu-turbo
dna polymerase (stratagene, la jolla, ca) in the presence of
sense and antisense strand-annealing oligonucleotides with
mutated sequences. mutations were confirmed by dna sequencing. pr-b cdna with the stop codon mutated was then
inserted in bspei and xhoi sites of peyfpnuc (clontech, palo
alto, ca) in-frame with 4xsv40nls at the c terminus, generating a fusion pr-b protein with yellow fluorescent protein
(yfp)-tagged at the n terminus and 4xsv40nls at the c
terminus. to create pyfp-pr-bmem, wild-type pr-b with an

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 371

intact stop codon was first inserted in bspei and xhoi sites of
peyfpnuc (clontech) in-frame with yfp at the n terminus
(peyfp-pr-b). an agei-psti fragment containing palmitoylation sequences was excised form peyfpmem and inserted
into agei-psti site at the n terminus of the yfp sequence of
peyfpr-b in-frame with the yfp sequence, generating a
fusion protein of n-terminally yfp containing palmitoylation
membrane insertion sequence tagged pr-b. sequences
were confirmed by dna sequencing.
to generate pcdnai-pr-b⌬nls and pcdnai-pr-a⌬nls, sequences between amino acid 591–644 of pr-b or 427–480 of
pr-a sequence in pcdnai-pr-b or pcdnai-pr-a were deleted by exsite pcr-based site directed mutagenesis as
described by manufacturer (stratagene) using the following
oligonucleotides as primers 5⬘-ctcgaggtcagagttgtgagagcactggatgctgttgctc-3⬘ and 5⬘-gaagaccttacagctcccacaggtaaggacacca-3⬘. xhoi site was introduced and used for screening of pr deletion mutants.
mutated sequences were confirmed by dna sequencing.
cell cultures
pr-negative t47dy (36), t47dc42 (34), and mcf-7c4-12
(35) breast cancer cells were provided by k. horwitz (university of colorado), v. craig jordan (dana farber), and wade
welshans (university of missouri), respectively. human pr-b,
pr-b⌬sh3 or pr-a cdna were inserted into xhoi and ecori
sites of pzeosv2(⫺) (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca). cells were
stably transfected with pr expression plasmids using effectene as described by the manufacturer (qiagen, valencia,
ca). cells transfected with gfp-tagged human pr-b, prb⌬sh3, or pr-a in pegfp-c2 (clontech) were selected as
single colonies in 1 mg/ml  xxxg418xxx  (invitrogen). cells transfected with pr-b, pr-a, pr-b⌬sh3 in pzeosv2(⫺) (invitrogen) were selected as single colonies in 250 ␮g/ml zeocin
(invitrogen). for experiments, cells were maintained overnight in phenol red-free mem in 5% fetal bovine serum that
had been treated with dextran-coated charcoal (dcc-fbs)
for 24 h before hormone treatment (10 nm r5020) in the same
medium supplement with 0.2% dcc-fbs, 2.5% dcc-fbs
or with 5% dcc-fbs.
transient transfection and luciferase assays
for r5020-mediated elk activation experiments, cells stably
expressing pr-b, pr-⌬sh3, or pr-a (5 ⫻ 105 cells per well
in six-well dishes) were transiently transfected with gal4dbdelk and 7xuas-luc reporter plasmids using effectene as
described by the manufacturer (qiagen) in mem supplement with 5% dcc-fbs. after 18 h, cells were rinsed with
serum-free medium, replaced with mem supplemented with
0.2% dcc-fbs with ethanol (vehicle control) or 10 nm
r5020, and incubated for additional 24 h. for r5020-mediated induction of mmtv-luc, 5 ⫻ 105 cells per well in six-well
dishes were transduced with mmtv-luciferase adenovirus at
moi ⫽ 5 in mem supplement with 5% dcc-fbs. after 18 h,
cells were rinsed with serum-free medium, replaced with
mem supplemented with 5% dcc-fbs with ethanol (vehicle
control) or 10 nm r5020, and incubated for additional 24 h.
cells were then harvested and assayed for luciferase activities as described (65, 66). luciferase activities were normalized to total cellular protein to generate relative luciferase
units. data represent average relative luciferase values from
three independent experiments ⫾ sem.
sds-page and immunoblotting
proteins were separated by 8% sds-page and analyzed by
immunoblotting as previously described (65, 66) and detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (amersham pharmacia biotech, piscataway, nj).

372 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

src kinase assays
cos-7 cells were plated at 1.1 ⫻ 106/100-mm dish in dmem
supplemented with 5% fbs and incubated overnight and
transfected with plasmids indicated in the figures by an attenuated adenovirus-mediated procedure as previously described (31, 33). after transfection, cells were incubated for
24 h in phenol red-free dmem supplemented with 5% dccfbs, followed by 48 h in dmem supplemented with 0.2%
dcc-fbs. hormones were added for the times indicated and
cells were lysed and  xxxg530xxx  activity was assayed by
immunoprecipitation using incorporation of ␣ p-32-atp into
enolase as substrate as previously described (31).
alternatively, src kinase activity was determined by the
biosource src [py418] elisa kit according to manufacturer’s
protocol (biosource, camarillo, ca). t47d c42 cells stably
expressing pr-b, pr-b⌬sh3, or pr-a were plated at 4.5 ⫻
106/60 mm dish in mem supplemented with 5% fbs overnight. cells were then rinsed with serum-free medium and
grown in mem supplemented with 2.5% dcc-fbs for 48 h.
cells were rinsed once with serum-free medium, replaced
with mem supplemented with 0.2% dcc-fbs and incubated
overnight. four hours before hormone treatment, medium
was replaced with fresh mem supplemented with 0.2% dccfbs. cells were treated with either ethanol control or 10 nm
r5020 as indicated in the figure. cell were lysed with cell
extraction buffer [10 mm tris, ph 7.4; 100 mm nacl; 1 mm
edta; 1 mm egta; 1 mm naf; 2 mm sodium pyrophosphate;
20 mm sodium vanadate; 1% triton x-100; 10% glycerol;
0.1% sds; 0.5%  xxxd1835xxx ; 1 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride; and protease inhibitors cocktail (roche applied science, indianapolis, in)]. diluted cell lysates with equal
amounts of protein, along with activated src-[py418] standards were added to microtiter wells precoated with total src
antibody and incubated for 2 h at 4c. wells were washed,
replaced with an antibody that recognizes the  xxxd1075xxx  [p418] in the activation loop of src, and incubate for
1 h. wells were then washed, replaced with antirabbit igghorseradish peroxidase for 30 min and followed by a stabilized chromogen for another 30 min. absorbance intensities
of stopped reactions were detected at 450 nm with a molecular devices elisa plate reader. relative src-[py418] concentrations were determined by using standard curve plotting
absorbance at 450 nm against known concentrations of srcpy[418]. results represent average src-[py418] ⫾ sem from
three replicate experiments.
real-time rt-pcr analysis
total rna was isolated from cells using versagene rna
purification kit with deoxyribonuclease treatment (gentra
systems, minneapolis, mn). equal amounts of total rna [500
ng for  xxxg366xxx  and sgk and 50 ng for glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase ( xxxg861xxx ) per reaction] were analyzed by real-time pcr (abi prism 7700 sequence detector,
applied biosystems) with taqman primers and probe for
 xxxg366xxx  gene (forward primer, 5⬘-gtcctactaccgcctcacacg-3⬘; reverse primer 5⬘-gggcttcgatctgctcctg-3⬘;
vic (applied biosystems) probe, 5⬘-aagtgtgacccagactgcctccgg-tetramethyl carboxyrhodamine) for sgk gene
(forward primer, 5⬘-cacaacagcacaacatccacc-3⬘; reverse primer 5⬘-ggctgcttatgaagcacctca-3⬘; fam (6carboxy fluorescein) probe, 5⬘-tggcacgccggagtatctcgc-tetramethyl carboxyrhodamine) and with a taqman
probe set for  xxxg861xxx  from applied biosystems. reactions
were carried out under universal conditions using one-step
reverse-transcription pcr reagents (applied biosystem), with
the following cycling parameters: 48 c for 30 min, 95 c for 10
min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 c for 15 sec and 60 c for 1
min. cycle threshold values were analyzed using the sds 1.9
software (pe applied biosystems, foster city, ca), and relative quantification of sgk and ccdn1 expression was de-

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

termined using the comparative cycle threshold method (abi
prism 7700 sds user bulletin no. 2; applied biosystems).
rna values were normalized to endogenous  xxxg861xxx . data
represent average values from three independent experiments ⫾ sem.
frap live cell imaging
live cell fluorescence imaging was carried out with cells
stably transfected with gfp-pr as previously described with
minor modifications (67). briefly, 2 ⫻ 106 cells were grown on
glass-bottom delta-t dishes (bioptech inc., butler, pa) containing mem supplemented with 5% dcc-fbs at 37 c for
16–18 h. the same medium with or without ligands was
recirculated with a peristaltic pump during the analysis. frap
analysis was carried out at 37 c on a zeiss lsm 510 laser
confocal microscope. a single z-section was imaged before
and at 2-sec time intervals after bleaching. the bleach was
carried out at 458 nm and at maximum power for 150 iterations of a rectangular area representing approximately 25%
of the nuclear volume. fluorescence intensities of regions of
interest were obtained using lsm software and data were
analyzed using microsoft excel.
for live cell quantitation of receptor localization, 4 ⫻ 106
cells were plated on 60-mm glass bottom dishes in mem
supplemented with 5% dcc-fbs overnight. cells were
treated with ethanol or 10 nm r5020 for 2 h and a single
z-section of live-cell images from 15–20 cells per treatment
group were collected under a zeiss lsm 510 laser confocal
microscope. fluorescence intensities of the whole cell and
nucleus were obtained using lsm software and data were
analyzed using microsoft excel.
indirect immunofluorescence
hela cells (4 ⫻ 104 cells) in four-well chamber slides were
grown in dmem supplemented with 5% dcc-fbs and transduced for 24 h with recombinant adenovirus vectors encoding wild-type pr-b, pr-a or pr-b⌬sh3. for cos 7 cells, 5 ⫻
104 cells were transiently transfected with various pr constructs using fugene 6 transfection reagent as described by
the manufacturer (roche applied science). cells were then
treated with ethanol or 10 nm r5020 for 2 h. after hormone
treatment, cells were rinsed once with ice-cold pbs, fixed
with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at 4 c, and permeabilized with 0.5% triton x-100 in pbs for 4 min. cells were
washed twice with pbs and blocked with 1% bsa in pbs for
1 h before incubating with primary antibody in 1% bsa-fbs
(3.5 ␮g/ml of 1294/h9) for an addition hour. cells were
washed three times with pbs and incubated with secondary
antibody at 1:1000 dilution (alexa 568 conjugated with goat
antimouse antibody, molecular probes, eugene, or). cells
were washed three times with pbs and 4⬘,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (molecular probes) was added at 1:5000 dilution in the second pbs wash for nuclear staining. slides were
mounted using vectashield reagent (vector laboratories,
burlingame, ca). digital confocal images were collected using a fluorescence microscope with delta vision system (applied precision, issaquah, wa).

acknowledgments
received august 15, 2006. accepted november 21, 2006.
address all correspondence and requests for reprints to:
dean p. edwards, department of molecular and cellular biology, one baylor plaza, mail stop bcm-130, houston,
texas 77030. e-mail: deane@bcm.tmc.edu.
this work received grant support from the national institutes of health (dk49030, to d.p.e.) and the american cancer society (rsg-06-074-01-tbe to v.b.).

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

author disclosure: v.b., e.m., l.s., m.m, and b.c. have
nothing to disclose. d.p.e. receives royalties for monoclonal
antibodies to steroid receptors from dako, upstate, affinity
bioreagents, stressgen, santa cruz biotechnology, and
phosphosolutions.

references
1. lydon jp, demayo fj, conneely om, o’malley bw 1996
reproductive phenotypes of the  xxxg1737xxx 
null mutant mouse. j steroid biochem mol biol 56:67–77
2. brisken c 2002 hormonal control of alveolar development and its implications for breast carcinogenesis. j
mammary gland biol neoplasia 7:39–48
3. fernandez-valdivia r, mukherjee a, mulac-jericevic b,
conneely om, demayo fj, amato p, lydon jp 2005
revealing progesterone’s role in uterine and mammary
gland biology: insights from the mouse. semin reprod
med 23:22–37
4. brisken c, park s, vass t, lydon jp, o’malley bw,
weinberg ra 1998 a paracrine role for the epithelial
 xxxg1737xxx  in mammary gland development.
proc natl acad sci usa 95:5076–5081
5. hofseth lj, raafat am, osuch jr, pathak dr, slomski
ca, haslam sz 1999 hormone replacement therapy with
estrogen or estrogen plus  xxxd2554xxx 
is associated with increased epithelial proliferation in the
normal postmenopausal breast. j clin endocrinol metab
84:4559–4565
6. anderson e, clarke rb 2004 steroid receptors and cell
cycle in normal mammary epithelium. j mammary gland
biol neoplasia 9:3–13
7. lydon jp, ge g, kittrell fs, medina d, o’malley bw 1999
murine mammary gland carcinogenesis is critically dependent on  xxxg1737xxx  function. cancer res
59:4276–4284
8. balana me, lupu r, labriola l, charreau eh, elizalde pv
1999 interactions between progestins and heregulin
(hrg) signaling pathways: hrg acts as mediator of progestins proliferative effects in mouse mammary adenocarcinomas. oncogene 18:6370–6379
9. chlebowski rt, hendrix sl, langer rd, stefanick ml,
gass m, lane d, rodabough rj, gilligan ma, cyr mg,
thomson ca, khandekar j, petrovitch h, mctiernan a,
whi investigators 2003 influence of estrogen plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy
postmenopausal women: the women’s health initiative
randomized trial. jama 289:3243–3253
10. writing group for the women’s health initiative investigators 2004 effects of  xxxd2044xxx  in
postmenopausal women with hysterectomy: the women’s health initiative randomized controlled trial. jama
291:1701–1712
11. sutherland rl, prall owj, watts ckw, musgrove ea
1998 estrogen and progestin regulation of cell cycle
progression. j mammary gland biol and neoplasia
3:63–72
12. thuneke i, schulte hm, bamberger am 2000 biphasic
effect of medroxyprogesterone-acetate (mpa) treatment
on proliferation and  xxxg366xxx  gene transcription in t47d
breast cancer cells. breast cancer res treat 63:243–248
13. groshong sd, owen gi, grimison b, schauer ie, todd
md, langan ta, sclafani ra, lange ca, horwitz kb 1997
biphasic regulation of breast cancer cell growth by
progesterone: role of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, p21 and  xxxg419xxx . 11:1593–1607
14. musgrove ea, lee cs, sutherland rl 1991 progestins
both stimulate and inhibit breast cancer cell cycle progression while increasing expression of transforming
growth factor ␣,  xxxg681xxx  receptor, c-fos,
and c-myc genes. mol cell biol 11:5032–5043

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 373

15. skildum a, faivre e, lange ca 2005 progesterone receptors induce cell cycle progression via activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases. mol endocrinol 19:
327–339
16. swarbrick a, lee csl, sutherland rl, musgrove ea
2000 cooperation of  xxxg419xxx  and p18ink4c in progestinmediated cell cycle arrest in t- xxxd751xxx  breast cancer cells.
mol cell biol 20:2581–2591
17. musgrove ea, swarbrick a, lee csl, cornish al, sutherland rl 1998 mechanisms of cyclin-dependent kinase
inactivation by progestins. mol cell biol 18:1812–1825
18. moore mr, conover jl, franks km 2000 progestin effects on long-term growth, death, and  xxxg251xxx  in breast
cancer cells. biochem biophys res commun 277:
650–654
19. ory k, lebeau j, levalois c, bishay k, fouchet p, allemand i, therwath a, chevillard s 2001 apoptosis inhibition mediated by  xxxd2554xxx  treatment of breast cancer cell lines. breast cancer res treat
68:187–198
20. lin vc-l, ng eh, aw se, tan mg-k, ng eh-l, bay bh
2000 progesterone induces focal adhesion in breast cancer cells mda-mb-231 transfected with progesterone
receptor complementary dna. mol endocrinol 14:
348–358
21. kastner p, krust a, turcotte b, stropp u, tora l, gronemeyer h, chambon p 1990 two distinct estrogen-regulated promoters generate transcripts encoding two functionally different human  xxxg1737xxx  forms a
and b. embo j 9:1603–1614
22. mulac-jericevic b, mullinax ra, demayo fj, lydon jp,
conneely om 2000 subgroup of reproductive functions
of progesterone mediated by  xxxg1737xxx -b
isoform. science 289:1751–1754
23. mulac-jericevic b, lydon jp, demayo fj, conneely om
2003 defective mammary gland morphogenesis in mice
lacking the  xxxg1737xxx  b isoform. pnas 100:
9744–9749
24. shyamala g, yang s, silberstein g, barcellos-hoff mh,
dale e 1998 transgenic mice carrying an imbalance in
the native ratio of a to b forms of  xxxg1737xxx 
exhibit developmental abnormalities in mammary glands.
proc natl acad sci usa 95:696–701
25. giangrande ph, mcdonnel dp 1999 the a and b isoforms of the human  xxxg1737xxx : two functionally different transcription factors encoded by a single gene. recent prog horm res 54:291–313
26. richer jk, jacobsen bm, manning ng, abel mg, wolf
dm, horwitz kb 2002 differential gene regulation by the
two  xxxg1737xxx  isoforms in human breast
cancer cells. j biol chem 277:5209–5218
27. mote pa, leary ja, avery ka, sandelin k, chenevixtrench g, kconfab investigators, kirk ja, clarke cl
2004 germ-line mutations in brca1 or brca2 in the
normal breast are associated with altered expression of
estrogen-responsive proteins and the predominance of
 xxxg1737xxx  a. genes chromosomes cancer
39:236–248
28. hopp ta, weiss hl, hilsenbeck sg, cui y, allred dc,
horwitz kb, fuqua saw 2004 breast cancer patients
with  xxxg1737xxx  pr-a-rich tumors have
poorer disease-free survival rates. clin cancer res 10:
2751–2760
29. migliaccio a, piccolo d, castoria g, di domenico m,
bilancio a, lombardi m, gong w, beato m, auricchio f
1998 activation of the src/ xxxg1077xxx /erk pathway by  xxxg1737xxx  via cross-talk with  xxxg730xxx .
embo j 17:2008–2018
30. castoria g, barone mv, di domenico m, bilancio a,
ametrano d, migliaccio a, auricchio f 1999 non-transcriptional action of  xxxd2037xxx  and progestin triggers
dna synthesis. embo j 18:2500–2510

374 mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375

31. boonyaratanakornkit v, scott m, ribon v, sherman l,
anderson s, maller j, miller w, edwards d 2001  xxxg1737xxx  contains a proline-rich motif that directly
interacts with sh3 domains and activates  xxxg2198xxx  family
tyrosine kinases. mol cell 8:269–280
32. proietti c, salatino m, rosemblit c, carnevale r, pecci
a, kornblihtt ar, molinolo aa, frahm i, charreau eh,
schillaci r, elizalde pv 2005 progestins induce transcriptional activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (stat3) via a jak- and src-dependent
mechanism in breast cancer cells. mol cell biol 25:
4826–4840
33. edwards dp, wardell se, boonyaratanakornkit v 2003
 xxxg1737xxx  interacting coregulatory proteins
and cross talk with cell signaling pathways. j steroid
biochem and mol biol 83:173–186
34. pink jj, bilmoria mm, assikis j, jordan vc 1996 irreversible loss of the  xxxg730xxx  in t47d breast
cancer cells following prolonged estrogen deprivation.
br j cancer 74:1227–1236
35. oesterreich s, zhang p, guler rl, sun x, curran em,
welshons wv, osborne ck and lee av 2001 re-expression of  xxxg730xxx  ␣ in  xxxg730xxx  ␣-negative mcf-7 cells restores both estrogen and insulin-like
growth factor-mediated signaling and growth. cancer
res 61:5771–5777
36. satorius ca, groshong sd, miller ra, powell rl, tung l,
takimoto gs, horwitz kb 1994 new t47d breast cancer
cell lines for the independent study of progesterone b
and a receptors; only antiprogestin-occupied b receptors are switched to transcriptional agonists by camp.
cancer res 54:3868–3877
37. rayasam gv, elbi c, walker da, wolford r, fletcher
tm, edwards d, hager gl 2005 ligand specific dynamics of the  xxxg1737xxx  in living cells and
during chromatin remodeling in vitro. mol cell biol
25:2406–2418
38. guiochon-mantel a, lescop p, christin-maitre s, lossfelt h, perrot-applanat m, milgrom e 1991 nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the  xxxg1737xxx . embo j
12:3587–3598
39. daun r, xie w, burghardt rc, safe s 2001 estrogen
receptor-mediated activation of serum response element
in mcf-7 cells through mapk-dependent phosphorylation of elk-1. j biol chem 276:11590–11598
40. saitoh m, ohmichi m, takahashi k, kawagoe j, ohta t,
doshida m, takahashi t, igarashi h, mori-abe a, du b,
tsutsumi s, kurachi h 2005  xxxd2554xxx  induces cell proliferation through up-regulation of
 xxxg366xxx  expression via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
akt/nuclear factor-␬b cascade in human breast cancer
cells. endocrinology 146:4917–4925
41. cicatiello l, addeo r, sasso a, altucci l, petrizzi vb,
borgo r, cancemi m, caporali s, caristi s, scafoglio c,
teti d, bresciani f, perillo b, weisz a 2004 estrogens
and progesterone promote persistent  xxxg366xxx  gene activation during g1 by inducing transcriptional derepression via c-jun/c-fos/ xxxg730xxx  (progesterone
receptor) complex assembly to a distal regulatory element and recruitment of  xxxg366xxx  to its own gene promoter. mol cell biol 24:7260–7274
42. said tk, conneely om, medina d, o’malley bw, lydon
jp 1997 progesterone, in addition to estrogen, induces
 xxxg366xxx  expression in the murine mammary epithelial
cell, in vivo. endocrinology 138:3933–3939
43. webster mk, goya l, ge y, maiyar ac, firestone gl
1993 characterization of sgk, a novel member of the
serine/threonine protein kinase gene family which is transcriptionally induced by glucocorticoids and serum. mol
cell biol 13:2031–2040
44. itani oa, liu kz, cornish kl, campbell jr, thomas cp
2002 glucocorticoids stimulate human sgk1 gene ex-

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.
53.
54.

55.
56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

pression by activation of a gre in its 5⬘-flanking region.
am j physiol endocrinol metab 283:e971–e979
jeong j-w, lee ky, kwak i, white ld, hilsenbeck sg,
lydon jp, demayo fj 2005 identification of murine
uterine genes regulated in a ligand-dependent manner
by the  xxxg1737xxx . endocriniology 146:
3490–3505
chawla a, repa jj, evans rm, mangelsdorf dj 2001
nuclear receptors and lipid physiology: opening the xfiles. science 294:1866–1870
li x, o’malley bw 2003 unfolding the action of progesterone receptors. j biol chem 278:39261–39264
edwards dp 2005 regulation of signal transduction
pathways by estrogen and progesterone. annu rev
physiol 67:335–376
altucci l, addeo r, cicatiello l, dauvois s, parker mg,
truss m, beato m, sica v, bresciani f, weisz a 1996
17␤-estradiol induces  xxxg366xxx  gene transcription,
p36d1–p34cdk4 complex activation and p105rb
phosphorylation during mitogenic stimulation of g(1)arrested human breast cancer cells. oncogene 12:
2315–2324
sabbah m, courilleau d, mester j, redeuilh g 1999
estrogen induction of the  xxxg366xxx  promoter: involvement of a camp response-like element. proc natl acad
sci usa 96:11217–11222
castro-rivera e, samudio i, safe s 2001 estrogen regulation of  xxxg366xxx  gene expression in zr-75 breast
cancer cells involves multiple enhancer elements. j biol
chem 33:30853–30861
hunter t, pines j 1994 cyclins and cancer; cyclin d and
cdk inhibitors come of age. cell 79:573–582
ewen me, lamb j 2004 the activities of  xxxg366xxx  that
drive tumorigenesis. trends mol med 10:158–162
fantl v, edwards pa, steel jh, jonderhaar bk, dickson
c 1999 impaired mammary gland development in cyll(⫺/⫺) mice during pregnancy and lactation is epithelial
cell autonomous. j mammary gland biol neoplasia
2:335–342
arnold a, papanikolaou a 2005  xxxg366xxx  in breast cancer pathogenesis. j clin oncol 23:4215–4224
wang tc, cardiff rd, zukerberg l, lees e, arnold a,
schmidt ev 1994 mammary hyperplasia and carcinoma
in mmtv- xxxg366xxx  transgenic mice. nature 369:669–671
yu qy, geng y, sicinski p 2001 specific protection
against breast cancers by  xxxg366xxx  ablation. nature
411:1017–1021
buckley mf, sweeney kj, hamilton ja, sini rl, manning
dl, nicholson ri, defazio a, watts ck, musgrove ea,
sutherland rl 1993 expression and amplification of cyclin genes in human breast cancer. oncogene
8:2127–2133
ballaŕe c, uhrig m, bechtold t, sancho e, domenico md,
migliaccio a, auricchio f, beato m 2003 two domains of
the  xxxg1737xxx  interact with the  xxxg730xxx  and are required for progesterone activation of
the  xxxg2198xxx /erk pathway in mammalian cells. mol cell biol
23:1994–2008
zhu y, rice cd, pang y, pace m, thomas p 2003 cloning, expression and characterization of a novel membrane progestin receptor and evidence it is an intermediary in meiotic maturation of fish oocytes. proc natl
acad sci usa 100:2231–2236
karteris e, zervou s, pang y, dong j, hillhouse ew,
randeva hs, thomas p 2006 progesterone signaling in
human myometrium through two novel membrane g protein-coupled receptors: potential role in functional progesterone withdrawal at term. mol endocrinol 20:
1519–1534
lim cs, baumann ct, htun h, xian w, irie m, smith cl,
hager gl 1999 differential localization and activity of the
-a and -b forms of the human  xxxg1737xxx 

boonyaratanakornkit et al. • pr activation of src  xxxg2198xxx 

using green fluorescent protein chimeras. mol endocrinol
13:366–375
63. evinger, aji and levin er 2005 requirement for  xxxg730xxx  ␣ membrane localization and function. steroids 70:361–363
64. press m, spaulding b, groshen s, kaminsky d, hagerty
m, sherman l, christensen k, edwards dp 2002 comparison of different antibodies for detection of  xxxg1737xxx  in breast cancer. steroids 67:799–813
65. boonyaratanakornkit v, melvin v, prendergast p, altman
m, ronfani l, bianchi me, taraseviciene l, nordeen sk,
allergretto ea, edwards dp 1998 high-mobility group
chromatin protein 1 and 2 functionally interact with ste-

mol endocrinol, february 2007, 21(2):359–375 375

roid hormone receptors to enhance their dna binding in
vitro and transcriptional activity in mammalian cells. mol
cell biol 18:4471–4487
66. onãte s, boonyaratanakornkit v, spencer t, tsai s, tsai
m-j, edwards dp, o’malley bw 1998 the  xxxg1510xxx  contains multiple receptor interacting
and activation domains that cooperatively enhance the
activation function 1 (af1) and af2 domains of steroid
receptors. j biol chem 273:12101–12108
67. stenoien dl, patel k, mancini mg, dutertre m, smith cl,
o’malley bw, mancini ma 2001 frap reveals that mobility of  xxxg730xxx -␣ is ligand- and proteosomedependent. nature cell biol 3:15–23

molecular endocrinology is published monthly by the endocrine society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost
professional society serving the endocrine community.

