pe r s pe c t iv e

medicare and erythropoietin

comptroller general of the gao,
as long as dialysis facilities “receive a separate payment for each
administration of each [separately billable] drug and the payment
exceeds the costs of acquiring
the drug, an incentive remains
to use more of these drugs than
necessary.”
under its monitoring policy,
medicare expects that providers,
in addition to following the fda
label instructions for epoetin, will
reduce the dose by 25% if the
patient’s hematocrit exceeds 39.0
(a hemoglobin level of 13.0 g
per deciliter). even if the dose is
not reduced, cms decreases the
payment. this payment-reduction
threshold recognizes clinical variability in maintaining hemoglobin
levels in individual patients. nonetheless, the house committee on
ways and means and others have
criticized the cms policy because
the level that triggers a reduction
in payment is higher than the
fda’s maximum target level for
patient care.
medicare uses a bundled-payment approach to pay for most
services. according to the gao,
extending this approach to all
esrd services would make treatment choices “payment neutral”
and encourage “providers to operate efficiently, as they retain
the difference if medicare’s payment exceeds the costs they in-

cur to provide the services.”1 for
example, providers might administer epoetin to more patients
subcutaneously, which requires
considerably less drug than intravenous administration to achieve
the same effect. of course, the
success of a global, prospectively set rate depends on the design
of the implementation strategy.
in addition to avoiding incentives
for undertreating, critical issues
include the reimbursement rate,
how it is updated to reflect changes in costs and medical practice,
and how medicare adjusts payments to account for the distribution among centers of patients
whose care is more or less expensive. moreover, in the case of
epoetin, other approaches to cost
reduction could complement efforts to control utilization. examples include a lower reimbursement rate, price competition with
other medications, and legislation to provide medicare with the
authority to negotiate lower drug
prices.
under the medicare prescription drug, improvement, and modernization act of 2003, congress
required cms to submit, in october 2005, a report on how a
bundled-payment system for esrd
would be designed and to start a
3-year bundling demonstration in
january 2006.1 in her testimony
at the december hearings, leslie

norwalk, the acting cms administrator, said that the agency generally supports shifting to such
a system but wants to finalize
the details first. the cms report,
however, has yet to be submitted,
and the demonstration project has
not started. congress will have to
decide whether to wait at least several more years for the results or
to create a bundled-payment system before they become available.
dr. steinbrook (rsteinbrook@attglobal.net)
is a national correspondent for the journal.
1. report to the chairman, committee on
ways and means, house of representatives.
end-stage renal disease: bundling of medicare’s payment for drugs with payment for
all esrd services would promote efficiency
and clinical flexibility. washington, dc: government accountability office, november
2006. (gao-07-77.) (accessed december
12, 2006, at http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/
getrpt?gao-07-77.)
2. steinbrook r. haemoglobin concentrations in chronic kidney disease. lancet. published online november 17, 2006 (doi:
10.1016-s0140-6736(06)69707-9).
3. usrds 2006 annual data report: atlas of
end-stage renal disease in the united states.
minneapolis: u.s. renal data system, 2006.
(accessed december 12, 2006 at http://
www.usrds.org/adr.htm.)
4. singh ak, szczech l, tang kl, et al. correction of anemia with  xxxd2011xxx  in chronic
kidney disease. n engl j med 2006;355:208598.
5. fda public health advisory.  xxxd2011xxx 
(marketed as procrit, epogen); darbepoetin
alfa (marketed as aranesp). rockville, md:
food and drug administration, november
16, 2006. (accessed december 12, 2006, at
http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/advisory/
rhe.htm.)
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society.

focus on rese arch

drugs and valvular heart disease
bryan l. roth, m.d., ph.d.
related articles, pages 29 and 39

i

n 1997, connolly et al. reported
that both racemic fenfluramine
(pondimin) and dexfenfluramine
(redux) were associated with val-

6

vular heart disease.1 the valvular
abnormalities seen in patients
treated with these agents were
distinctive. on echocardiography,

n engl j med 356;1

www.nejm.org

leaflet thickening as well as chordal thickening and retraction were
observed. surgically removed valves
were noted to have a glistening

january 4, 2007

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at university of illinois on march 14, 2013. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pe r s pe c ti v e

drugs and valvular heart disease

white surface, with histologic evidence of a plaque-like process extending along the leaflet surfaces
and encasing the chordae tendineae. these findings were similar
to those in patients with heartvalve damage induced by serotonin-secreting carcinoid tumors.1
this association of racemic
fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine
with valvular heart disease led
to the withdrawal of both drugs
from the market. because of the
observed similarity to carcinoid
heart disease, and because fenfluramine and its active metabolite norfenfluramine are agonists
at various serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-ht) receptors,
devereux urged caution “in the
long-term use of other agents
that act on serotonergic mechanisms.”2 since a large number of
commonly prescribed medications, including antidepressant,
antipsychotic, anxiolytic,  xxxd2022xxx , and other drugs, have serotonergic mechanisms, there was
concern that numerous approved
drugs might also cause valvular
heart disease.2
in 2000, we and others reported that norfenfluramine is a
potent agonist at 5-ht2b receptors.3 these receptors are plentiful in human cardiac valves and
appear to be essential for normal
cardiac development. in contrast,
norfenfluramine is devoid of appreciable activity at many other
types of receptors that are plentiful in the heart, including all
known biogenic amine (e.g., alpha1-,
 xxxg831xxx -, and beta-adrenergic) receptors
and peptide receptors.3 in subsequent studies, we found that
ergotamine, an ergot derivative
that has also been reported to
induce valvular heart disease,
activates 5-ht2b receptors and that
methylergonovine, the active metabolite of the prototypic valvu-

lopathic agent  xxxd2621xxx , is
an extraordinarily potent 5-ht2b
agonist.4 taken together, these
findings implicated activation of
5-ht2b receptors as a key step in
initiating drug-induced valvular
heart disease.
valvulopathic drugs have been
shown to induce mitogenesis in
cultured interstitial cells from human cardiac valves by activating
the  xxxg1114xxx .4 my research
group has suggested that valvulopathy induced by 5-ht2b receptors is caused by the inappropriate
mitogenic stimulation of normally
quiescent valve cells, resulting in
an overgrowth valvulopathy (see
diagram).4 although the precise
signaling pathways leading to
valvulopathy are unknown, 5-ht2b
receptors are known to activate
mitogenic pathways through the
phosphorylation of src kinase and
extracellular regulated kinases
(erk). both classic g-protein–
mediated signaling pathways and
new pathways involving arrestin
and other accessory proteins may
be involved in activating the mitogenic pathways; it is also likely
that cross talk with receptor tyrosine kinases is important for
mitogenesis (see diagram).5
it was subsequently discovered
that two antiparkinsonian dopamine agonists, pergolide and cabergoline, are potent 5-ht2b agonists; they were therefore predicted
to be valvulopathic agents.5 other
commonly prescribed antiparkinsonian drugs such as apomorphine, pramipexole, bromocriptine,  xxxd2498xxx , and roxindole are
devoid of 5-ht2b–agonist activity
and, accordingly, were not expected to induce valvular regurgitation. as predicted, case reports of
cabergoline- and pergolide-induced
valvular heart disease soon appeared.
in this issue of the journal, two

n engl j med 356;1

www.nejm.org

large european studies independently verify the association of
valvular heart disease with pergolide and cabergoline. schade
et al. (pages 29–38) conducted a
population-based study to investigate the associations between
six dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline, pergolide,
 xxxd2498xxx , pramipexole, and  xxxd3145xxx ) and valvular heart disease.
only pergolide and cabergoline
— the only two dopamine agonists that are also potent 5-ht2b
agonists — were significantly associated with cardiac-valve disease.
mitral, aortic, and tricuspid valves
were affected.  xxxd2498xxx , which is
an agonist at two related serotonin receptors (5-ht2a and 5-ht2c)
but is not a 5-ht2b agonist, was
not associated with valve disease.
the findings concerning  xxxd2498xxx 
further implicate 5-ht2b serotonin–receptor activation as a key
step in the progression of druginduced valvulopathy. schade et
al. also report that amantadine
is associated with an increased
risk of valvular heart disease. it
will be important to determine
whether amantadine (or one of its
metabolites) also activates 5-ht2b
receptors.
in the second study, zanettini
et al. (pages 39–46) found that
clinically significant regurgitation was discovered only in patients taking pergolide or cabergoline. the rates of drug-induced
valvulopathy were high (23.4%
and 28.6% in the pergolide and
cabergoline groups, respectively,
vs. 5.6% among controls) but were
similar to those reported previously in a smaller study. in the
zanettini study, as in the study by
schade et al., drug-induced insufficiency was evident in mitral, aortic, and tricuspid valves.
these two studies reinforce the
notion of a causal association be-

january 4, 2007

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at university of illinois on march 14, 2013. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

7

pe r s pe c t iv e

drugs and valvular heart disease

 xxxd2621xxx 

fenfluramine
f

h
o

n

h

n

o

h

 xxxd2498xxx 

h

n

n

cabergoline

pergolide

o

n

f

f

n
h

n

s

n
h

methylergonovine

n

norfenfluramine
f

h
n
h

n
n
h

h

f

h
o

h

n
o

f

n

h
h

n

o

n

o

h

h

h

n
h

n
h

n
h

extracellular
space

tgf-beta

5-ht2b

intracellular
space

galphaq

plc-beta

gbetay

dag

gtp
p p

betaarr

?

src-p

 xxxg1369xxx /2

pkc

p p

nucleus

rb-p

left atrium

atrium
mitral valve

mitral valve

proliferation

chordae
tendineae

chordae
tendineae

left ventricle

8

n engl j med 356;1

left ventricle

www.nejm.org

january 4, 2007

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at university of illinois on march 14, 2013. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pe r s pe c ti v e

drugs and valvular heart disease

molecular mechanisms by which 5-ht2b agonists
induce valvular heart disease.
both prescribed drugs (such as pergolide, cabergoline, and ergotamine) and their active metabolites
(such as norfenfluramine and methylergonovine)
activate 5-ht2b receptors, a subtype of serotonin
receptors. chemically similar medications that do
not activate 5-ht2b receptors (e.g.,  xxxd2498xxx ) do
not cause valvular heart disease, further implicating this receptor in the pathogenesis of heart-valve
disease. activation of 5-ht2b receptors leads to
the dissociation of the heterotrimeric g protein,
liberating the galphaq subunit, which in turn activates
phospholipase c-beta (plc-beta). activation of plc-beta
leads to the activation of protein kinase c (pkc)
through the mobilization of intracellular calcium
and the liberation of diacylglycerol (dag). although
all the specifics are not yet known, g proteins may
also induce src phosphorylation (forming src-p)
and activation, as well as the activation of the pathways of extracellular regulated kinases (erk). in
addition, src-p may both mediate and enhance
the activity of the transforming growth factor beta
(tgf-beta) receptor, augmenting 5-ht2b–stimulated
mitogenesis. for many g-protein–coupled receptors, the binding of beta-arrestin (betaarr) may facilitate
activation of  xxxg1369xxx  and  xxxg1366xxx . the final common
pathway by which activation of 5-ht2b receptors
leads to mitogenesis probably involves the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein (rb-p).
excessive cell division leads to an overgrowth valvulopathy and subsequent valvular dysfunction.

tween 5-ht2b agonism and valvular heart disease. such an association has now been seen with
drugs for diverse indications, including anorectic agents (fenfluramine),  xxxd2022xxx  drugs (dihydroergotamine,  xxxd2621xxx ,
and ergotamine), and antiparkinsonian agents (pergolide and cabergoline). on the basis of these
findings, my colleagues and i have
urged pharmaceutical companies
and regulatory agencies to screen
candidate drugs and their major
metabolites at 5-ht2b receptors
comprehensively before launching
clinical trials, in order to prevent “fen–phen”-type disasters.3,5
clearly, practitioners should avoid
prescribing drugs that are potent
5-ht2b –receptor agonists — a
growing list of medications that
now includes ergot derivatives (ergotamine,  xxxd2621xxx , and dihydroergotamine), dopamine agonists (pergolide and cabergoline),
and amphetamine derivatives (fenfluramine and methylenedioxy-

n engl j med 356;1

www.nejm.org

methamphetamine [mdma, or
“ecstasy”]).
dr. roth is a professor in the departments
of pharmacology and medicinal chemistry,
schools of medicine and pharmacy, and director of the national institute of mental
health psychoactive drug screening program at the university of north carolina,
chapel hill.
1. connolly hm, crary jl, mcgoon md, et
al. valvular heart disease associated with
fenfluramine–phentermine. n engl j med
1997;337:581-8. [erratum, n engl j med 1997;
337:1783.]
2. devereux rb. appetite suppressants and
valvular heart disease. n engl j med 1998;339:
765-6.
3. rothman rb, baumann mh, savage je,
et al. evidence for possible involvement of
5-ht(2b) receptors in the cardiac valvulopathy associated with fenfluramine and other
serotonergic medications. circulation 2000;
102:2836-41.
4. setola v, hufeisen sj, grande-allen kj, et
al. 3,4- xxxd2611xxx 
(mdma, “ecstasy”) induces fenfluraminelike proliferative actions on human cardiac
valvular interstitial cells in vitro. mol pharmacol 2003;63:1223-9.
5. setola v, roth bl. screening the receptorome reveals molecular targets responsible
for drug-induced side effects: focus on ‘fenphen.’ expert opin drug metab toxicol 2005;
1:377-87.
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society.

january 4, 2007

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at university of illinois on march 14, 2013. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2007 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

9

