c 2007)
journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, january 2007 (
doi: 10.1007/s10875-006-9060-0

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx , zenapax) in the treatment of leukemia,
autoimmune diseases, and in the prevention of allograft
rejection: a 25-year personal odyssey
thomas a. waldmann1,2

directed toward a cytokine receptor that was approved
for therapy (3). this antibody played a pivotal role in
the revolution that has occurred in our understanding of
the roles played by the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system in the
normal immune response and the disorders in this system
that underlie t-cell leukemia, select autoimmune disorders, and allograft rejection. furthermore, these studies
have culminated in the definition of the  xxxg1175xxx 
 xxxg216xxx  as an exceptionally valuable target for immunotherapy (4–7). the scientific basis for this choice of
target was the demonstration that very few normal resting
cells express  xxxg1175xxx  alpha. however, this receptor subunit
is expressed by abnormal t-cells in patients with lymphoid
malignancies, those t-cells involved in autoimmune diseases as well as t-cells participating in allograft rejection
(4–6). different forms of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha directed therapy
have been employed. these include unmodified antibodies to  xxxg1175xxx  alpha (anti-tac,  xxxd1798xxx , zenapax) and
this antibody armed with toxins or alpha and beta-emitting
radionuclides (4, 7–10). the administration of the antibody, anti-tac, in its humanized form ( xxxd1798xxx ) contributed to the reduction of acute renal allograft rejection
episodes (3, 10, 11). in addition to its use in the prevention of organ allograft rejection, we and our collaborators
have shown that  xxxd1798xxx  is of value in the treatment
of t-cell mediated autoimmune disorders. in particular,
 xxxd1798xxx  provided effective therapy for patients with
noninfectious uveitis who were able to be weaned off their
systemic immunosuppressive medications (12, 13). furthermore, there was a 78% reduction in the development of
gadolinium-enhanced mri lesions in patients with multiple sclerosis failing beta interferon therapy when they
were treated with  xxxd1798xxx  (14). in addition, murine
anti-tac and  xxxd1798xxx  provided effective therapy for
subsets of patients with htlv-i associated adult t-cell
leukemia (atl) and the neurological disease, human

received november 16, 2006; accepted november 20, 2006
published online: 11 january 2007

twenty-five years ago, we reported the production of the monoclonal antibody, anti-tac that identifies the  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
subunit and blocks the interaction of il-2 with this growth factor
r
), the humanized form
receptor. in 1997,  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax
of this antibody, was approved by the fda for use in the prevention of renal allograft rejection. in addition, we demonstrated that
 xxxd1798xxx  is of value in the treatment of patients with noninfectious uveitis, multiple sclerosis, and the neurological disease human t-cell lymphotropic virus i associated myelopathy/tropical
spastic paraparesis (ham/tsp). others demonstrated therapeutic efficacy with  xxxd1798xxx  in patients with pure red cell
aplasia, aplastic anemia, and psoriasis. thus, translation of basic insights concerning the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system obtained
using the monoclonal antibody  xxxd1798xxx  provided a useful
strategy for the prevention of organ allograft rejection and the
treatment of patients with select autoimmune diseases or t-cell
leukemia/lymphoma.
key words: anti-tac; adult t-cell leukemia;  xxxd1798xxx ; il-2
receptor; monoclonal antibody.

introduction

twenty-five years ago in 1981, we reported the production
of the monoclonal antibody, anti-tac directed toward the
 xxxg1175xxx   xxxg216xxx  (1, 2). in its humanized form,
 xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax) was approved for use in renal allograft protocols by the fda as the third monoclonal antibody, the first humanized antibody, and the first antibody

1 metabolism

branch, center for cancer research, national cancer
institute, nih.
2 to whom correspondence should be addressed to metabolism branch,
center for cancer research, national cancer institute, nih building
10, room 4n115, 10 center drive 1374, bethesda, maryland 208921374; e-mail: tawald@helix.nih.gov.

1
c 2007 springer science+business media, llc
0271-9142/07/0100-0001/0 

2

t-cell lymphotropic virus i associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (ham/tsp) (15). finally,
in clinical trials that employed this antibody directed to
the  xxxg1175xxx  alpha armed with 90 y, we observed remissions in over 50% of the patients with atl and 70%
of patients who had hodgkin’s disease (8, 16).
in the present report, we focus on our 25-year odyssey
with the anti-tac monoclonal antibody. these studies
were directed toward the definition of the roles played
by il-2 in the life and death of lymphocytes, and on
the disorders of the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system that underlie many clinical disorders. finally, an emphasis of
this report is on the translation of these basic insights
into novel cytokine receptor directed monoclonal antibody mediated approaches for the treatment of t-cell
leukemia/lymphoma, autoimmune diseases, and for the
prevention of organ allograft rejection.

the beginning: the production
of the anti-tac monoclonal antibody
and its characterization as an antibody
directed to  xxxg220xxx  of the  xxxg1175xxx 

in 1975, köhler and milstein’s development of the
hybridoma technology to produce monoclonal antibodies captured the imagination of medical scientists and
rekindled interest in the use of antibodies as agents to
treat patients with cancer (17). however, the initial use
of monoclonal antibodies was relatively disappointing;
the dream of a “magic bullet” involving antibody therapy
presented by paul ehrlich in his croonian lecture in 1900
where he stated that “immunizations such as these which
are of great theoretic interest may come to be available
for clinical application attacking epithelial new formations, particularly carcinoma by means of specific antiepithelial sera,” proved elusive (18). at the time when our
studies were initiated, in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
no therapeutic monoclonal antibody had been approved
for use by the fda. our own efforts were focused on the
question “how do t-cells proliferate and develop effector
functions following activation”? it had been recognized
that activation of t-cells requires two sets of signals from
cell surface receptors to the nucleus (19). the first signal
was initiated by the interaction of appropriately processed
foreign antigen presented to the t-cell receptor specific
for that antigen. following this interaction, in the context
of products of the major histocompatibility locus, t-cells
were induced to express interleukin-2 which interacted
with specific high-affinity membrane il-2 receptors. the
presence of receptors specific for il-2 was suggested by
robb and coworkers who utilized purified biosyntheti-

waldmann

cally labeled il-2 to demonstrate specific saturable, highaffinity binding sites on il-2 dependent t-cell lines as
well as mitogen and alloantigen-activated t-cells (20).
further progress in the analysis of the structure, function,
and expression of the human  xxxg1175xxx  was greatly
facilitated by the production of the anti-tac monoclonal
antibody in our laboratory by takashi uchiyama (1, 2,
21). uchiyama’s production of the anti-tac monoclonal
antibody was a classical example of serendipity. he used
as his target a t-cell line we had developed from a patient
who carried the diagnosis of the sézary t-cell leukemia,
but who in retrospect had htlv-i associated adult
t-cell leukemia. the goal of our efforts was to produce
an anti-cd4 monoclonal antibody during a period when
such antibodies were being embargoed and were not made
available to the scientific community. however, the antibody we produced, anti-tac (t-cell activation antigen)
did not bind to the  xxxg388xxx . indeed, the antibody did
not react with the vast majority of resting cells, but only
with activated t-cells. the anti-tac monoclonal antibody
was rejected by the first leukocyte differentiation workshop since that workshop did not include activated cells
in the panel being analyzed with the different monoclonal
antibodies submitted. the anti-tac monoclonal antibody
that we had selected, on the basis of its ability to bind to
activated t-cells but not to the majority of resting t-cells,
b cells, or monocytes, reflected a pattern of cellular reactivity identical to the distribution of il-2 receptors that
had been reported by robb and coworkers (20). therefore,
with warren leonard and warner greene in the laboratory
taking leadership positions, we hypothesized that anti-tac
recognized the human receptor for il-2 (22). data in support of this hypothesis were: (a) anti-tac blocked the
il-2 induced dna synthesis of il-2 dependent continuous t-cell lines but did not inhibit the dna synthesis
of il-2 independent t-cell lines; (b) anti-tac blocked
more than 95% of the binding of 3 h—labeled il-2 to
hut-102 b-2 cells—a cell line derived from the patient
whose adult leukemic t-cells were used in the generation
of the anti-tac monoclonal antibody; (c) anti-tac blocked
the il-2 binding to phytohaemagglutinin (pha) activated
lymphoblasts; and (d) il-2 at high concentrations blocked
the binding of 3 h-labeled anti-tac to pha-activated lymphoblasts. these were important findings since anti-tac
was one of the first, if not the first, monoclonal antibody to
define a receptor for one of the cytokines. as outlined later,
the anti-tac monoclonal antibody was used to: (a) define
an il-2 binding receptor subunit that participates in the
human receptor for il-2; (b) molecularly clone cdnas for
the 55-kda peptide of the human  xxxg1175xxx ; (c) define
the cellular distribution of high-affinity il-2 receptors;
(d) determine the immunoregulatory effects that require

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

3

the interaction of il-2 with its receptor; (e) analyze disorders of  xxxg1175xxx  expression in disease; and (f) develop
novel therapeutic strategies for patients with  xxxg1175xxx 
expressing t-cell leukemia, autoimmune disorders, and
for individuals receiving organ allografts (4–6).

chemical characterization and molecular
cloning of the  xxxg1175xxx  subunit
identified by anti-tac

the il-2 binding receptor subunit identified by the
anti-tac monoclonal antibody was shown to be a densely
glyclosylated, sulfated, integral membrane protein with
an apparent mr of 55,000 (22, 23). using the antitac monoclonal antibody to purify the receptor peptide,
warren leonard, warner greene, and other members of
our group succeeded in cloning, sequencing, and expressing cdnas encoding the 33-kda polypeptide backbone
of the 55-kda  xxxg1175xxx  protein (24). the deduced
amino-acid sequence of the  xxxg1175xxx  indicated that
this protein is composed of 272 amino acids, including a
21 amino-acid signal peptide (24). the receptor contains
two potential n-linked glyclosylation sites and multiple
possible o-linked carbohydrate sites. there is a single
hydrophobic membrane region of 19 amino acids and a
very short 13 amino acid cytoplasmic domain. the cytoplasmic domain of the  xxxg1175xxx  subunit identified by
anti-tac thus appeared to be too small for enzymatic function. potential phosphate acceptor sites (serine, threonine,
but not tyrosine) were present within its intracytoplasmic
domain. thus, this receptor subunit differed from other
known growth factor receptors that have large intracytoplasmic domains with tyrosine-kinase activity. leonard
and coworkers demonstrated that the single gene encoding the  xxxg1175xxx   xxxg216xxx , identified by anti-tac,
consists of eight exons located on chromosome number
10 at p14 (25).
the observation that the 13-amino acid intracytoplasmic domain was too short to function in signaling raised
the issue of how the  xxxg1175xxx  signals were transduced to the nucleus. furthermore, questions were posed
concerning the  xxxg1175xxx  that were difficult to answer when only the 55 kda  xxxg1175xxx  alpha protein identified
by anti-tac was considered. these questions included:
what is the structural explanation for the great difference
in affinity between high (10−11 m) and low (10−8 m)
affinity receptors? how could certain non-tac expressing
cells including resting natural killer cells respond to  xxxg1173xxx ? in association with mitsuru tsudo, who had joined our
laboratory, we resolved these issues in parallel with investigators in the laboratory of warren leonard, by codiscov-

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

fig. 1 the structure of the heterotrimeric  xxxg1175xxx . the heterotrimeric  xxxg1175xxx  involves the private  xxxg1175xxx   xxxg216xxx ,
 xxxg1175xxx  beta shared with il-15, as well as the common gamma (gamma c)
subunit shared with il-4,  xxxg1183xxx , il-9, il-15, and il-21. the  xxxg1175xxx  uses a signaling pathway that involves janus kinase-1 ( xxxg1219xxx ),  xxxg1221xxx ,
and stat-5 (signaling transducer and activator of transcription-5).

ering a novel non-tac 70 kda il-2 binding protein,  xxxg1175xxx 
beta (26, 27). subsequently, shugamura and coworkers
demonstrated that the 64 kda  xxxg1175xxx  gamma chain or gamma c
is required for high-affinity il-2 binding and signaling
(28). the beta and gamma subunits are shared by other
cytokines, with the  xxxg1175xxx   xxxg217xxx  being utilized by
il-15 as well as il-2, and the common gamma chain a
participant not only of the  xxxg1175xxx  but also of the
il-4,  xxxg1183xxx , il-9, il-15, and il-21 receptors (fig. 1) (28,
29).

distribution of interleukin-2 receptors

the cellular distribution of the 55 kda subunit of the  xxxg1173xxx  receptor has been defined using the anti-tac monoclonal
antibody for humans or with alternate antibodies to the  xxxg1174xxx  alpha receptor subunit (cd25) for other species (4, 5).
less than 5% of unstimulated human peripheral blood
t-cells react with the anti-tac monoclonal antibody.

4

waldmann

furthermore, a proportion of immature thymocytes display this receptor subunit. in addition, anti-tac reacts
with small subsets of t and nk cells with regulatory
function (30, 31). in particular, this cd25 receptor subunit is expressed by cd4+ cd25+ foxp3 expressing
t regs that inhibit immune responses (30). furthermore,
cd25 identified by anti-tac is expressed by a small subset
of nk t-cells with regulatory function, the cd56 bright
il-10 producing, negative regulatory nk cells (31). the
majority of t-cells can be induced to express  xxxg1175xxx 
alpha following interaction with lectins, antigens, or alloantigens or by the addition of monoclonal antibodies to
the t-cell antigen receptor complex, by appropriate pairs
of anti-cd2 antibodies or an antibody to cd28 (4, 5, 32).
on activated t-cells, there is a 5–20-fold greater number
of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha subunits than high-affinity receptors. isolated  xxxg1175xxx  alpha subunits bind il-2  xxxd1891xxx −8 m whereas
the trimeric (alpha, beta, gamma)  xxxg1175xxx  binds il-2
at high-affinity 10−11 m (4). the peptide identified by antitac is also expressed by activated b cells and activated
nk cells (33). furthermore, this receptor subunit has been
detected on activated cells of the monocyte-macrophage
series, including cultured monocytes, kupffer’s cells of
the liver, cultured lung macrophages, and langerhan’s
cells of the skin (34, 35).
activation through the t-cell receptor complex that is
associated with an increase in intracellular calcium and
involvement of protein kinase-c leads to the expression
of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha (cd25). il-2 receptors may also be induced without interaction with the t-cell antigen receptor
by the use of a calcium ionophore or by phorbol myristic
acetate (36, 37). after activation with mitogenic lectins,
the number of il-2 receptors reaches a maximum at 48–
72 h. following this period, there is a progressive decline in the number of receptors so that  xxxd2274xxx –21 days

table i.

in culture the number of receptors is fewer than 20% of
the number during peak expression. several reports have
indicated that il-2 upregulates the expression of the  xxxg1173xxx  specific receptor  xxxg216xxx  identified by anti-tac
(38, 39).

abnormalities of  xxxg1175xxx  expression
in htlv-i associated disorders

rubin and coworkers demonstrated that activated normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells and certain lines
of t and b-cell origin release a soluble 45 kda form of the
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha into the culture media (40). using an
enzyme-linked immunoabsorbant assay that employs two
monoclonal antibodies that recognize distinct epitopes of
human  xxxg1175xxx  alpha, they showed that normal individuals
express measurable amounts of the  xxxg1175xxx  subunit in their serum. certain lymphoreticular malignancies,
autoimmune disorders, and allograft rejections are associated with elevated serum levels of this receptor subunit
(table i) (40). the release of the soluble  xxxg1175xxx 
appears to be associated with the activation of various
cell types and may be observed in association with the
disordered regulation of the immune response in diverse
diseases. thus, determination of the serum levels of the
il-2 alpha receptor subunit provides a valuable, noninvasive approach to the analysis of both normal and diseaseassociated lymphocyte activation in vivo. the use of this
technique and the direct demonstration of cd25 with the
anti-tac monoclonal antibody on t-cells of the affected
tissues have led to the definition of an array of malignant
and benign disorders associated with abnormally elevated
levels of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha expression (table i). in particular,
elevated serum-soluble  xxxg1175xxx  alpha levels and in

causes of elevated serum soluble  xxxg1175xxx  alpha concentrations

allograft rejection

neoplasia

autoimmune diseases

infectious diseases

renal
liver
cardiac
bone marrow

acute myelocytic leukemia
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma
adult t-cell leukemia/lymphoma
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
chronic myelocytic leukemia
cutaneous t-cell lymphoma
mycosis fungoides
hairy cell leukemia
hodgkin’s disease
non-hodgkin’s lymphomas (b-cell)
peripheral t-cell lymphomas

aplastic anemia
behcet’s syndrome
crohn’s disease
giant cell arteritis
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
kawasaki disease
multiple sclerosis
polymyalgia rheumatica
rheumatoid arthritis
sarcoidosis
scleroderma
sjögren’s syndrome
systemic lupus erythematosus
vasculitis
wegerner’s granulomatosis

hiv/aids
pulmonary tuberculosis
rubeola
infectious mononucleosis
sepsis
other
end-stage renal disease
il-2 administration

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

select cases high  xxxg1175xxx  alpha expression on abnormal
cells, have been demonstrated with the malignant cells
in patients with adult t-cell leukemia, cutaneous t-cell
lymphoma, hairy cell b-cell leukemia, hodgkin’s disease,
as well as acute and chronic granulocytic leukemia (4,
5, 36). furthermore, such abnormalities of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
expression have been demonstrated in the autoimmune
diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, aplastic anemia, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
( xxxg1193xxx ), crohn’s disease, sarcoidosis, scleroderma, noninfectious uveitis, chronic active hepatitis, multiple sclerosis, and tropical spastic paraparesis. furthermore, such
elevations of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha expression have been detected
in the serum of patients during organ allograft rejection
and from those with graft versus host disease (4, 10).

lymphocyte functions inhibited by anti-tac
( xxxd1798xxx )

in early studies utilizing the anti-tac monoclonal antibody, lymphocyte functions that involve the interaction of
il-2 with its inducible receptor on activated t-cells were
defined. the addition of anti-tac to cultures of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells inhibited the proliferation associated with the addition of soluble, autologous, and allogenic antigens (32). furthermore, anti-tac
inhibited t-cell proliferation induced by mitogenic lectins.
anti-tac inhibition of antigen and mitogen-induced
t-cell proliferation was reversed by the addition of purified il-2. anti-tac inhibited the generation of cytotoxic
t-lymphocytes in allogenic cell cultures, but did not inhibit their action once generated (2). furthermore, antitac inhibited the generation of inhibitory t-cells activated by lectins or by the plate-bound cd3 monoclonal
antibody. in addition, anti-tac inhibited immunoglobulin production by b cells activated by pokeweed mitogen,
wheat germ agglutinin, streptolysin o, or nocardia watersoluble mitogen (41).
more recent studies, including those involving the genetic deletion of il-2 and its private subunit,  xxxg1175xxx 
alpha, have revealed the redundancy of the cytokine system demonstrating that many of the functions mediated by
il-2 that were defined in early studies are shared by other
cytokines (42–48). in particular, as might be anticipated
from their sharing of  xxxg1175xxx  beta and gamma c subunits, il-15
and il-2 share a number of biological activities including
the stimulation of the proliferation of activated cd4+ ,
cd8+ , as well as gamma delta subsets of t-cells (44).
the two cytokines facilitate the induction of cytotoxic
effector cells including cytotoxic t-lymphocytes (ctl)
and  xxxg1173xxx -activated killer cells (lak) cells. il-2

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

5

and il-15 also stimulate the proliferation of nk cells and
both cytokines induce the proliferation and immunoglobulin synthesis by human b-cells stimulated with anti-igm
or  xxxg390xxx .
in addition to these common functions, although il-2
and il-15 share two receptor subunits they have contrasting functions in many adaptive immune responses (44–
48). il-2 is pivotally involved in the maintenance and
fitness of cd4+ cd25+ foxp3 expressing t regs (49).
furthermore, il-2 plays a critical role in aicd, a process
that leads to the elimination of self-reactive t-cells (50). in
contrast, in il-15 transgenic mice, there is an inhibition
of il-2 activation-induced cell death (aicd) (47). furthermore, il-15 stimulates the maintenance of cd44hi
cd8+ memory phenotype t-cells (44–48). these observations from ex vivo functional studies are supported by
an analysis of mice with disrupted cytokine and cytokine
receptor genes. il-2 deficient and  xxxg1175xxx  alpha deficient
mice develop a marked enlargement of peripheral lymphoid organs associated with polyclonal t- and b-cell
expansion which reflects the impairment of t reg maintenance and function, and loss of aicd (42, 43). these
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha deficient mice and  xxxg1175xxx  deficient humans
develop autoimmune disorders such as hemolytic anemia
and inflammatory bowel disease (42, 43, 51). thus, a
special role of il-2 is to prevent a t-cell mediated immune response to self. by contrast, mice genetically deficient in il-15 or il-15r alpha, the private receptor for
il-15, do not develop lymphoid enlargement, increased
immunoglobulin levels, or autoimmune diseases. rather,
they display a marked reduction in the number of thymic
and peripheral nk cells, nk-t-cells, and intraintestinal
intraepithelial lymphocytes (iels) (52, 53). thus, a special role of il-15 is to maintain a sustained, long-lasting
immune response to invading pathogens.

early therapeutic trials of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
directed monoclonal antibody therapy:
from murine anti-tac to  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax)

the initial use of monoclonal antibodies as therapeutic
agents was relatively disappointing. at the time in 1983,
when we initiated our clinical trials with murine anti-tac,
no monoclonal antibody had received fda approval for
use. our observation that very few resting normal cells
display the  xxxg216xxx  of the  xxxg1175xxx  whereas it
is expressed by the malignant t-cells in many leukemias
and lymphomas, especially those of htlv-i associated
adult t-cell leukemia as well as by the t-cells involved in
an array of autoimmune diseases and by those involved
in allograft rejection, provided the scientific basis for the

6

waldmann

fig. 2 effective therapy provided by anti-tac for a patient with htlv-i associated adult t-cell leukemia. a
patient with acute adult t-cell leukemia was treated with anti-tac as indicated by the solid bars. there was
an elimination of all circulating leukemic t-cells defined as cells expressing high levels of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha, cd4,
cd3dim but not cd7. this complete response has been maintained for the 17-year period of observation after
initiation of the short-course of anti-tac therapy.

initiation of therapeutic studies with the anti-tac monoclonal antibody (4, 7). such  xxxg1175xxx  alpha directed agents
could theoretically eliminate tac expressing leukemic
cells or activated t-cells and their precursors involved in
other disease states and in allograft rejection, while retaining the tac negative, normal t-cells that express the full
repertoire of antigen receptors required for t-cell immune
responses. in the first phase of these efforts, we translated
the insights from the laboratory and validated them in preclinical animal studies. in particular, in collaboration with
robert kirkman, of harvard medical school, we demonstrated the efficacy of anti-tac in the prevention of renal allograft rejection in cynomolgus monkeys (54). in parallel,
in our own laboratory, we demonstrated that the murine
version of the anti-tac monoclonal antibody delayed cardiac allograft rejection in cynomolgus monkeys (55).
the first clinical trials involving murine anti-tac were
directed toward the treatment of patients with adult tcell leukemia—a malignancy of mature cd4+ cd25+
lymphocytes that is caused by the retrovirus htlv-i (7,
56, 57). no chemotherapeutic regimen appeared successful in altering the survival of these patients who have a
median survival duration of only 9 months (57). the retrovirus htlv-i encodes a transactivating protein, tax, that
indirectly stimulates the transcription of numerous host
genes including those of il-2 and  xxxg1175xxx  alpha (58). the
malignant atl cells constitutively express approximately
10,000–28,000  xxxg1175xxx  alpha receptor subunits identified

by the anti-tac monoclonal antibody whereas most of the
patients’ normal resting cells do not express this receptor
subunit (59). these observations stimulated us to perform
a therapeutic trial with the unmodified murine version
of the anti-tac monoclonal antibody (7). seven of the
19 patients treated developed a mixed (one case), partial
(four cases), or complete (two cases) response. in one
case, the remission has persisted for more than 17 years
after initiation of a short course of therapy (fig. 2). none
of the patients treated suffered any untoward reactions.
however 6 of 10 patients with an anti-tac induced clinical remission produced antibodies to the murine anti-tac
monoclonal antibody.
humanization of the anti-tac monoclonal
antibody to generate  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax)

although murine antibodies such as murine anti-tac
may be of value in the therapy of human diseases, their
effectiveness is limited because rodent monoclonal antibodies induce an immune response that neutralizes their
therapeutic effect. in particular, in a clinical trial directed
toward the prophylaxis of renal allograft rejection, treatment with murine anti-tac led to the development in 7
of 10 patients of antibodies directed to the infused monoclonal antibody (60). in addition, murine anti-tac had
a short survival of only 50 h in the circulation of humans, precluding its long-term use as an agent to provide

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

the antibody-mediated saturation of the receptors required
to prevent their interaction with the growth factor il-2.
an additional problem is that the responses induced by
murine anti-tac are limited, because the antibody does
not function in antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(adcc) with human mononuclear cells and does not fix
human complement and therefore, is relatively ineffective as a cytocidal agent. to circumvent these limitations,
genetically engineered antibody variants were produced
that combined the rodent variable or hypervariable regions
with the human constant or constant and framework regions. initially, chimeric versions were produced where
human constant regions were joined to mouse variable regions. such chimeric antibodies represented an improvement over mouse antibodies in human patients as they
were presumably less immunogenic and sometimes mediated adcc more effectively. for example, chimeric antitac that included the human igg1 constant region mediated adcc with activated human effector cells, whereas
the murine anti-tac did not (61, 62). however, the mouse
variable region can itself be highly immunogenic. jones,
winter, and colleagues therefore took the further innovative step of combining the complementarity determining
regions (cdrs) from a mouse (or rat) antibody with the
framework from a human antibody thereby reducing the
xenogeneic elements in the humanized antibody to a minimum (63). unfortunately, in many cases, including that of
anti-tac, the fully humanized antibody generated had significantly less binding affinity for antigen than the original
mouse antibody. we joined with cary queen in generating
a humanized anti-tac monoclonal antibody reactive with
the human  xxxg1175xxx   xxxg216xxx  at high affinity and introduced two ideas that have wider application (61). first, the
human igg1 framework sequence from the eu-myeloma
antibody was chosen to be as homologous as possible to
the original mouse antibody to reduce any deformation of
the mouse complementary determining regions (cdrs).
second, computer modeling was used to identify several
framework amino acids in the mouse antibody that might
interact with the cdrs or directly with antigen and those
murine or more typical human amino acids at positions
27, 30, 48, 66, 67, 94 and 103 in the vh and at positions
48 and 60 in the vl were transferred to the human framework along with the cdrs. this latter action proved to
be critical in generating a high-affinity humanized antitac. the igg1 isotype was chosen since antibody effector
functions were desired. the primary goal in these studies was to maintain the affinity and functional capacity
of the mouse monoclonal antibody. the parent murine
anti-tac molecule had an affinity of 9 × 10−9 m whereas
the hyperchimeric humanized version had an affinity of
3 × 10−9 m—still very high (61). the original humanjournal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

7

ized anti-tac monoclonal antibody and the parent murine
version manifested comparable inhibition of t-cell proliferation in response to tetanus antigen indicating that
humanization was not associated with the loss of functional activity (62).
a major opportunity provided by genetic engineering
of monoclonal antibodies is the ability to alter the pharmacokinetics of the immunoglobulin molecule. one may
wish to prolong the survival of a monoclonal antibody to
increase its period of effective action. in the case of antitac, the pharmacokinetics of the radiolabeled humanized
version differed substantially from that of the murine antitac when administered to normal cynomolgus monkeys,
with a prolongation of the mean terminal half-time of
humanized anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ) to 103 h as compared
to 38 h for murine anti-tac (55). when used in humans,
humanized anti-tac yielded a terminal t1/2 of 20 ± 0.6
days (10).
one of the primary goals in the generation of humanized
antibodies is to reduce their immunogenicity. humanized
anti-tac was dramatically less immunogenic than murine
anti-tac when administered to cynomolgus monkeys undergoing heterotopic cardiac allografting (55). specifically, all monkeys treated with murine anti-tac developed
antibodies to the administered monoclonal antibody by
day 15 (mean onset 11 days). in contrast, none of the
animals receiving humanized anti-tac produced antibodies to this monoclonal antibody version (55). a similar
marked reduction in immunogenicity has been observed
in humans when an assay for such antibodies that does
not yield false positives was utilized.
finally, treatment with anti-tac prolonged graft survival in a cynomolgus heterotopic cardiac allograft model
(55). in animals that received murine anti-tac, the allograft survival was increased significantly compared to
that of a control group (mean survival 14 ± 1.98 days
compared to 9.2 ± 0.5 days; p < 0.025). graft survival
was further prolonged by administration of humanized
anti-tac (with a mean survival of 20 ± 0.6 days compared
to 9.2 ± 0.5 days in controls p < 0.001 or compared to
murine anti-tac 14.0 ± 2 days (p < 0.02). there was no
toxicity attributable to the administration of either form
of anti-tac. thus, in primate studies, humanized antitac ( xxxd1798xxx ) exhibited reduced immunogenicity, improved pharmacokinetics, and increased ability to prolong
cardiac allograft survival relative to the murine antibody.
these studies suggested that humanized anti-tac might
be of value as an adjunctive standard immunosuppressant
therapy for patients receiving organ transplants and in
the treatment of those with leukemias and lymphomas or
autoimmune disorders.

8

 xxxd1798xxx  therapy in individuals receiving
organ allografts

organ allograft rejection is associated with an elevated
s- xxxg1175xxx  alpha in the serum that is linked to the activation
of t-cells mediated by mhc mismatched recognition. as
noted earlier, murine as well as humanized anti-tac prolonged renal and cardiac allograft survival in cynomolgus monkeys. in a collaborative study with kirkman and
coworkers, the efficacy of standard triple immunosuppressive therapy (cyclosporin, azathioprine, and prednisone)
was compared to murine anti-tac delivered with the same
treatment for the prevention of rejection in 80 patients
who received renal allografts (60). the addition of murine
anti-tac significantly delayed the time to first rejection,
however there was no difference in actual or actuarial
graft or patient survival between the two groups. therapy
with murine anti-tac appeared to be limited by the development of antiidiotypic antibodies. to circumvent this
problem of immunogenicity, a humanized version of antitac ( xxxd1798xxx , zenapax) was produced by cary queen
and coworkers of protein design labs inc. (61). two
major phase iii studies were used to evaluate the clinical
efficacy of  xxxd1798xxx  compared with a placebo (10, 64).
both studies were double-blind, randomized, and multicenter in design. the endpoint in both trials was the incidence of biopsy-proven rejection in the first 6 months after
transplantation. in the multicenter phase iii, performed in
the united states, which was a randomized double-blind
placebo-controlled study, 260 patients undergoing a first
cadaveric renal transplant were randomized to standard
treatment with  xxxd1781xxx , azathioprine, and corticosteroids or alternatively this regimen plus  xxxd1798xxx  (10).
 xxxd1798xxx  was administered intravenously at 1 mg/kg
within 24 h preoperatively and postoperatively at weeks
2, 4, 6, and 8 for a total of five doses. this was sufficient to
maintain therapeutic serum concentrations (5–10 µg/ml)
throughout the period of antibody administration with receptor saturation maintained for 90–120 days. of the 126
patients receiving  xxxd1798xxx , 28 (22%) had a biopsy
confirmed episode of rejection compared with 35% of
134 in the control patient group that received standard
immunosuppression plus placebo (p = 0.03). there was
however no statistically significant difference in graft survival between the two treatment groups at 1 year. the
incidence of adverse events related to treatment was similar in placebo and  xxxd1798xxx  recipients. in particular,
 xxxd1798xxx  therapy was not associated with an increase
in infections or malignancies including lymphoma. in
the second european multicenter phase iii randomized
double-blind placebo controlled trial,  xxxd1798xxx  was
compared with a placebo in 275 patients who were also

waldmann

receiving a less intensive immunosuppressive regimen of
cyclosporin and corticosteroids (64). at 6 months, 28%
of patients on the  xxxd1798xxx  arm had a biopsy confirmed
episode of acute rejection compared with 47% of patients
in the placebo arm (p = 0.001). the patients on the  xxxd1798xxx  treatment arm had better graft function, reduced
requirement for antithymocyte or anti-lymphocyte globulin, lower administered corticosteroid doses, a lower incidence of cytomegalovirus infections, a lower incidence of
infectious deaths, and a greater 1-year survival than did
patients on the placebo arm (99% vs. 94%, p = 0.01) (64).
in a similar extensive randomized trial, it was shown that
 xxxd286xxx , a chimeric antibody also directed toward  xxxg1174xxx  alpha was associated with reduced numbers of acute
rejection episodes in renal allograft recipients. on the
basis of the efficacy in multicenter trials and the lack of
associated increase in toxicity, the fda provided marketing clearance for the use of  xxxd1798xxx  in the prevention
of acute kidney transplant rejection in 1997 (3, 65). thus,
although the magnitude of the effects of  xxxd1798xxx  on
long-term patient and graft survival are not fully defined,
the available data indicate that  xxxd1798xxx  is an important
advance in renal transplant immunosuppression, reducing
acute graft rejection without affecting the tolerability of
standard cyclosporin-based immunosuppression (65).
 xxxd1798xxx  treatment has been shown to improve the
survival of other organ allografts.  xxxd1798xxx  therapy
was associated with decreased organ rejection and no
increased mortality in cardiac transplant patients receiving  xxxd2677xxx , cyclosporin, and corticosteroids (66). fifty-five patients undergoing a first cardiac
allograft were randomized to cyclosporin,  xxxd2677xxx , and prednisone with or without  xxxd1798xxx 
1 mg/kg administered intravenously every 2 weeks for
five doses (66, 67). acute rejection episodes occurred in
17 of 27 patients on standard immunosuppression and
in 5 of 28 patients on the standard immunosuppression
plus  xxxd1798xxx  treatment (p = 0.04). in an analysis by
the scientific registry of transplant recipients of all
adult cardiac transplants performed in the usa between
january 1998 and october 2003, patients were selected
based on induction treatment, either  xxxd1798xxx  (n = 684)
or no induction (n = 2525) (67). the patients receiving
 xxxd1798xxx  had no increased risk of patient death or
infectious disease. furthermore, patients receiving  xxxd1798xxx  had a lower incidence of acute rejection at
6 months (p = 0.005), 12 months (p ≤ 0.001), and over
3 years (p = 0.006).
in two clinical trials,  xxxd1798xxx  in a two-dose regimen
reduced the incidence of liver transplant rejection, facilitated improved renal function, and was not associated
with side effects (68, 69).

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

in addition, shapiro and coworkers incorporated  xxxd1798xxx  in their glucocorticoid-free immunosuppressive
regimen for pancreatic islet cell transplantation in patients
with type-1 diabetes and demonstrated that islet transplantation with this regimen can result in insulin independence
(70). thus, in clinical trials involving large groups of recipients,  xxxd1798xxx  therapy provided a reduction of rejection episodes in patients receiving renal, liver, cardiac,
and islet transplants.
in general, trials that used  xxxd1798xxx  to prevent allograft rejection did not take advantage of our knowledge
that in order to maintain efficacy it would probably require
the administration of  xxxd1798xxx  on a q. 3 or 4-week basis
indefinitely to maintain the saturation of the  xxxg1175xxx 
required for its continued effective action. thus, if one
wishes to make a major long-term difference in organ
and patient survival, it is likely that one must utilize the
approach described later for patients with uveitis and multiple sclerosis treated with  xxxd1798xxx  where a strategy of
persistent therapy with the agent involves using a dosing
scheme that maintains receptor saturation perpetually (12,
14).

 xxxd1798xxx  therapy of cd25 ( xxxg1175xxx  alpha)
expressing leukemia/lymphoma

 xxxg1175xxx  alpha (cd25), the target of  xxxd1798xxx , is expressed by the malignant cells from patients with a variety of lymphoproliferative disorders including the malignant cells in adult t-cell leukemia/lymphoma (atl),
cutaneous t-cell lymphomas, hairy cell leukemia, the
reed–sternberg cells, and associated polyclonal t-cells
in hodgkin’s disease, anaplastic large cell lymphoma,
and some other b-cell neoplasms (4, 7, 16). to evaluate different therapeutic approaches involving  xxxd1798xxx 
(humanized anti-tac) in atl, we developed a murine
model of human adult t-cell leukemia (71). in particular, an in vivo murine model of human atl (met-1
model) in nonobese, diabetic, (nod)/severe combined
immunodeficient (scid) mice was established by introducing human adult t-cell leukemic cells into the
mice. leukemic cell survival was monitored with surrogate markers including elisa procedures to quantitate the serum concentrations of soluble human  xxxg1175xxx 
alpha and human beta-2 microglobulin. the transferred disease progressed to death in the mice after
about 4–6 weeks. various forms of the antibodies to the
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha including humanized anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ),
murine anti-tac, and the 7g7/b6 monoclonal antibody
that targets the il-2 alpha receptor subunit at an epitope
other than the il-2 and anti-tac binding sites, significantly

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

9

delayed the progression of the leukemia and prolonged the
survival of tumor-bearing mice (71). it appeared in this
model that the three anti- xxxg1175xxx  alpha receptor-directed
antibodies acted by a mechanism that had not been anticipated. the prevailing view was that the antibodies to
the  xxxg1175xxx  alpha receptor have an effective action that
is limited to the blockade of the interaction of il-2
with its growth factor receptor thereby inducing cytokine
deprivation-mediated apoptotic cell death. however, this
action does not appear to be the mechanism involved in
our met-1 model of atl. in particular, although both
murine and humanized anti-tac block il-2 binding to the
high-affinity  xxxg1175xxx , 7g7/b6 binds to a different
epitope on the il-2 alpha receptor subunit that is not involved in il-2 binding (71). furthermore, the met-1 atl
cells obtained from the spleens of leukemic mice do not
produce human il-2, nor do they express il-2 mrna. in
addition, they do not proliferate in response to murine  xxxg1173xxx . we considered an alternative mechanism, one requiring
fcr receptor expression on host cells such as monocytes
or polymorphonuclear leukocytes. to test this hypothesis,
we joined with jeffrey ravetch in a collaboration that
involved scid/nod  xxxg769xxx  − / − mice that lack effective  xxxg769xxx  i,  xxxg769xxx  iii, and  xxxg769xxx  iv receptors (fig. 3) (72).
the three anti- xxxg1175xxx  alpha-directed monoclonal antibodies that were effective in the wild-type mice were not
active in these  xxxg769xxx  − / − mice, supporting the view that
an action requiring fc receptor expression on monocytes
or polymorphonuclear leukocytes was probably involved
in the therapeutic efficacy in this model of atl.
in another series of studies, we evaluated the efficacy
of a combination of unmodified  xxxd1798xxx  along with
chemotherapeutic agents to follow the emerging paradigm
that monoclonal antibodies for cancer therapy will not be
used as standalone agents but as part of multidrug therapy. in the met-1 model of adult t-cell leukemia,  xxxd357xxx 
(velcade) or  xxxd135xxx  had only modest efficacy when
utilized alone. however, there was a marked synergy in
the therapeutic efficacy in the met-1 murine model of
atl observed when  xxxd135xxx  or velcade were used
in concert with the anti-cd25 monoclonal antibody,  xxxd1798xxx  (73, 74).
 xxxd1798xxx  is being evaluated in clinical trials of patients with cd25 expressing adult t-cell leukemia (9).
a dose escalation analysis was used to define the dose
required to maintain saturation of the  xxxg1175xxx . in
this study, it was determined that in these patients with
high numbers of leukemic cells that display large numbers of cd25 receptors, a dose of 8 mg/kg of anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ) every 3 weeks was required to maintain saturation of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha on the lymph node cells of the patients
(9). this is a dose eightfold greater than that approved

10

waldmann

fig. 3 kaplan–meyer analysis of the effect of  xxxd1798xxx  on the met-1 murine model of human adult t-cell
leukemia in wild-type and  xxxg769xxx  − / − mice. the met-1 model was established by introducing human adult
t-cell leukemic cells into scid/nod mice (71). in untreated animals, the transferred disease progressed to
death in the mice after about 4–6 weeks. in the wild-type mice,  xxxd1798xxx  therapy significantly delayed the
progression of the leukemia and prolonged the survival of tumor-bearing mice (left panel). in contrast, there
was no efficacy on  xxxd1798xxx  therapy in  xxxg769xxx  − / − mice supporting the view that an action requiring fc
receptor expression on monocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes was probably involved in the therapeutic
efficacy in this model of atl (right panel) (72).

for the treatment of patients receiving organ allografts or
those treated for autoimmune disorders. therapy with  xxxd1798xxx  yielded some partial responses. these responses
were predominantly observed in patients with smoldering
or chronic atl that appeared to be in the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx 
alpha autocrine phase of their disease. in contrast, very
few responses were observed in patients in the il-2 independent acute and lymphoma forms of atl, especially in
those patients who had failed aggressive chemotherapeutic regimens. as just noted, only a subset of patients with
atl responded to  xxxd1798xxx  therapy. furthermore, in
contrast to the situation in the met-1 model in mice, the
responding patients appeared to be in the autocrine phase
of their disease where an interaction of il-2 with the il-2
receptor was required for malignant t-cell proliferation
and survival. in an effort to test this hypothesis and in an
effort to develop an ex vivo test that would help predict
which patients with atl would respond to  xxxd1798xxx 
therapy, we cultured the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of patients with atl ex vivo for 6 days in media with
fetal calf serum and studied the spontaneous proliferation
in the presence and absence of antibodies to il-2 or  xxxg1174xxx  alpha ( xxxd1798xxx ). the pbmc of a subset of atl
patients manifested spontaneous proliferation, and this
proliferation was inhibited by the addition of  xxxd1798xxx ,
an antibody to  xxxg1175xxx  alpha. the hypothesis was that these
patients were manifesting an il-2/ xxxg1175xxx -mediated
autocrine loop that underlies the proliferation. this hypothesis was supported by our demonstration using
rt-pcr analysis that large quantities of mrna encoding

il-2 were produced by these patients’ atl cells and that
their culture supernatants contained biologically meaningful quantities of il-2 as assessed by elisa analysis.
the patients of this subset manifested a partial response
when they were treated with  xxxd1798xxx  supporting the
view that the leukemic cells in this subset manifested an
il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  autocrine pattern and that the antibody
interrupted this autocrine loop.

 xxxd1798xxx  cytotoxic conjugates:
immunotoxin-linked monoclonal antibody

a limitation in the use of unmodified monoclonal
antibodies such as ant-tac for the treatment of t-cell
leukemia/lymphoma is the fact that they are relatively
ineffective as cytocidal agents. this is true in the late
stages of htlv-i associated atl, stages where the cells
continue to express  xxxg1175xxx  alpha, but no longer produce nor
require il-2 for their proliferation. this limited efficacy of
unmodified anti-tac in leukemia/lymphoma therapy led to
the alternative approach of using this antibody as a carrier
of cytotoxic agents such as toxins or radionuclides. in one
series of studies, in conjunction with krietman and pastan,
we evaluated the clinical efficacy of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha-directed
immunotoxins that involved a truncated version of
pseudomonas exotoxin a (pe38) (75). exon i of pseudomonas toxin that is involved in ubiquitous unwanted
binding was deleted. a single-chain toxin fusion protein
anti-tac (fv) pe38 in which the variable region (fv) of

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

anti-tac was joined in peptide linkage to the truncated
toxin pe38 had characteristics in vitro and in vivo that
suggested its use as an  xxxg1175xxx  directed agent for humans.
this agent anti-tac fv pe38 (lmb-2) was evaluated in a
phase i/ii clinical trial that involved 59 cycles of therapy in
35 patients who had leukemia/lymphoma that expressed
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha (75). in this trial, there were eight responders including four with hairy cell leukemia and one each
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hodgkin’s disease,
cutaneous t-cell lymphoma ( xxxg2343xxx ), and atl.

 xxxd1798xxx  armed with beta-andalpha-emitting radionuclides

the actions of toxins conjugated to monoclonal antibodies depend on their ability to be internalized by the
malignant cells and translocated to the cytoplasm. in fact,
the toxin conjugates do not pass easily from the endosome to the cytosol. furthermore, large protein toxins are
immunogenic and thus provide only a narrow therapeutic window prior to the development of host antibodies
directed toward the toxins. to circumvent these limitations, anti-tac was armed with radionuclides. a number
of factors needed to be considered when designing an
optimal radioimmunotherapy strategy: (a) the choice of
the monoclonal antibody and thus the antigenic target; in
our case, anti-tac targeting  xxxg1175xxx  alpha expressed on malignant cells; (b) the choice of the delivery system used to
target the radionuclide to the tumor cell; and (c) the choice
of radionuclide. in most clinical trials, intact monoclonal
antibodies have been employed to deliver the radionuclide. there are however a number of limitations in this
approach. there are physiological and structural barriers
that limit the delivery of high molecular weight molecules
such as intact antibodies to tumor cells especially those in
large tumor masses. meaningful tumor uptake of antibody
may not occur until 24–48 h after injection. unfortunately,
the long serum half-lives of the monoclonal antibodies
prolong radiation exposure to normal organs including
the radiosensitive bone marrow, which limits the radiation
that can be safely administered and delivered to the tumor
cell. finally, because of the slow equilibration of intact
monoclonal antibodies with cells in a tumor mass, such
therapy is limited to long-lived beta-emitting rather than
short-lived alpha-emitting radionuclides. to circumvent
these obstacles encountered using intact radiolabeled antibodies, a series of multistep strategies have been described
to decouple the administration of the radionuclide from
that of the antibody (76–78). the strategy proposed by
axworthy and coworkers involves a pretargeting approach
using streptavidin-conjugated anti-tac followed 24–48 h

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

11

later by the administration of a “clearing agent” to remove
unbound antibody from the circulation (77, 78). this procedure is followed 1–3 h later with the administration of
radiolabeled biotin that binds to the streptavidin linked
to the antibody on the tumor cells. the fundamental advantages of this pretargeting approach over conventional
radioimmunotherapy are that the uptake of therapeutic
radionuclide by the tumor is high and rapid and that any
excess radioactivity is efficiently eliminated from the body
in the urine. using this pretargeting technique to treat the
met-1 model of human atl, we demonstrated dramatic
efficacy of the pretargeting approach in the met-1 model
of atl that was considerably superior to that observed
with radiolabled intact antibodies (77, 78).
the third component of an optimal radioimmunotherapy regimen is the nature of the radionuclide used. a
variety of radionuclides are available that differ in terms
of their energy/range of emissions and half-life. historically beta-particles have received the most use. the emission path length of beta-emitters is relatively long with
a low-energy transfer. the use of such beta-emitting radionuclides is effective with large tumor masses where
the beta emissions produce a crossfire effect. however,
as the tumor mass decreases, so does the benefit of the
crossfire effect. when used with micrometastases or with
individual tumor cells as in leukemia, the relative path
length of the beta-emission compared to alpha radiation
may result in high-energy beta emissions outside of the
tumor target volume. in addition, it may not be possible to
achieve the number of beta emission transversals that are
required to kill the malignant cells in small tumors. thus,
future development of radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies including  xxxd1798xxx  for the treatment of leukemias
or micrometastases, may focus on alpha-emitting radionuclides that have a short distance of action and release very
high-energy emissions. therapy with an astatine-labeled
anti-cd25 monoclonal antibody provided effective therapy for a murine model of human adult t-cell leukemia
(79).
our systemic radioimmunotherapy clinical trials have
focused on the use of 90 y linked to anti-tac. eighteen
patients with atl were treated with a total of 55 doses of
90
y labeled anti-tac initially in a phase i dose escalation
trial and subsequently in a phase ii trial involving 10
µci of 90 y-labeled anti-tac per patient dose (8). patients
undergoing a partial or a complete response were permitted to receive up to eight additional doses of 90 y-labeled
anti-tac with a minimum of 6 weeks between courses.
at the 5–15 µci doses used, 10 of the 17 evaluable patients responded to 90 y-anti-tac with partial (8) or complete (2) remissions. the only meaningful ( > grade 3)
toxicity was limited to the hematopoietic system. more

12

recently, we have also had encouraging results with 90 y
humanized anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ) in the treatment of patients with hodgkin’s disease. there were 7 crs and 5
prs obtained in the 17 patients with hodgkin’s disease
treated with repeated doses of 15 µci of 90 y (16). thus, it
appears that  xxxd1798xxx  armed with the radionuclide 90 y
provides meaningful therapy for select patients with atl
and hodgkin’s disease.

humanized anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ) treatment
of autoimmune diseases

as noted previously (table i), increased serum soluble
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha (tac) concentrations have been demonstrated
in association with an array of autoimmune disorders including: wegener’s granulomatosis, vasculitis, polymyalgia rheumatica, giant cell arteritis, kawasaki disease, behcet’s syndrome, aplastic anemia, pure red cell aplasia,
crohn’s disease, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, scleroderma,
sjogren’s syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus
(4, 5).
 xxxd1798xxx  has been used effectively without meaningful toxicity in the treatment of select patients with
htlv-i associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis, ham/tsp, noninfectious uveitis, multiple sclerosis,
pure red cell aplasia, and aplastic anemia (12–15, 80–
85). ham/tsp is a neurological disease that results from
the interaction of retroviral infection and immune activation (15). immune activation is initiated through the
production of htlv-i encoded tax, a trans-activator of
viral genes and several host genes including those of
interleukin-2 and the interleukin-2 receptor  xxxg216xxx 
( xxxg1175xxx  alpha) (86, 87). other evidence for immune activation in ham/tsp is demonstrated by the presence of
ex vivo spontaneous proliferation of pbmc and htlv-i
tax-specific cd8 cytotoxic t-lymphocytes in the peripheral blood from ham/tsp patients (88). spontaneous
lymphoproliferation, which probably reflects the effect of
multiple autocrine cytokine loops including an autocrine
loop initiated by the activation of il-2 and  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
expression, can be inhibited ex vivo by the addition of
either an antibody to il-2 or to  xxxg1175xxx  alpha (anti-tac,  xxxd1798xxx ) (86, 87). in collaboration with lehky, jacobson,
and coworkers, we performed a study where we demonstrated a reduction in the htlv-i proviral load and spontaneous lymphoproliferation in patients with ham/tsp
who were treated with  xxxd1798xxx  (15). in this study, five
doses (1 mg/kg) of humanized anti-tac antibody were
administered to nine patients with ham/tsp at weeks 0,
2, 6, 10, and 14. immunological studies on the patients

waldmann

with ham/tsp treated with  xxxd1798xxx  indicated that
there was a selective downregulation in the number of
circulating activated t-cells that displayed the  xxxg1175xxx  alpha and a decrease in the ex vivo spontaneous
proliferation of pbmc as well as a decrease in htlv-i
viral loads in the peripheral lymphocytes that suggested
the selective removal of htlv-i infected  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
(cd25) expressing activated cd4 expressing lymphocytes (15). thus,  xxxd1798xxx  has been demonstrated to
have a potential role in the treatment of this autoimmune neurological disease that is secondary to htlv-i
infection.
with another autoimmune disorder, treatment with  xxxd1798xxx  in a phase i/ii clinical trial was effective in
preventing the progression of noninfectious intermediate and posterior uveitis. circulating t-cells in models
of experimental autoimmune uveitis in mice and nonhuman primates bear large numbers of il-2 receptors on
their surfaces (82). in studies focusing on experimental
uveitis, guex-crosier and colleagues in collaboration with
our group demonstrated that the infusion of  xxxd1798xxx 
had a positive effect on s-antigen-induced experimental
uveitis in nonhuman primates (82). large numbers of  xxxg1173xxx  receptors have been demonstrated on the circulating
t-cells from patients with uveitis. to evaluate the safety
and potential activity of  xxxd1798xxx  therapy in the treatment of patients with severe sight-threatening intermediate and posterior noninfectious uveitis, in a collaborative effort led by robert nussenblatt, a nonrandom openlabel pilot study was performed (12, 13). patients with
uveitis who had been treated with a minimum of prednisone, cyclosporin, antimetabolites, or any combination
of these agents were eligible. patients were weaned off
their systemic immunosuppressive agent while ultimately
receiving  xxxd1798xxx  infusions at 1 mg/kg every 4 weeks.
 xxxd1798xxx  administration appeared to prevent the continued expression of severe sight-threatening intraocular
inflammatory disease in eight of 10 patients treated over
a multiyear period with improvement in visual acuity.
additional benefits of the  xxxg1175xxx  target of treatment that
were observed after the patients were tapered off systemic
corticosteroids were improvements in blood pressure and
serum cholesterol levels.
 xxxd1798xxx  therapy was also effective in patients with
multiple sclerosis, an immune-mediated disorder of the
brain and spinal cord, where at least part of the inflammatory process can be objectively measured by contrastenhancing lesions on brain mri. in a collaborative study
led by bielekova and martin, we demonstrated that  xxxd1798xxx  inhibited disease activity in multiple sclerosis patients failing to respond to  xxxg1140xxx  (14,
85). an open-label phase ii baseline-to-treatment trial of

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

fig. 4  xxxd1798xxx  therapy inhibits disease activity in multiple sclerosis
patients failing to respond to beta interferon. new contrast-enhancing
lesions (cel) observed in 10 patients with multiple sclerosis receiving
 xxxd2370xxx  therapy alone is indicated at the left in months—3 to
0 and when  xxxd1798xxx  was added to  xxxd2370xxx  from months 0
through 7 (14). there was little efficacy observed for the first 4–6 weeks
of  xxxd1798xxx  therapy. however, after this period, there was a 78%
reduction in new contrast-enhancing lesions on brain mri during  xxxd1798xxx  therapy (modified and reproduced with permission from proc
natl acad sci usa 101:8705–8708, 2004 (14)).

 xxxd1798xxx  was performed in 10 multiple sclerosis patients manifesting an incomplete response to interferonbeta therapy and high-brain inflammatory and clinical
disease activity. in this initial study,  xxxd1798xxx  therapy was very well tolerated and led to a 78% reduction in new contrast-enhancing lesions and to a significant improvement in several clinical outcome measures (fig. 4). comparable sustained clinical improvement (10 patients) or stabilization (9 patients) was observed in an independent study by rose and coworkers
in 19 patients with ms treated with  xxxd1798xxx  (84).
a subsequent study in conjunction with bielekova and
martin was performed to investigate whether  xxxd1798xxx 
retains its beneficial effect when applied as monotherapy (85).  xxxd1798xxx  monotherapy was highly effective in 9/13 ms patients, whereas the synergistic effect of  xxxd1798xxx  and  xxxg1140xxx  was necessary to stabilize disease activity in 04/13. in this study overall ,
15 months of  xxxd1798xxx  therapy led to a significant inhibition of mri disease activity (by 72%) and to a significant amelioration of clinical disability. prolonged multidose therapy with  xxxd1798xxx  was associated with persistent efficacy. a phase ii multicenter study involving over
200 patients has been initiated.
 xxxd1798xxx  has also been studied by others in small
open-label trials involving patients with diverse autoimmune disorders. to examine the efficacy of  xxxd1798xxx  in

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

13

the treatment of pure red cell aplasia—a disease characterized by anemia, reticulocytopenia, and absence of bone
marrow erythroid precursors, 15 patients were treated with
1 mg/kg of this drug every 2 weeks for a total of five infusions (80). six of 15 patients (40%) responded to treatment. all responders became transfusion-independent and
achieved normal or near-normal hemoglobin values and
normal reticulocyte counts.
 xxxd1798xxx  was also evaluated in patients with moderate pancytopenia defined as a depression of two of
the three blood counts, absolute neutrophil count of
1200/mm3 or less, platelet count 70,000/mm3 or less,
or a hemoglobin level of 8.5 g/dl or less (81).  xxxd1798xxx  at 1 mg/kg was administered every 2 weeks for 3
months. six of the 16 (38%) evaluable patients responded
to treatment. two patients with previously chronic disease showed a complete return of normal hematological
counts that were sustained for more than 2 years following treatment. two previously transfusion-dependent
patients became transfusion independent; and one patient
with many neutropenia-related infections had a normal
neutrophil count following treatment (81).
nineteen patients with psoriasis, studied in two centers,
received  xxxd1798xxx  at an initial dose of 2 mg/kg, then
1 mg/kg at weeks 2, 4, 8, and 12. in those patients with
pretreatment psoriasis area and severity index with a score
of less than 36, there was a mean reduction in severity by
30% at 8 weeks (83).
in summary,  xxxd1798xxx  therapy at receptor saturating
doses of antibody, as evaluated in small open-label trials,
has provided efficacy with minimal toxicity in patients
with ham/tsp, multiple sclerosis, noninfectious uveitis,
pure red cell aplasia, moderate aplastic anemia, and psoriasis. efficacy required persistence of the therapy, with a
recurrence following reduction of circulating  xxxd1798xxx 
levels below that required to saturate the  xxxg1175xxx 
alpha. on the basis of these encouraging results, large
multicenter trials have been initiated using  xxxd1798xxx  in
the treatment of patients with t-cell mediated uveitis and
multiple sclerosis.

diverse mechanisms of action of  xxxd1798xxx 
in patients with autoimmune diseases

a number of mechanisms underlie the immunosuppressive effects of  xxxd1798xxx  therapy in autoimmune diseases
(89, 90). when administered at doses sufficient to saturate
the  xxxg1175xxx   xxxg216xxx , it inhibited the interaction of il-2 with its high-affinity receptor. this, in turn,
inhibited the il-2 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
the  xxxg1175xxx  beta and gamma subunits that are mediated by

14

il-2. furthermore, in coimmunoprecipitation experiments,  xxxd1798xxx  inhibited the il-2 induced association
of the  xxxg1175xxx  beta and common gamma chains—a prerequisite for their mutual phosphorylation (90). in addition,
utilizing the cytokine-dependent cell line kit 225 as well
as pha-activated lymphoblasts,  xxxd1798xxx  markedly inhibited phosphorylation of the  xxxg1219xxx ,  xxxg1221xxx , and stat-5
a/b components of the  xxxg1175xxx  dependent signaling pathway (89). furthermore, the administration of  xxxd1798xxx 
was associated with downregulation of the internalization
of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha but not  xxxg1175xxx  beta or the common gamma
chain (10, 89, 90). thus, one mode of action of  xxxd1798xxx 
is to interrupt il-2 mediated activation of cells that express
the high-affinity  xxxg1175xxx .
as noted earlier,  xxxd1798xxx  manifests adcc with
human mononuclear cells. furthermore, in the met-1
murine model of adult t-cell leukemia,  xxxd1798xxx  has
an action in addition to its role in the blockade of the interaction of il-2 with its growth factor, in that the antibody
was ineffective in mice that were deficient in the agonist
 xxxg769xxx  i,  xxxg769xxx  iii, and  xxxg769xxx  iv receptors, supporting the
view that an action requiring fc-receptor expression on
monocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes contributed
to the action of  xxxd1798xxx  (72).
recently, an additional mechanism of action has been
reported; i.e.,  xxxd1798xxx  interaction with the human il-2
receptor was associated with an expansion in the number of cd56bright natural killer cells that mediate immunomodulatory effects in patients with active uveitis
and multiple sclerosis (91, 92). nk cells have been divided by cooper and coworkers into two subsets based
on their cell-surface density of cd56 (cd56bright and
cd56dim) each with distinct phenotypic properties (31).
a cd56dim nk cell subset reflects cytotoxic cells that
express higher levels of ig-like nk receptors and fc
gamma receptor iii (cd16) than does the cd56bright
nk cell subset. the cd56bright subset in contrast has
the capacity to produce abundant cytokines following
activation of monocytes, but has low cytotoxic activity. the cd56bright subset expresses cd25 identified
by  xxxd1798xxx  whereas this receptor subunit is not expressed by the cd56dim nk cell subset. furthermore, the
cd56bright nk cells produce a number of immunoregulatory cytokines including il-10 that act as checkpoints
or brakes on the immune system (31, 92). in studies by
li and coworkers, administration of  xxxd1798xxx  to patients with active uveitis led to a four to twentyfold expansion of the cd56bright regulatory nk cells (92). furthermore, patients with active uveitis had a significantly
lower level of cd56bright nk cells compared with normal donors. in addition, the induced cd56bright cells
secreted large quantities of il-10 whereas the cd56dim

waldmann

did not—suggesting that the induction of cd56bright
cells might have a beneficial effect on the activity of the
uveitis. in a parallel study led by bielekova, administration of  xxxd1798xxx  was associated with a significant
expansion of cd56bright nk cells in vivo and this effect correlated highly with the treatment response (91).
there was a positive correlation between the expansion of
cd56bright nk and the contraction of cd4+ and cd8+
t-cell numbers in vivo providing supporting evidence for
nk-cell mediated negative immunoregulation of activated
t-cells during  xxxd1798xxx  therapy. in support of these two
studies, a regulatory role of nk cells has been demonstrated in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(eae) in mice (93). in these studies when mice were
deprived of nk cells by antibody treatment before administration of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (mog)
sub-35-55 peptide, the mice developed a more serious
form of eae associated with relapse (93). these studies
support the view that a subset of natural killer cells inhibits the activity in immune neurological diseases such as
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (eae). the
data presented in the two reports on uveitis and multiple
sclerosis support the existence of an immunoregulatory
pathway wherein cd56bright nk cells activated through
the action of  xxxd1798xxx  inhibit disordered t-cell action.
this immunoregulatory role has potential importance as
a mechanism of action of  xxxd1798xxx  that is of relevance
in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and transplant
rejection.
future directions

the inclusion of  xxxd1798xxx  has been of value in protocols to prevent acute organ allograft rejection. however,
the protocol approved by the fda for patients receiving
kidney allografts which involves only five 1 mg/kg antibody doses at 2-week intervals is not optimal.  xxxd1798xxx 
is not a cytotoxic monoclonal antibody but requires the
continued saturation of the  xxxg1175xxx  alpha receptor for its
persistent action. thus, when therapy with this agent is
terminated, an immune response to the foreign transplantation antigens on the organ develops, thereby explaining
the modest efficacy of therapy on prolongation of organ
and patient survival. to determine if this limitation could
be circumvented, it would be of value to evaluate a dosing
strategy that involves the indefinite q. 3 to 4-week administration of  xxxd1798xxx  using a protocol analogous to those
that have been effective in maintaining long-term suppression of disease progression in t-cell mediated uveitis and
multiple sclerosis.
an additional limitation in the use of  xxxd1798xxx  is that
it does not inhibit the action of il-15, a cytokine that does

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

not use  xxxg1175xxx  alpha, but utilizes its own private il-15r
alpha in addition to il-2/il-15r beta and the common
gamma chain that it shares with il-2. furthermore,  xxxd1798xxx  does not inhibit the actions of il-2 on resting
nk cells that display il-2/il-15r beta and gamma c but not
 xxxg1175xxx  alpha the target of  xxxd1798xxx . these limitations
could be addressed by simultaneously administrating  xxxd1798xxx  and an antibody, hu-mik-beta-1 that is directed
to the cytokine receptor ( xxxg1175xxx /il-15r beta) shared by
il-2 and il-15.
a number of approaches could be exploited to optimize the action of  xxxd1798xxx  in the therapy of cd25
( xxxg1175xxx  alpha) expressing lymphoid leukemias and lymphomas. combinations of unmodified  xxxd1798xxx  with
an array of agents including chemotherapeutic agents that
utilize a different mode of action could be evaluated in
order to follow the paradigm that monoclonal antibodies for cancer therapy are most effective as part of a
multidrug therapy regimen. insights derived from effective systemic radioimmunotherapy in preclinical models
of human t-cell malignancy in mice should be translated into human clinical trials. in particular, in patients
who have t-cell leukemia, select alpha-emitting radionuclides such as astatine-211 are being introduced in lieu
of the beta-emitting yttrium-90 whose crossfire effect is
relatively ineffective when directed toward isolated malignant cells. furthermore, multistep systemic radioimmunotherapy strategies such as pretargeting that decouple the administration of the radionuclide from that of
the antibody, to augment the proportion of the radionuclide delivered to the tumor, and accelerate the delivery
of the radionuclide following its administration could be
studied.
 xxxd1798xxx  has been shown to be of considerable value
in a number of t-cell mediated autoimmune disorders
that involve an abnormality of the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system. in particular, continuous therapy with  xxxd1798xxx  has
shown efficacy in select patients with the neurological disorder ham/tsp, multiple sclerosis, noninfectious uveitis,
pure red cell aplasia, aplastic anemia, and psoriasis.
therefore, evaluation of this agent is indicated for the
other autoimmune disorders that involve disorders of the
il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  alpha system with elevated serum  xxxg1175xxx  alpha
levels that are enumerated in table i, such as rheumatoid
arthritis. in support of this proposal,  xxxd1798xxx  was effective in a rhesus monkey model of collagen-induced
arthritis (94).
in summary, basic insights concerning the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system developed using  xxxd1798xxx  over the past
25 years when coupled with the experiences with this
humanized antibody in clinical trials are providing effective  xxxd1798xxx -mediated approaches for the treatment of

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

15

patients with leukemia/lymphoma, autoimmune disorders
and for the prevention of organ allograft rejection.
acknowledgments

this work was supported by the intramural research
program of the national cancer institute, nih. all animal studies were approved by the animal care and use
committee of the national cancer institute (nci) and all
clinical investigations had prior approval of the irb, nci.

references
1. uchiyama t, broder s, waldmann ta: a monoclonal antibody (antitac) reactive with activated and functionally mature human t-cells i
production of anti-tac monoclonal antibody and distribution of tac
( + ) cells. j immunol 126:1393–1397, 1981
2. uchiyama t, nelson dl, fleisher ta, waldmann ta: a monoclonal
antibody (anti-tac) reactive with activated and functionally mature
human t-cells ii expression of  xxxg1174xxx  on activated cytotoxic
killer t-cells suppressor cells and on one of two types of helper
t-cells. j immunol 126:1398–1403, 1981
3. wiseman lr, faulds d:  xxxd1798xxx : a review of its use in the
prevention of acute rejection in renal transplant recipients. drugs
58:1029–1042, 1999
4. waldmann ta: the multi-subunit interleukin-2 receptor. annu rev
biochem 58:875–911, 1989
5. waldmann ta: the il-2/ xxxg1175xxx  system: a target for rational
immune intervention. immunol today 14:264–270, 1993
6. foss fm, waldmann ta: interleukin-2 receptor-directed therapies
for cutaneous lymphomas. hematol oncol clin n am 17:1449–
1458, 2003
7. waldmann ta, goldman ck, bongiovanni kf, sharrow so, davey
mp, cease kb, greenberg sj, longo dl: therapy of patients with
human t-cell lymphotrophic virus i-induced adult t-cell leukemia
with anti-tac a monoclonal antibody to the receptor for interleukin2. blood 72:1805–1816, 1988
8. waldmann ta, white jd, carrasquillo ja, reynolds jc, paik ch,
gansow oa, brechbiel mw, jaffe es, fleisher ta, goldman ck,
top le, bamford r, zaknoen e, roessler e, kasten-sportes c,
england r, litou h, johnson ja, jackson-white t, manns a,
hanchard b, junghans rp, nelson dl: radioimmunotherapy of
interleukin-2r alpha-expressing adult t-cell leukemia with yttrium90-labeled anti-tac. blood 86:4063–4075, 1995
9. morris jc, waldmann ta: advances in  xxxg1173xxx  receptor targeted treatment. ann rheum dis 59(suppl 1):i109–i114, 2000
10. vincenti f, kirkman r, light s, bumgardner g, pescovitz m,
halloran p, neylan j, wilkinson a, ekberg h, gaston r, backman
l, burdick j: interleukin-2-receptor blockade with  xxxd1798xxx  to
prevent acute rejection in renal transplantation  xxxd1798xxx  triple
therapy study group. n engl j med 338:161–165, 1998
11. waldmann ta, o’shea j: the use of antibodies against the il-2
receptor in transplantation. curr opin immunol 10:507–512, 1998
12. nussenblatt rb, fortin e, schiffman r, rizzo l, smith j, van
vp, sran p, yaffe a, goldman ck, waldmann ta, whitcup sm:
treatment of noninfectious intermediate and posterior uveitis with
the humanized anti-tac mab: a phase i/ii clinical trial. proc natl
acad sci usa 96:7462–7466, 1999

16

13. nussenblatt rb, thompson dj, li z, chan cc, peterson js,
robinson rr, shames rs, nagarajan s, tang mt, mailman m,
velez g, roy c, levy-clarke ga, suhler eb, djalilian a, sen hn,
al-khatib s, ursea r, srivastava s, bamji a, mellow s, sran p,
waldmann ta, buggage rr: humanized anti-interleukin-2 ( xxxg1173xxx ) receptor alpha therapy: long-term results in uveitis patients
and preliminary safety and activity data for establishing parameters for subcutaneous administration. j autoimmun 21:283–293,
2003
14. bielekova b, richert n, howard t, blevins g, markovic-plese
s, mccartin j, frank ja, wurfel j, ohayon j, waldmann ta,
mcfarland hf, martin r: humanized anti-cd25 ( xxxd1798xxx ) inhibits disease activity in multiple sclerosis patients failing to respond to  xxxg1140xxx . proc natl acad sci usa 101:8705–8708,
2004
15. lehky tj, levin mc, kubota r, bamford rn, flerlage an, soldan
ss, leist tp, xavier a, white jd, brown m, fleisher ta, top
le, light s, mcfarland hf, waldmann ta, jacobson s: reduction
in htlv-i proviral load and spontaneous lymphoproliferation in
htlv-i-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis patients
treated with humanized anti-tac. ann  xxxd122xxx  44:942–947, 1998
16. o’mahony d, morris jc, carrasquillo ja, le n, paik ch, whatley
m, pittaluga s, fleisher ta, lee c, gao w, o’hagan d, brechbiel
m, waldmann ta, janik je: phase i/ii study of yttrium-90 labeled
humanized anti-tac (hat) monoclonal antibody and calcium dtpa
in cd25-expressing malignanices. j nucl med 47:98p, 2006
17. köhler g, milstein c: continuous cultures of fused cells secreting
antibody of predefined specificity. nature 256:495–497, 1975
18. ehrlich p: on immunity with special reference to cell life: croonian
lecture. in the collected papers of paul ehrlich, b himmelweir
(ed). london, pergammon, 1956, pp 148–192
19. schwartz rh: t-lymphocyte recognition of antigen in association
with gene products of the major histocompatibility complex. annu
rev immunol 3:237–261, 1985
20. robb rj, munck a, smith ka:  xxxg1173xxx  receptors quantitation specificity and biological relevance. j exp med 154:1455–
1474, 1981
21. waldmann ta: the meandering 45-year odyssey of a clinical immunologist. annu rev immunol 21:1–27, 2003
22. leonard wj, depper jm, uchiyama t, smith ka, waldmann ta,
greene wc: a monoclonal antibody that appears to recognize the
receptor for human  xxxg1173xxx ; partial characterization of
the receptor. nature 300:267–269, 1982
23. leonard wj, depper jm, kronke m, robb rj, waldmann ta,
greene wc: the human receptor for  xxxg1173xxx  evidence
for variable post-translational processing phosphorylation sulfation
and the ability of precursor forms of the receptor to bind t-cell
growth factor. j biol chem 260:1872–1880, 1985
24. leonard wj, depper jm, crabtree gr, rudikoff s, pumphrey j,
robb rj, kronke m, svetlik pb, peffer nj, waldmann ta, greene
wc: molecular cloning and expression of cdnas for the human
interleukin-2 receptor. nature 311:626–631, 1984
25. leonard wj, depper jm, kanehisa m, kronke m, peffer nj, svetlik
pb, sullivan m, greene wc: structure of the  xxxd2286xxx 
receptor gene. science 230:633–639, 1985
26. tsudo m, kozak rw, goldman ck, waldmann ta: demonstration
of a non-tac peptide that binds  xxxg1173xxx : a potential participant
in a multichain  xxxg1173xxx  receptor complex. proc natl acad sci
usa 83:9694–9698, 1986
27. sharon m, klausner rd, cullen br, chizzonite r, leonard wj:
novel interleukin-2 receptor subunit detected by cross-linking under
high-affinity conditions. science 234:859–863, 1986

waldmann

28. sugamura k, asao h, kondo m, tanaka n, ishii n, ohbo k,
nakamura m, takeshita t: the interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain:
its role in the multiple cytokine receptor complexes and t-cell development in xscid. annu rev immunol 14:179–205, 1996
29. noguchi m, nakamura y, russell sm, ziegler sf, tsang m, cao
x, leonard wj: interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain: a functional
component of the  xxxg1183xxx  receptor. science 262:1877–1880,
1993
30. sakaguchi s: naturally arising cd4+ regulatory t-cells for immunologic self-tolerance and negative control of immune responses.
annu rev.immunol 22:531–562, 2004
31. cooper ma, fehniger ta, turner sc, chen ks, ghaheri ba,
ghayur t, carson we, caligiuri ma: human natural killer cells: a
unique innate immunoregulatory role for the cd56(bright) subset.
blood 97:3146–3151, 2001
32. depper jm, leonard wj, robb rj, waldmann ta, greene wc:
blockade of the interleukin-2 receptor by anti-tac antibody: inhibition of human lymphocyte activation. j immunol 131:690–696,
1983
33. korsmeyer sj, greene wc, cossman j, hsu sm, jensen jp, neckers
lm, marshall sl, bakhshi a, depper jm, leonard wj, jaffe es,
waldmann ta: rearrangement and expression of immunoglobulin
genes and expression of  xxxg1174xxx  in hairy cell leukemia. proc
natl acad sci usa 80:4522–4526, 1983
34. holter w, goldman ck, casabo l, nelson dl, greene wc,
waldmann ta: expression of functional il 2 receptors by
lipopolysaccharide and interferon-gamma stimulated human monocytes. j immunol 138:2917–2922, 1987
35. herrmann f, cannistra sa, levine h, griffin jd: expression of
 xxxg1173xxx  receptors and binding of  xxxg1173xxx  by gamma
interferon-induced human leukemic and normal monocytic cells.
j exp med 162:1111–1116, 1985
36. waldmann ta: the structure function and expression of interleukin2 receptors on normal and malignant lymphocytes. science
232:727–732, 1986
37. depper jm, leonard wj, kronke m, noguchi pd, cunningham re,
waldmann ta, greene wc: regulation of  xxxg1173xxx  receptor expression: effects of phorbol diester phospholipase c and reexposure
to lectin or antigen. j immunol 133:3054–3061, 1984
38. reem gh, yeh nh:  xxxg1173xxx  regulates expression of its receptor and synthesis of gamma interferon by human t lymphocytes.
science 225:429–430, 1984
39. cantrell da, smith ka: transient expression of  xxxg1173xxx  receptors consequences for t-cell growth. j exp med 158:1895–1911,
1983
40. rubin la, nelson dl: the soluble interleukin-2 receptor: biology
function and clinical application. ann intern med 113:619–627,
1990
41. waldmann ta, goldman ck, robb rj, depper jm, leonard wj,
sharrow so, bongiovanni kf, korsmeyer sj, greene wc: expression of  xxxg1173xxx  receptors on activated human b cells. j exp
med 160:1450–1466, 1984
42. schorle h, holtschke t, hunig t, schimpl a, horak i: development
and function of t-cells in mice rendered interleukin-2 deficient by
gene targeting. nature 352:621–624, 1991
43. sadlack b, kuhn r, schorle h, rajewsky k, muller w, horak
i: development and proliferation of lymphocytes in mice deficient for both interleukins-2 and -4. eur j immunol 24:281–284,
1994
44. waldmann ta, dubois s, tagaya y: contrasting roles of il-2 and
il-15 in the life and death of lymphocytes: implications for immunotherapy. immunity 14:105–110, 2001

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

anti-tac ( xxxd1798xxx ): a personal odyssey

45. zhang x, sun s, hwang i, tough df, sprent j: potent and selective
stimulation of memory-phenotype cd8+ t-cells in vivo by il-15.
immunity 8:591–599, 1998
46. ku cc, murakami m, sakamoto a, kappler j, marrack p: control
of homeostasis of cd8+ memory t-cells by opposing cytokines.
science 288:675–678, 2000
47. marks-konczalik j, dubois s, losi jm, sabzevari h, yamada n,
feigenbaum l, waldmann ta, tagaya y: il-2-induced activationinduced cell death is inhibited in il-15 transgenic mice. proc natl
acad sci usa 97:11445–11450, 2000
48. waldmann ta: the biology of interleukin-2 and  xxxg1165xxx : implications for cancer therapy and vaccine design. nat rev immunol
6:595–601, 2006
49. sakaguchi s: naturally arising cd4+ regulatory t-cells for immunologic self-tolerance and negative control of immune responses.
annu rev immunol 22:531–562, 2004
50. lenardo mj: fas and the art of lymphocyte maintenance. j exp med
183:721–724, 1996
51. roifman cm: human  xxxg1175xxx  alpha chain deficiency. pediatr
res 48(1):6–11, 2000
52. lodolce jp, boone dl, chai s, swain re, dassopoulos t, trettin
s, ma a: il-15 receptor maintains lymphoid homeostasis by supporting lymphocyte homing and proliferation. immunity 9:669–676,
1998
53. kennedy mk, glaccum m, brown sn, butz ea, viney jl, embers
m, matsuki n, charrier k, sedger l, willis cr, brasel k, morrissey
pj, stocking k, schuh jc, joyce s, peschon jj: reversible defects
in natural killer and memory cd8 t-cell lineages in interleukin
15-deficient mice. j exp med 191:771–780, 2000
54. kirkman rl, shapiro me, carpenter cb, milford el, ramos el,
tilney nl, waldmann ta, zimmerman ce, strom tb: early experience with anti-tac in clinical renal transplantation. transplant
proc 21:1766–1768, 1989
55. tinubu sa, hakimi j, kondas ja, bailon p, familletti pc, spence
c, crittenden md, parenteau gl, dirbas fm, tsudo m, bacher
jd, kastensprtes c, waviucci jl, gddman ck clark re waldman
ta: humanized antibody directed to the  xxxg1175xxx  beta-chain
prolongs primate cardiac allograft survival. j immunol 153:4330–
4338, 1994
56. uchiyama t, yodoi j, sagawa k, takatsuki k, uchino h: adult
t-cell leukemia: clinical and hematologic features of 16 cases.
blood 50:481–492, 1977
57. shimoyama m: diagnostic criteria and classification of clinical subtypes of adult t-cell leukaemia-lymphoma a report from the lymphoma study group (1984–87). br j haematol 79:428–437, 1991
58. jeang kt: functional activities of the human t-cell leukemia virus
type i tax oncoprotein: cellular signaling through nf-kappa b.
cytokine growth factor rev 12:207–217, 2001
59. uchiyama t: human t-cell leukemia virus type i (htlv-i) and
human diseases. annu rev immunol 15:15–37, 1997
60. kirkman rl, shapiro me, carpenter cb, mckay db, milford el,
ramos el, tilney nl, waldmann ta, zimmerman ce, strom tb:
a randomized prospective trial of anti-tac monoclonal antibody in
human renal transplantation. transplant proc 23:1066–1067, 1991
61. queen c, schneider wp, selick he, payne pw, landolfi nf,
duncan jf, avdalovic nm, levitt m, junghans rp, waldmann ta:
a humanized antibody that binds to the  xxxg1173xxx  receptor. proc
natl acad sci usa 86:10029–10033, 1989
62. junghans rp, waldmann ta, landolfi nf, avdalovic nm,
schneider wp, queen c: anti-tac-h a humanized antibody to the
 xxxg1173xxx  receptor with new features for immunotherapy in malignant and immune disorders. cancer res 50:1495–1502, 1990

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

17

63. jones pt, dear ph, foote j, neuberger ms, winter g: replacing
the complementarity-determining regions in a human antibody with
those from a mouse. nature 321:522–525, 1986
64. nashan b, light s, hardie ir, lin a, johnson jr: reduction of
acute renal allograft rejection by  xxxd1798xxx .  xxxd1798xxx  double
therapy study group. transplantation 67:110–115, 1999
65. carswell ci, plosker gl, wagstaff aj:  xxxd1798xxx : a review of its
use in the management of organ transplantation. biodrugs 15:745–
773, 2001
66. beniaminovitz a, itescu s, lietz k, donovan m, burke em, groff
bd, edwards n, mancini dm: prevention of rejection in cardiac
transplantation by blockade of the interleukin-2 receptor with a
monoclonal antibody. n engl j med 342:613–619, 2000
67. kobashigawa j, david k, morris j, chu ah, steffen bj, gotz vp,
gordon rd:  xxxd1798xxx  is associated with decreased rejection and
no increased mortality in cardiac transplant patients receiving mmf
cyclosporine and corticosteroids. transplant proc 37:1333–1339,
2005
68. eckhoff de, mcguire b, sellers m, contreras j, frenette l, young
c, hudson s, bynon js: the safety and efficacy of a two-dose  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax) induction therapy in liver transplant recipients.
transplantation 69:1867–1872, 2000
69. niemeyer g, koch m, light s, kuse er, nashan b: long-term
safety tolerability and efficacy of  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax) in a twodose regimen in liver transplant recipients. am j transplant 2:454–
460, 2002
70. shapiro am, lakey jr, ryan ea, korbutt gs, toth e, warnock gl,
kneteman nm, rajotte rv: islet transplantation in seven patients
with type 1 diabetes mellitus using a glucocorticoid-free immunosuppressive regimen. n engl j med 343:230–238, 2000
71. phillips ke, herring b, wilson la, rickford ms, zhang m,
goldman ck, tso jy, waldmann ta:  xxxg1175xxx  alpha directed monoclonal antibodies provide effective therapy in a murine model of
adult t-cell leukemia by a mechanism other than blockade of  xxxg1173xxx / xxxg1175xxx  alpha interaction. cancer res 60:6977–6984, 2000
72. zhang m, zhang z, garmestani k, goldman ck, ravetch jv,
brechbiel mw, carrasquillo ja, waldmann ta: activating fc receptors are required for antitumor efficacy of the antibodies directed
toward cd25 in a murine model of adult t-cell leukemia. cancer
res 64:5825–5829, 2004
73. tan c, waldmann ta: proteasome inhibitor  xxxd357xxx  a potential
therapeutic agent for adult t-cell leukemia. cancer res 62:1083–
1086, 2002
74. zhang m, zhang z, goldman ck, janik j, waldmann ta: combination therapy for adult t-cell leukemia-xenografted mice:  xxxd135xxx  and anti-cd25 monoclonal antibody. blood 105:1231–1236,
2005
75. kreitman rj, wilson wh, white jd, stetler-stevenson m, jaffe
es, giardina s, waldmann ta, pastan i: phase i trial of recombinant immunotoxin anti-tac(fv)-pe38 (lmb-2) in patients
with hematologic malignancies. j clin oncol 18:1622–1636,
2000
76. axworthy db, reno jm, hylarides md, mallett rw, theodore
lj, gustavson lm, su f, hobson lj, beaumier pl, fritzberg ar:
cure of human carcinoma xenografts by a single dose of pretargeted yttrium-90 with negligible toxicity. proc natl acad sci usa
97:1802–1807, 2000
77. zhang m, yao z, garmestani k, axworthy db, zhang z,
mallett rw, theodore lj, goldman ck, brechbiel mw, carrasquillo ja, waldmann ta: pretargeting radioimmunotherapy of
a murine model of adult t-cell leukemia with the alpha-emitting
radionuclide bismuth. blood 100:208–216, 2002

18

78. zhang m, zhang z, garmestani k, schultz j, axworthy db,
goldman ck, brechbiel mw, carrasquillo ja, waldmann ta: pretarget radiotherapy with an anti-cd25 antibody-streptavidin fusion
protein was effective in therapy of leukemia/lymphoma xenografts.
proc natl acad sci usa 100:1891–1895, 2003
79. zhang m, yao z, zhang z, garmestani k, talanov vs,
plascjak ps, yu s, kim hs, goldman ck, paik ch, brechbiel mw,
carrasquillo ja, waldmann ta: the anti-cd25 monoclonal antibody 7g7/b6 armed with the {alpha}-emitter 211at provides effective radioimmunotherapy for a murine model of leukemia. cancer
res 66:8227–8232, 2006
80. sloand em, scheinberg p, maciejewski j, young ns: brief communication: successful treatment of pure red-cell aplasia with an
anti-interleukin-2 receptor antibody ( xxxd1798xxx ). ann intern med
144:181–185, 2006
81. maciejewski jp, sloand em, nunez o, boss c, young ns: recombinant humanized anti- xxxg1175xxx  antibody ( xxxd1798xxx ) produces responses in patients with moderate aplastic anemia. blood
102:3584–3586, 2003
82. guex-crosier y, raber j, chan cc, kriete ms, benichou j, pilson
rs, kerwin ja, waldmann ta, hakimi j, roberge fg: humanized
antibodies against the alpha-chain of the  xxxg1175xxx  and against
the beta-chain shared by the il-2 and il-15 receptors in a monkey
uveitis model of autoimmune diseases. j immunol 158:452–458,
1997
83. krueger jg, walters ib, miyazawa m, gilleaudeau p, hakimi j,
light s, sherr a, gottlieb ab: successful in vivo blockade of cd25
(high-affinity interleukin-2 receptor) on t-cells by administration of
humanized anti-tac antibody to patients with psoriasis. j am acad
dermatol 43:448–458, 2000
84. rose jw, watt he, white at, carlson ng: treatment of multiple
sclerosis with an anti-interleukin-2 receptor monoclonal antibody.
ann  xxxd122xxx  56:864–867, 2004
85. bielekova b, howard t, packer a, richert n, blevins g, o’hayon
j, waldmann ta, mcfarland hf, martin r:  xxxd1798xxx  inhibits inflammation and stabilizes disease progression in multiple sclerosis.
ann  xxxd122xxx , in press

waldmann

86. tendler cl, greenberg sj, blattner wa, manns a, murphy e,
fleisher t, hanchard b, morgan o, burton jd, nelson dl,
waldmann ta: transactivation of  xxxg1173xxx  and its receptor
induces immune activation in human t-cell lymphotropic virus type
i-associated myelopathy: pathogenic implications and a rationale
for immunotherapy. proc natl acad sci usa 87:5218–5222, 1990
87. azimi n, brown k, bamford rn, tagaya y, siebenlist u, waldmann
ta: human t-cell lymphotropic virus type i tax protein transactivates  xxxg1165xxx  gene transcription through an  xxxg1559xxx 
site. proc natl acad sci usa 95:2452–2457, 1998
88. azimi n, nagai m, jacobson s, waldmann ta: il-15 plays a major role in the persistence of tax-specific cd8 cells in ham/tsp
patients. proc natl acad sci usa 98:14559–14564, 2001
89. tkaczuk j, yu cl, baksh s, milford el, carpenter cb, burakoff
sj, mckay db: effect of anti-il-2ralpha antibody on il-2-induced
jak/stat signaling. am j transplant 2:31–40, 2002
90. goebel j, stevens e, forrest k, roszman tl:  xxxd1798xxx  (zenapax) inhibits early interleukin-2 receptor signal transduction events.
transpl immunol 8:153–159, 2000
91. bielekova b, catalfamo m, reichert-scrivner s, packer a, cerna
m, waldmann ta, mcfarland h, henkart pa, martin r: regulatory cd56(bright) natural killer cells mediate immunomodulatory effects of  xxxg1175xxx  alpha-targeted therapy ( xxxd1798xxx ) in
multiple sclerosis. proc natl acad sci usa 103:5941–5946,
2006
92. li z, lim wk, mahesh sp, liu b, nussenblatt rb: cutting edge:
in vivo blockade of human  xxxg1175xxx  induces expansion of
cd56(bright) regulatory nk cells in patients with active uveitis.
j immunol 174:5187–5191, 2005
93. zhang b, yamamura t, kondo t, fujiwara m, tabira t: regulation
of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by natural killer
(nk) cells. j exp med 186:1677–1687, 1997
94. brok hp, tekoppele jm, hakimi j, kerwin ja, nijenhuis em, de
groot cw, bontrop re, hart ba: prophylactic and therapeutic
effects of a humanized monoclonal antibody against the  xxxg1175xxx  ( xxxd1798xxx ) on collagen-induced arthritis (cia) in rhesus
monkeys. clin exp immunol 124:134–141, 2001

journal of clinical immunology, vol. 27, no. 1, 2007

