j inherit metab dis (2007) 30:96–99
doi 10.1007/s10545-006-0508-4

o r i g i na l a rt i c l e

pyridoxal 5 -phosphate may be curative in early-onset
epileptic encephalopathy
g. f. hoffmann · b. schmitt · m. windfuhr · n. wagner · h. strehl · s. bagci ·
a. r. franz · p. b. mills · p. t. clayton · m. r. baumgartner · b. steinmann · t. bast ·
n. i. wolf · j. zschocke

received: 14 november 2006 / submitted in revised form: 4 december 2006/ accepted: 5 december 2006 / published online: 23 december 2006
c ssiem and springer 2006


summary neonatal epileptic encephalopathy can be caused
by inborn errors of metabolism. these conditions are often unresponsive to treatment with conventional antiepileptic
drugs. six children with pyridox(am)ine-5 -phosphate oxidase ( xxxg1793xxx ) deficiency presented with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy. two were treated with pyridoxal 5 -phosphate

(plp) within the first month of life and showed normal development or moderate psychomotor retardation thereafter. four
children with late or no treatment died or showed severe mental handicap. all of the children showed atypical biochemical
findings. prompt treatment with plp in all neonates and infants with epileptic encephalopathy should become mandatory, permitting normal development in at least some of those
affected with  xxxg1793xxx  deficiency.

communicating editor: michael gibson
competing interests: none declared
g. f. hoffmann
department of general pediatrics, ruprecht-karls-university
heidelberg, heidelberg, germany
b. schmitt
division of clinical neurophysiology, university children’s
hospital zürich, zürich, switzerland
m. windfuhr · n. wagner · h. strehl
childrens hospital dortmund, dortmund, germany
s. bagci · a. r. franz
department of neonatology, center for pediatrics, university of
bonn, bonn, germany
p. b. mills · p. t. clayton
university college london institute of child health, london, uk
m. r. baumgartner · b. steinmann
divison of metabolism and molecular pediatrics, university
children’s hospital zürich, zürich, switzerland
t. bast · n. i. wolf
department of neuropediatrics, ruprecht-karls-university
heidelberg, heidelberg, germany
j. zschocke ()
institute of human genetics, ruprecht-karls-university
heidelberg, heidelberg, germany
e-mail: johannes.zschocke@med.uni-heidelberg.de

springer

abbreviations
plp
pyridoxal 5 -phosphate
 xxxg1793xxx  pyridox(am)ine-5 -phosphate oxidase

introduction
epileptic seizures represent a frequent and serious emergency
in neonates. rarely, severe early-onset seizures are the predominant or exclusive manifestation of an inborn error of
metabolism. such seizures are often refractory to conventional treatment and the outcome is grim, e.g. in gabatransaminase deficiency or glycine encephalopathy (nonketotic hyperglycinaemia).
in 1954 hunt and colleagues were the first to describe a
patient with a seizure disorder that was successfully treated
solely by the administration of pyridoxine ( xxxd3049xxx  ) and
coined the term ‘pyridoxine dependency’ (hunt et al 1954).
it became good clinical practice to test for pyridoxine dependency in every child with ‘difficult-to treat’ seizures starting before 2 years of age. recently the enzymatic defect
was pinpointed to a piperideine-6-carboxylate dehydrogenase located in the cns degradation pathway of lysine,
which resulted in the accumulation of an intermediate scavenging  xxxd3047xxx  (mills et al 2006). the diagnosis
may be confirmed by measurement of urinary alpha-aminoadipic

j inherit metab dis (2007) 30:96–99

97

fig. 1  xxxd3049xxx  metabolism.
 xxxd3047xxx  is
synthesized from dietary
pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and
pyridoxine by  xxxg1720xxx 
(pk) and pyridox(am)ine
5 -phosphate oxidase ( xxxg1793xxx ).
p = phosphate

semialdehyde. elevated csf and plasma pipecolic acid is
also a marker for this inborn error of metabolism (plecko
et al 2000). a similar pathogenic mechanism is responsible
for pyridoxal deficiency in hyperprolinaemia type ii (farrant
et al 2001) and during treatment with the tuberculostatic drug
isoniazid.
very recently it was recognized that in some children
epileptic encephalopathy may be resistant to pyridoxine
but ceases with administration of pyridoxal 5 -phosphate
(plp) (clayton et al 2003). it was shown that this condition is due to a genetic deficiency of pyridox(am)ine5 -phosphate oxidase ( xxxg1793xxx ) inherited as an autosomal
recessive trait (mills et al 2005). without  xxxg1793xxx , pyridoxine
and pyridoxamine cannot be converted into plp, leaving
exogenous pyridoxal/plp as the only source of the active co-factor (fig. 1). csf and urine analyses in affected
children show evidence of secondary deficiencies of several plp-dependent enzymes including aromatic l-amino
acid decarboxylase (resulting in decreased csf concentrations of homovanillic acid, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, and raised levels of
l-dopa, 5-hydroxytryptophan and 3-o-methyldopa as well
as increased urinary concentrations of vanillactic acid), threonine dehydratase (causing raised csf threonine), glycine
cleavage system (causing raised csf glycine) and ornithine
delta-aminotransferase (causing low csf arginine). in addition, patients may display variable lactic acidaemia as well
as a tendency to hypoglycaemia and raised csf levels
of histidine and taurine. all patients reported so far have
been born prematurely (clayton et al 2003; mills et al
2005).
unfortunately, plp is not available as a licensed drug
either in europe or in the united states. diagnosis in
the past usually rested on the identification of the characteristic metabolic derangement in csf, which so far has
been found in all reported patients with  xxxg1793xxx  deficiency.
nevertheless, in 2004 we started to use plp in all infants
with refractory epilepsy following a therapeutic trial of pyridoxine and  xxxd2147xxx  irrespective of diagnostic biochemical markers. this led to the identification of  xxxg1793xxx  de-

ficiency in six additional patients from three independent
families, all with at least partly non-characteristic metabolic
findings.

patients
patient 1, a girl, was born at 34 weeks of gestation, reportedly
developed intractable seizures and died  xxxd2274xxx  months of age.
detailed diagnostic efforts were unrevealing and ohtahara
syndrome was suspected. the father and mother were nonconsanguineous of lebanese and iraqi origin, respectively;
the father was not related to the third family described here.
patient 2, sister of patient 1, was born at 37 + 5 weeks
of gestation. shortly after birth she developed repeated
myoclonus and progressively more complex and frequent
seizures with burst-suppression eeg that proved unresponsive to pyridoxine and various antiepileptic drugs. the child
cried frequently as if in intractable severe pain, which was
very straining for her carers. detailed metabolic investigations were unremarkable except for an increase of threonine
in csf. csf lactate was normal. a therapeutic breakthrough
was achieved with plp. the eeg immediately almost normalized, seizures ameliorated, and the girl awoke, stopped
the frequent crying, started feeding, fixated and smiled and
could be discharged home at 2 months of age. molecular
analysis in the girl revealed homozygosity for the mutation
r95c (c.283c > t) in the  xxxg1793xxx  gene and heterozygosity in
the parents. this mutation has not been described before and
affects a highly conserved amino acid. at the present age of
2 years 5 months she is developing well with moderate psychomotor delay and occasional seizures on 50 mg/kg/day
plp in six doses.
patient 3, a boy, the first child of non-consanguineous parents, was born at 39 weeks of gestation. the mother reported
rhythmic fetal movements in the 36th and 38th weeks of
gestation. family history was negative for epilepsy. at age
36 hours the otherwise normal newborn showed an episode
of 15–20 minutes with eye deviation, intermittent prominent ocular convergence, grimaces, erratic movements and
springer

98

j inherit metab dis (2007) 30:96–99

multifocal myoclonic jerks associated with heavy crying,
flushed appearance and diaphoresis. similar episodes occurred over the next days and weeks. additionally we observed long-lasting series of spasms, with crying and nasal
eye deviation; and short episodes with abnormal eye movements, smiling, smacking or forehead frowning. several
long-term eegs were normal, even during the spasms. only
one eeg showed subclinical left temporal spike wave discharges. mri of the brain and metabolic studies in cerebrospinal fluid, plasma and urine including amino acids,
organic acids and pipecolic acid were all normal. phenobarbital, clonazepam, phenytoin and pyridoxine (up to 55
mg/kg) were not effective. vigabatrin possibly suppressed
the spasms. at age 28 days 200 mg/day plp in four doses
was introduced. in the next 24 hours short episodes of apnoea, sleepiness, muscle hypotonia and feeding difficulties
occurred. subsequently the boy normalized and antiepileptic medication could be discontinued without relapse. withdrawal of plp at age 7 months was followed by erratic movements, agitated eye movements, irritability and crying after 7 hours. the eeg, normal at first, showed generalized
rhythmic fast activity over 2 minutes when the symptoms increased. after 200 mg plp, symptoms resolved within about
20 minutes and the eeg normalized. at age 9 months testing
by the bayley scales of infant development showed normal
results (psychomotor developmental index 101, reference
range 100 ± 15). because of rare breakthrough seizures (distress, agitation, rolling eyes) at the end of the 6 hours drug
interval, plp was increased from 60 to 100 mg/kg per day
and divided into six doses. at the last visit (age 1.5 years) the
boy was seizure free; only sleep was disturbed with frequent
awakening. he was compound heterozygous for a missense
mutation, d33v (c.98a > t), and a single base pair deletion,
c.246delt, in the  xxxg1793xxx  gene. csf studies initially showed
only increased levels of 3-methoxytyrosine and serine and
slightly increased taurine and histidine. all of these parameters normalized after plp substitution.
patient 4’s parents were first cousins of lebanese origin.
two other children, a boy (patient 5, born at 36 weeks of
gestation) and a girl (patient 6, born at 30 weeks of gestation), had died from neonatal-onset epileptic encephalopathy. patient 4, a boy, was born spontaneously at 35 weeks
of gestation with signs of fetal distress. he had treatmentresistant, pyridoxine-nonresponsive epilepsy with frequent
seizures from the second day of life. electroencephalograms
showed generalized burst suppression. cranial mr was normal at 6 weeks of age. severe epilepsy persisted under various
antiepileptic drug regimens and other treatments including
ketogenic diet and acth, and his psychomotor development
was severely retarded. he showed frequent attacks of painful
crying which were interpreted as signifying abdominal pain
by the parents but were associated with epileptic seizures. at
the age of 3 years, a repeat mri scan revealed severe diffuse
springer

cerebral atrophy. at this time, a therapeutic trial with plp
(35 mg/kg per day in 3 doses) was initiated. twenty-three
minutes after the first oral administration of plp the eeg
burst-suppression pattern changed to complete suppression
for 90 minutes before alpha and theta activity resumed. plp
treatment resulted in markedly reduced seizure activity, albeit
seizures did not stop completely. all three affected children
in this family initially presented with lactic acidosis. remarkably, detailed metabolic investigations including csf
analyses performed in patient 4 during infancy did not reveal any of the abnormalities reported as characteristic for
 xxxg1793xxx  deficiency. in patient 5, metabolic investigations including amino acids and metabolites of biogenic amines in
csf were also all normal. in patient 6, only a transient increase of threonine and glycine in csf and a decrease of
serotonin in plasma had been noted; homovanillic acid and 5hydroxyindoleacetic acid in csf were transiently increased
but at no time decreased, as would have been expected. mutation analysis in patients 4 and 6 identified homozygosity
for the same mutation r95c found in the family of patients
1 and 2, and heterozygosity in the parents.

discussion
in view of the rapid treatment success and in analogy to
pyridoxine dependency we suggest calling this disorder  xxxd3047xxx  dependency. characteristic differences between these two conditions are listed in table 1. we do
not yet know the full clinical and biochemical spectrum
of  xxxd3047xxx  dependency, but it is much broader
than initially suggested. most likely, there are other children who are not born prematurely and have normal or inconclusive results in biochemical studies. other prematurely
born infants with  xxxg1793xxx  deficiency will be misdiagnosed as
hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy since an associated transient lactic acidosis would wrongly support this working hypothesis. furthermore, biochemical features of reduced  xxxg618xxx  activity such as a decrease
of serotonin in plasma or a decrease of homovanillic and 5hydroxyindoleacetic acids in csf, thought to be the most
suggestive and characteristic findings (brautigam et al 2002;
clayton et al 2003), may be only transiently present or absent
altogether.
we suggest that in future, all neonates and infants with
epileptic encephalopathy as well as prematurely born infants
with hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy should receive a
therapeutic trial with oral plp (30 mg/kg per day in three
doses for at least one day) in addition to pyridoxine (100 mg
i.v. in a single dose, to be repeated and possibly increased
to 500 mg in total) and  xxxd2147xxx  (3–5 mg/kg per day for
two to three days; no therapeutic response was observed with
pyridoxine or  xxxd2147xxx  in our patients). this test should be

j inherit metab dis (2007) 30:96–99

99

table 1 comparison of characteristic clinical and biochemical features of  xxxd3047xxx  dependency ( xxxg1793xxx  deficiency) compared to
pyridoxine dependency

pregnancy
prenatal seizures
prematurity
apgar score
perinatal complications
lactate (blood, csf)
amino acids (blood, csf)
metabolite pattern suggestive of  xxxg618xxx  deficiencyb
pipecolic acid (csf, blood)
alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde (urine)

pyridoxine dependency

 xxxd3047xxx  dependency

normal (in utero seizures)
yes
unusual
normal
mild distress possible
normal
normal
no
elevated
elevated

fetal distress frequenta
yes
frequent
low
‘signs of asphyxia’
may be elevated
elevated glycine, threonine
frequent (pseudo- xxxg618xxx  deficiency)
normal
normal

a

fetal distress documented on the cardiotocogram in several of our patients is thought to represent plp deficiency and intrauterine seizure activity
rather than fetal hypoxia
b
 xxxg618xxx  deficiency =  xxxg618xxx  deficiency

carried out in conjunction with appropriate metabolic investigations in urine, blood and csf but should not be delayed
until the results of the biochemical tests have been returned.
a single dose of plp may not be conclusive as seizures
can recur early and mask the positive response. the recommended dose of plp may not be enough for some children,
and to gain complete seizure control it may be necessary to
increase plp administration to four to six times per day. it is
quite likely that plp will also correct pyridoxine-dependent
seizures due to piperideine-6-carboxylate dehydrogenase deficiency, and thus plp could even be used as the first-line
drug instead of pyridoxine in neonatal and infantile epileptic
encephalopathy once it has become available as a licensed
drug. distinction between  xxxg1793xxx  deficiency and piperideine6-carboxylate dehydrogenase deficiency is possible by biochemical and molecular means in children who respond to
plp (table 1).
additional infants with epileptic encephalopathy as well
as older infants and children with intractable seizures who
responded to plp but not to pyridoxine have already been
described (kuo and wang 2002; wang et al 2005). it remains
to be seen whether these too are affected by  xxxg1793xxx  deficiency.
further research will be necessary to investigate the full clinical and biochemical spectrum of this disorder and to optimize
timing and dosage of therapy as well as prenatal therapy in
families known to be at risk.

references
bräutigam c, hyland k, wevers r, et al (2002) clinical and laboratory
findings in twins with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy mimicking  xxxg618xxx  deficiency. neuropediatrics 33: 113–117.
clayton pt, surtees ra, devile c, hyland k, heales sj (2003) neonatal epileptic encephalopathy. lancet 361: 1614.
farrant rd, walker v, mills ga, mellor jm, langley gj (2001)  xxxd3047xxx  de-activation by pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid. increased risk of  xxxd3049xxx  deficiency and seizures in hyperprolinemia type ii. j biol chem 276: 15107–15116.
hunt ad jr, stokes j jr, mccrory ww, stroud hh (1954) pyridoxine
dependency: report of a case of intractable convulsions in an infant
controlled by pyridoxine. pediatrics 13: 140–145.
kuo mf, wang hs (2002)  xxxd3047xxx -responsive epilepsy
with resistance to pyridoxine. pediatr  xxxd122xxx  26: 146–
147.
mills pb, surtees ra, champion mp, et al (2005) neonatal epileptic
encephalopathy caused by mutations in the  xxxg1793xxx  gene encoding
pyridox(am)ine 5 -phosphate oxidase. hum mol genet 14: 1077–
1086.
mills pb, struys e, jakobs c, et al (2006) mutations in antiquitin in
individuals with pyridoxine-dependent seizures. nat med 12: 307–
309.
plecko b, stockler-ipsiroglu s, paschke e, erwa w, struys ea, jakobs
c (2000) pipecolic acid elevation in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid
of two patients with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy. ann  xxxd122xxx 
48: 121–125.
wang hs, kuo mf, chou ml, et al (2005)  xxxd3047xxx  is better than pyridoxine for controlling idiopathic intractable epilepsy.
arch dis child 90: 512–515.

springer

