refractive hypotension in a patient with
disulfiram-ethanol reaction
min-po ho, md; chia-hung yo, md; chang-ming liu, md; chun-lin chen, md;
chien-chang lee, md, msc

abstract: disulfiram (antabuse) is used for aversive
treatment of alcohol dependence with good effects.
through inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase, disulfiram heightens serum aldehyde concentration after alcohol ingestion and causes aversive disulfiram-ethanol
reaction. typical symptoms of this reaction include
flushing, nausea, dyspnea, tremor, and confusion, which
are usually self-limiting. however, severe life-threatening arterial hypotension sometimes develops. we report
here a patient with generalized flushing, tremor, and

refractive hypotension after ingestion of alcohol 18
hours after disulfiram treatment. initial volume resuscitation and dopamine infusion failed to restore the blood
pressure. noradrenaline was given and the blood pressure returned to normal range. this case illustrates the
intensity of disulfiram-ethanol reaction and underscores
the advantageous use of noradrenaline in patients in
such a critical condition. key indexing terms: disulfiram; alcohol; hypotension; disulfiram-ethanol reaction. [am j med sci 2007;333(1):53–55.]

a

resuscitation, in which case a potent vasopressor
may be needed. we report a case of a young man who
had severe hypotension due to severe disulfiramethanol reaction and underscore the use of noradrenaline in such a critical condition.

lcohol abuse and alcoholism constitutes a major, multifaceted problem throughout the world.
disulfiram ( xxxd1916xxx  disulfide) has been
the cornerstone of pharmacologic therapy to aid alcohol abstinence in the past 60 years. it belongs to
one of several aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitors
that raise the blood level of acetaldehyde after ethanol ingestion.1–3 its use requires specialist supervision because unpredictable and occasionally severe reaction can occur during treatment.4 this
reaction is referred to as “disulfiram-ethanol reaction” and consists of episodes of flushing, weakness,
nausea, and, occasionally, hypotension.3
the symptoms are considered to be the results of
acetaldehyde formation because of the intensity of
clinical symptoms in relation to the blood levels
of acetaldehyde among volunteers who received both
disulfiram and alcohol.5 most symptoms of disulfiram-ethanol reactions are self-limiting and can be
managed expectantly. on rare occasions, the hypotension can be severe and not amenable to fluid

from the department of emergency medicine, far eastern
memorial hospital (mph, chy, cml), the department of emergency
medicine, national taiwan university hospital (chy, ccl), and
the department of psychiatry, far eastern memorial hospital
(clc), taipei, taiwan.
submitted april 21, 2006; accepted in revised form july 26,
2006.
correspondence: dr. chien-chang lee, department of emergency
medicine, national taiwan university hospital, #7, chung-shan
south road, taipei 100, taiwan (e-mail: chnchnglee@ha.mc.
ntu.edu.tw).
the american journal of the medical sciences

case report
a 35-year-old man with a history of chronic alcoholism presented to the emergency department with generalized flushing
and tremor after drinking half a bottle of whisky. he reported
that he underwent a complete course of disulfiram treatment
(antabuse 400 mg once a day for 7 days) 1 day before and denied
any past history of drug allergy. he had a blood pressure of 85/43
mm hg, pulse rate of 110/min, respiratory rate of 22/min, and
body temperature of 36.6°c.
on examination, the patient appeared anxious and agitated.
auscultation of the lungs revealed bilateral, symmetric, clear
breathing sounds. the jugular veins were flat in the semi-erect
position, and the abdomen was not distended, soft, and with
normoactive bowel sounds. pulse oxymetry showed an oxygen
saturation of 97% in room air. a 12-lead electrocardiograph
showed sinus tachycardia. laboratory results revealed a white
blood cell count of 13,920/ml and a serum alcohol level of 69
mg/dl (reference range, 0 mg/dl). other hematologic and biochemical findings, including hemoglobin, hematocrit, cardiac enzymes, blood sugar, electrolytes, renal function, and liver function
test findings were within normal limits. chest and abdominal
radiographs were likewise unremarkable.
under the suspicion of hypotension due to disulfiram-ethanol
reaction, fluid resuscitation with 2000 ml of lactated ringer
solution was initially made. however, the fluid challenge failed to
correct the unstable hemodynamics. arterial hypotension and
urinary output worsened despite maximal doses of dopamine
support. intravenous noradrenaline was then administered,
which caused a return of blood pressure to 125/68 mm hg. the
hot flushing and restlessness also gradually improved. the patient was discharged from the emergency department on the
same day.

53

refractive hypotension in disulfiram-ethanol reaction

discussion
it is almost 60 years since disulfiram was introduced for the treatment of alcohol dependence. disulfiram acts through the inhibition of the hepatic
low km (michaelis-menten constant) aldehyde dehydrogenase, which leads to elevation of blood acetaldehyde concentrations after ethanol intake and
causes aversive reactions on the patients.3 the decision to use this medication requires balanced consideration of efficacy and toxicity.
although early clinical studies of disulfiram have,
for the most part, reported excellent results, most of
these studies were lacking in control groups or
blinding. the results of the first multisite randomized clinical trial were published in 1986; the study
found that disulfiram did not result in more total
abstinence, but there were few drinking days.6 the
multisite study was later criticized on the methods
of disulfiram administration because it allowed the
patients to take it at their discretion, but the adherence to disulfiram was poor.7 in 1992, a randomized
clinical trial comparing the supervised administration of disulfiram to placebo found significantly less
drinking with disulfiram.8
disulfiram plus alcohol, even in small amounts,
produce disulfiram-ethanol reaction. classic disulfiram-ethanol reaction includes flushing, nausea,
sweating, dyspnea, tremor, and confusion. in severe
reactions, there may even be arrhythmias, myocardial
infarction, acute congestive heart failure, unconsciousness, convulsions, and death.3,4,9 there were only a few
reported cases of severe cardiovascular collapse. a
50-year-old man taking disulfiram 800 mg/day was
reported having severe hypotension when he consumed a bottle of wine. the patient was refractive to
dopamine and volume resuscitation. he was administered intravenous norepinephrine, which resulted in a
rapid improvement in blood pressure.10
arrhythmia and hypotension were also reported
in a 48-year-old man when he was given a disulfiram-alcohol test a week after starting disulfiram
250 mg twice daily.11 in addition to classic disulfiram effects, he exhibited atrial fibrillation and
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. our patient
represents one of the few case reports in the literature with severe refractive hypotension.
as with previous reports, we observed that noradrenaline was the vasopressor with real benefit in
this condition. the mechanism of hypotension induced by the concomitant use of ethanol and disulfiram was thought to be vasodilation due to acetaldehyde accumulation. another metabolite of disulfiram,
 xxxd1917xxx , would attenuate the adrenergic response to hypotension due to the inhibition of
 xxxg608xxx , a rate-limiting step in
noradrenalin synthesis.12 dopamine exerted its vasopressor effects via release of endogenous catechol54

amine and hence might not be effective in this catecholamine-depleted condition.
noradrenaline or adrenaline should be the vasopressor of choice. successful treatment of hypotension resulting from a der has been reported using
the maximum dosage of adrenaline as high as 170
␮g/kg/hour.13 the duration of the reaction varies
from 30 to 60 minutes to several hours in the more
severe cases, or as long as there is alcohol in the
blood.
another factor that contributed to the intensity of
the reaction in this patient may be the high serum
concentration of alcohol. although the intensity of
reaction varies with each individual, it is generally
proportional to the amounts of alcohol ingested.5,14
mild reactions can occur in the sensitive individual
when the blood alcohol concentration is increased to
as little as 5 to 10 mg per 100 ml. symptoms are
fully developed at 50 mg per 100 ml and unconsciousness usually results when the blood alcohol
level reaches 125 to 150 mg. our patient had a
serum alcohol concentration of 69 mg/dl, which may
explain the severity of the symptoms.
disulfiram does not have to be used when a patient initially presents for treatment. however, if
the patient is struggling to achieve sobriety, the
supervised administration of disulfiram is warranted. toxicity and side effects generally should
not be the obstacle for disulfiram prescription. the
side effects are usually minor and serious adverse
reactions are uncommon, although monitoring for
hepatotoxicity should be done. when severe hypotension occurs, adrenaline/noradrenaline should be
administered judiciously.

references
1. wright c, moore rd. disulfiram treatment of alcoholism.
am j med 1990;88:647–55.
2. fuller rk, gordis e. does disulfiram have a role in alcoholism treatment today? addiction 2004;99:21–4.
3. petersen en. the pharmacology and toxicology of disulfiram and its metabolites. acta psychiatr scand suppl 1992;
369:7–13.
4. garver e, ross ad, tu gc, et al. paradigm to test a
drug-induced aversion to ethanol. alcohol alcohol 2000;35:
435–8.
5. johnsen j, stowell a, morland j. clinical responses in
relation to blood acetaldehyde levels. pharmacol toxicol
1992;70:41–5.
6. fuller rk, branchey l, brightwell dr, et al. disulfiram
treatment of alcoholism. a veterans administration cooperative study. jama 1986;256:1449–55.
7. brewer c. disulfiram treatment of alcoholism. jama 1987;
257:926–7.
8. chick j, gough k, falkowski w, et al. disulfiram treatment of alcoholism. br j psychiatry 1992;161:84–9.
9. health mj, pachar jv, perez martinez al, et al.

january 2007 volume 333 number 1

ho et al

an exceptional case of lethal disulfiram-alcohol reaction. forensic sci int 1992;56:45–50.
10. savas mc, gullu ih. disulfiram-ethanol test reaction: significance of supervision. ann pharmacother 1997;31:374–5.
11. motte s, vincent jl, gillet jb, et al. refractory hyperdynamic shock associated with alcohol and disulfiram.
am j emerg med 1986;4:323–5.
12. tottmar o, hellstrom e. blood pressure response to ethanol in relation to acetaldehyde levels and dopamine-beta-

the american journal of the medical sciences

hydroxylase activity in rats pretreated with disulfiram,
cyanamide and coprine. acta pharmacol toxicol 1979;45:
272–81.
13. moller lm, pedersen b. high-dose adrenaline in the treatment of severe hypotensive crisis caused by a disulfiramethanol reaction. ugeskr laeger 1990;152:2437–8.
14. johansson b. a review of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of disulfiram and its metabolites. acta psychiatr scand suppl 1992;369:15–26.

55

