cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732
www.elsevier.com/locate/cellbi

effects of taxol treatment on the microtubular system and
mitochondria of tetrahymena
p. kovács a, g. csaba a,*, éva pállinger b, renate czaker c
a

department of genetics, cell- and immunobiology, semmelweis university, nagyvárad tér 4, pob 370, h-1445 budapest, hungary
b
molecular immunological research group, hungarian academy of sciences, budapest, hungary
c
center of anatomy and cell biology, medical university, vienna, austria
received 30 october 2006; revised 12 december 2006; accepted 10 january 2007

abstract
complex investigation was done using immunocytochemical confocal microscopy, electron microscopy and flow cytometry on the effect of
taxol to the microtubular arrangement and dynamics. the most interesting phenomenon was the rapid disappearance of transversal microtubule
bands, while longitudinal microtubule bands remained and were submitted to the known effects of taxol. there was a broad variation in mitochondrial effect, some of them remained normal, while others swollen, desintegrated and their tubules disoriented. treatment with 50 nm taxol
significantly reduced the binding of anti a-tubulin antibody and a lesser degree anti-acetylated tubulin antibody. the difference between the
transversal and longitudinal microtubules is emphasized by the results and the paper discusses the possibilities of indirect effects of taxol to
the transversal microtubules (tubulin-gtp interaction, faster turnover, mitochondrial interaction). polyglutamylation of tubulin has not a role
in this difference.
ó 2007 international federation for cell biology. published by elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
keywords: microtubules; taxol; tetrahymena; transversal microtubule band

1. introduction
microtubules are targets for many antimitotic agents, including taxol. these agents are able to suppress microtubule
dynamics and they are useful probes to investigate the role
of these polymers in vivo.
taxol is a complex diterpene isolated from the bark of
taxus brevifolia; it is an effective antitumor drug, a potent inhibitor of cell proliferation and arrests cells in mitosis by a stabilizing action on microtubules (rowinsky and donehower,
1995). the well-established action mechanism of taxol in
the treatment of cancer is based on this stabilization of microtubules in tumor cells and induction of apoptosis. in addition
greatly increasing the microtubule polymer mass in cells, taxol
also induces microtubule ‘‘bundling’’ (turner and margolis,

* corresponding author. tel.: þ36 1 210 2950; fax: þ36 1 303 6968.
e-mail address: csagyor@dgci.sote.hu (g. csaba).

1984). in contrast to other antitumor drugs such as colchicine
and vinblastine, which bind to the tubulin dimer, taxol has
a binding site on the microtubule polymer. microtubules that
are formed in the presence of taxol are resistant to depolymerization by cold, dilution and ca2þ; resulting in the formation
of stable bundles of microtubules (schiff and horwitz, 1980).
in eukaryotic cells, tubulin heterogeneity is generated at the
gene level and is considerably increased by several types of
posttranslational modifications, as acetylation, polyglutamylation. in tetrahymena, as in other ciliates and flagellates, the
number of tubulin genes is reduced (one a- and two b-tubulin
genes, and also a g-tubulin gene), in spite of the complexity of
the microtubular cytoskeleton: tetrahymena assembles 17
types of distinct microtubules, which are localized in cilia,
cell cortex, nuclei and the endoplasm. these diverse microtubules have distinct morphologies, stabilities and associations
with specific microtubule-associated proteins (gaertig, 2000).
tubulin and the microtubules have e apart from cytoskeletal role e many important functions. thus tubulin regulates

1065-6995/$ - see front matter ó 2007 international federation for cell biology. published by elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cellbi.2007.01.004

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

certain g-protein-mediated signaling pathways. this function
based on the gtp-binding properties of tubulin. signal transduction through gq-regulated phospholipase c1 (plc1) is activated by tubulin through a direct transfer of gtp from
tubulin to gq. thus, tubulin, depending on local membrane
concentration, may serve as a positive or negative regulator
of phosphoinositide hydrolysis (popova et al., 2002).
distribution of mitochondria as well as other intracellular organelles in mammalian cells is regulated by interphase microtubules. moreover, the interphase microtubules may be essential
for the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in mammalian
cells. numerous observations demonstrate the presence of specific map-binding sites on the outer membrane, suggesting an
association between porin and the membrane domain involved
in the cross-linkage between microtubules and mitochondria
(linden et al., 1989).
ultrastructural observations of the cortically-located mitochondria of tetrahymena thermophila revealed associations
not only between the mitochondria and certain cortical microtubule bands, but also between the mitochondria and epiplasm
of the cortex. most of the distal mitochondrial surface is close
and parallel to the epiplasm; favorable views show bridge-like
structures spanning the 20e40 nm gap between the mitochondrion and the epiplasm. some studies have shown that the localization of mitochondria in the cortex appears to be determined
by certain cortical microtubule bands (aufderheide, 1980).
the original concept of apoptosis stressed the morphological changes of the nucleus, condensation with the aggregation
of chromatin, and the intactness of intracellular organelles including mitochondria. one of the cellular events that trigger
the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis is the disturbance of
the dynamic formation of microtubules in the cell. this event
can be triggered by a variety of microtubule-targeted, tubulinpolymerizing agents (mtpas), which include paclitaxel (taxol)
and several other anticancer drugs. following intracellular
uptake, mtpas bind b-tubulin and promote tubulin polymerization, which interferes with the function of the mitotic spindle resulting in mitotic arrest at the metaphase-anaphase
transition and subsequent induction of the mitochondrial
pathway of apoptosis (bhalla, 2003). taxol early initiates an
apoptotic signaling pathway associated with increases in the
mitochondrial reducing potential, mitochondrial membrane
potential, p53 expression, and bax/bcl-2 ratio (pasquier et al.,
2004). anti-tubulin agents induce the release of cytochrome
c from isolated mitochondria. thus, tubulin is an inherent
component of mitochondrial membranes, and it could play
a role in apoptosis via interaction with permeability transition
pore (carre et al., 2002). taxol exerts rapid effects on the
cytosolic ca2þ signal via opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (kidd et al., 2002).
both mammalian cells and unicellulars alter the activity of
transcription of tubulin genes after treatments with microtubule-depolymerising and polymerising drugs: a gen-specific
signal transduction participates between microtubules and
tubulin genes (gu et al., 1995).
in our previous experiments we obtained data on the connection of microtubular and signaling systems in tetrahymena

725

(kovács and pintér, 2001; kovács et al., 2000), and on the
effect of drugs affecting microtubular assembly to different
kinds of microtubules in this unicellular organism (kovács
and csaba, 2005a). the aim of the present study is to obtain
additional data: 1./ on the alterations of different microtubular
structures of tetrahymena; 2./ on the alteration of posttranslational modification (e.g. acetylation, polyglutamylation) of
different tubular structures after taxol treatments; and 3./ on
the functional connection of the microtubular system and
mitochondria during the treatments with taxol.
2. materials and methods
2.1. chemicals
taxol; mouse monoclonal anti-a-tubulin, anti-polyglutamylated tubulin
and anti-acetylated tubulin antibodies, fitc-labelled anti-mouse goat igg,
and tryptone were obtained from sigma (st louis, mo, usa). yeast extract
was obtained from oxoid (unipath, basingstoke, hampshire, uk). agar
100 was purchased from agar scientific (uk). all other chemicals used
were of analytical grade available from commercial sources.

2.2. tetrahymena cultures
in the experiments, t. pyriformis gl strain was tested in the logarithmic
phase of growth. the cells were cultivated at 28  c in 0.1 per cent yeast extract
containing 1 per cent tryptone medium. before the experiments the cells were
washed with fresh culture medium and were resuspended at a concentration of
5  104 cells ml1.

2.3. confocal scanning laser microscopic (cslm) analysis of
tetrahymena cells labelled with monoclonal anti-a-tubulin,
anti-polyglutamylated tubulin and anti-acetylated tubulin
to localize tubulin-containing structures, taxol (50 nm) treated (1 h) and
untreated (control) cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in
pbs, ph 7.2. after washing with wash buffer (wb; ¼ 0.1% bsa in 20 mm
trisehcl; 0.9% nacl; 0.05% tween 20, ph 8.2) the cells were incubated
with monoclonal anti-a-tubulin, anti-polyglutamylated tubulin and anti-acetylated tubulin antibodies diluted 1:500 with antibody [ab] buffer (1% bsa in
20 mm trisehcl; 0.9% nacl; 0.05% tween 20, ph 8.2) for 45 min at room
temperature. (to determine the rapidity of action of taxol-treatments on the
transverse microtubular bundles we decorated the cells with anti-acetylated
tubulin-antibody also after tenth and twentieth minutes of the taxol treatments.)
after three washings with wb the anti-tubulin antibody treated cells were incubated with fitc-labelled anti-mouse goat igg (diluted to 1:500 with ab
buffer) for 45 min at room temperature. after this incubation the cells were
washed four times with wb, and were mounted onto microscopic slides.
the mounted cells were analyzed in a bio-rad mrc 1024 confocal scanning
laser microscope (cslm) equipped with a krypton/argon mixed gas laser as
a light source. excitation was provided by the 480 nm line from the laser.

2.4. electron microscopy
tetrahymena specimens (control and treated with10 and 50 nm taxol for
1 h) were fixed in 1.2% glutaraldehyde containing 0.1 m phosphate buffer
(ph 7.0) for 1 h at room temperature, washed three times in the same buffer
and then enclosed in 4% 50  c hot low melting agarose. post fixation of
cooled down cell blocks was performed with 1% oso4 diluted with 0.1 m
phosphate puffer (ph 7.0) for 1 h at room temperature. dehydration was carried out by a graded series of ethanol and embedding in agar 100 (agar scientific, uk) was done according to the manufacturer’s protocol. ultrathin
sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined
with a jeol 1200ex electron microscope.

726

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

2.5. flow cytometric analysis
samples of cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde solution (dissolved in
pbs, ph 7.2) for 5 min, and then washed twice in wash buffer. to block nonspecific binding of antibodies the cells were treated with blocking buffer (1%
bsa in pbs) for 30 min at room temperature. aliquots from cell suspensions
were transferred into tubes, and primary antibodies were added for 30 min at
room temperature. negative controls were carried out with pbs containing
10 mg/ml bsa instead of primary antibodies.
after washing four times with wash buffer to remove excess primary antibody the cells were incubated with secondary antibody (fitc-labeled monoclonal anti-mouse igg developed in goat; diluted 1:50 with ab buffer) for
30 min at room temperature.
for controlling the specificity, autofluorescence of the cells and aspecificity of the secondary antibodies were detected. the measurement was done in
a facscalibur flow cytometer (beckton dickinson, san jose, usa), using
25 000 cells for each measurement. for the measurement and analysis cellquest pro program was used. the numerical comparison of detected values
was done by the comparison of percentual changes of geometric mean channel
values to the appropriate control groups by using origin program and student’s t-test. all experiments were done in triplicate.

3. results
3.1. confocal scanning laser microscopic (cslm)
analysis of tetrahymena cells labelled with monoclonal
anti-a-tubulin, anti-polyglutaminated tubulin and
anti-acetylated tubulin
in the control (untreated) cells the transverse microtubule
(tm) and longitudinal microtubule bands (lm), the oral

apparatus, deep fibers, basal bodies (bb), and the pore of contractile vacuoles (usually 2 per cells, rarely 3) are strongly
labelled with anti-acetylated tubulin antibody (fig. 1). similar
structures were labeled with anti-a-tubulin antibody (fig. 2).
using anti-polyglutamylated antibody the cilia (mostly the
tip of cilia) and the oral field were strongly labeled (fig. 3).
the use of taxol to alter microtubule assembly/disassembly
dynamics resulted in some alterations of the different microtubular systems of tetrahymena; these alterations seem to be different in the certain microtubular systems. after taxol (50 nm)
treatments the labeling of the transversal microtubule-bands
and the labeling of oral apparatus with anti-acetylated tubulin
antibody disappear, sometimes only the remnants of transversal
microtrubule-bands are visible (fig. 4). similar alteration is
visible in the case of anti-a-tubulin antibody labeling, except
the oral field, which is to a certain degree labeled (fig. 5).
this treatment does not alter the labeling-pattern with antipolyglutamylated antibody.
the action of taxol on the transversal microtubule bands is
relatively quick: after the tenth minute of treatments only the
remnants of these structures are visible, and after twenty minutes they are totally disappeared (fig. 6).
3.2. em results
taxol caused severe ultrastructural damages, affecting
a number of organelles especially mitochondria and, to a lesser
degree the microtubular systems.

fig. 1. binding of anti acetylated-tubulin antibody to the tetrahymena. confocal microscopic pictures. asterisk ¼ oral apparatus; arrow ¼ deep fiber; dotted
arrow ¼ contractile vacuole pores; dotted arrows with circle ¼ transversal microtubule bands; thin arrows ¼ basal bodies; semicolon arrows ¼ longitudinal microtubule band. a and b ¼ same cell, optical sections at different levels. magnification: a and b ¼  1100; c ¼  1500; d ¼  2000.

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

727

fig. 2. binding of anti a-tubulin antibody to the tetrahymena. confocal microscopic pictures. same cell, optical sections at different levels. asterisk ¼ oral
apparatus; arrow ¼ deep fiber; dotted arrows ¼ contractile vacuole pores. magnification: 900.

the somatic cortex in the untreated control sample of tetrahymena was characterized by intact pellicular microtubular
systems. closely associated with the epiplasm were the supraepiplasmic microtubules constituting the so-called longitudinal
microtubule bundle and the laterally directed subepiplasmic
microtubules which form the so-called transverse microtubule
bundle. the cortical ridges between the kineties contained the
majority of the typical tubular mitochondria positioned in
close association with the epiplasm and the pellicular microtubular systems (fig. 7).
taxol (10 nm) treatment initiated the beginning of moderate
alterations in the cortical region of tetrahymena which, of
course, were not found in all individuals. thus, while a part of
the individuals obviously appeared to be unaffected by the
drug (fig. 8a), the alterations in the other part primarily concentrated on the cortical mitochondria which successively began to

swell. (fig. 8b) however, the longitudinal as well as the transverse microtubule bundles appeared unaltered (fig. 8a).
taxol (50 nm) treatment was characterized by a marked increase of alterations which apparently affected in a first step
the cortical mitochondria and in a second step the transverse
microtubule bundles. however, in this group, too, individuals
were found which exhibited a normally looking ultrastructure.
what concerns now, is the structure of the mitochondria,
it could be observed that the swelling proceeded. thereby
individuals were to observe in which only the most cortical
mitochondria were affected while those beneath appeared unaltered. this situation corresponded to that in 10 nm taxol in
so far as the longitudinal and transverse microtubule bundles
showed a more or less regular pattern (fig. 9a). the persistence of both these microtubule bundles could also be
observed in individuals with markedly swollen mitochondria

fig. 3. binding of anti polyglutamilated-tubulin antibody to the tetrahymena. confocal microscopic pictures. same cell, optical sections at different levels.
arrow ¼ oral apparatus. magnification: 1200.

728

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

fig. 4. binding of anti acetylated-tubulin antibodies to the taxol (50 nm for 1 h) treated tetrahymena. confocal microscopic pictures. the transversal microtubule
bands disappeared. arrow ¼ deep fiber; dotted arrow ¼ nucleus (stained with  xxxd1816xxx ); rods ¼ basal bodies. magnification: 1700.

provided that some intact ones were still present (fig. 9b).
however, in those individuals in which the greatest part of
the swollen mitochondria began to disintegrate, the transverse
microtubule bundles tended to disappear. in this stage the

mitochondria exhibited extremely reduced and peripherally
placed, disoriented mitochondrial tubules the walls of the
mitochondria became attenuated and lost their integrity by
rupturing (fig. 9c).

fig. 5. binding of anti a-tubulin antibodies to the taxol (50 nm for 1 h) treated tetrahymena. confocal microscopic pictures. the transversal microtubule bands
disappeared. asterisk ¼ oral apparatus; arrows ¼ basal bodies. magnification: a and d ¼  1700; b and c ¼  900.

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

729

fig. 6. binding of anti acetylated-tubulin antibodies to the taxol (50 nm, 10 min) treated (c and d), 20 min treated (e and f) and control (untreated) tetrahymena
(a and b). confocal microscopic pictures. after 10 min treatments only remnants of transversal microtubule bands are visible, while after 20 min treatments totally
disappeared. asterisk ¼ oral apparatus; arrow ¼ contractile vacuole pores. magnification: a, e and f ¼  900; c and d ¼  1200; b ¼  2000.

3.3. flow cytometric analysis
treatments with 50 nm taxol reduced the binding of anti
a-tubulin-antibody significantly. these treatments decreased
also the binding of the anti-acetylated tubulin-antibodies
significantly, but to a lesser degree than in the case of anti
a-tubulin-antibody. the binding of anti-polyglutamylated
tubulin- and anti-g-tubulin antibodies were practically unchanged
(fig. 10).

induced alterations cause ramified modifications in numerous
cellular events. in addition some of our present results are
distinct from that reported in the literature. although taxol
induces several above mentioned alterations, the exact

4. discussion
the biological systems are very complex, the different
structures are often in close morphological and functional connections. taking into consideration this fact, sometimes it is
very difficult to determine which structure is the first target
of the applied treatment. this serious problem has arisen
also in our present work. microtubular structures e in addition
to the cytoskeletal functions e have effects among others to
the mitochondria, on the production of high energy nucleotide
molecules, on the apoptotic events and on the signaling: these

fig. 7. electron microscopic picture of the cortical region of control
(untreated) tetrahymena. b ¼ basal body; m ¼ mitochondria; c ¼ cilia;
arrow ¼ longitudinal section of transversal microtubule band; arrowhead ¼
cross section of longitudinal microtubule bands.

730

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

fig. 8. a and b. electron microscopic pictures of 10 nm taxol (for 1 h) treated
tetrahymena. on the cellular organelles only moderate alterations are visible e
compared to the controls. m ¼ mitochondria; c ¼ cilia; r ¼ rough endoplasmic
reticulum; arrow ¼ transversal microtubule band; arrowhead ¼ cross section of
lingitudinal microtubule band.

mechanism of its complex action in tetrahymena is not yet
known.
tetrahymena assembles 17 types of distinct microtubules,
which are localized in cilia, cell cortex, nuclei, and the endoplasm. these diverse microtubules have distinct morphologies,
stabilities, and associations with specific microtubule-associated proteins. it is unlikely that the unique properties of individual microtubules are derived by the utilization of diverse
tubulin genes, because tetrahymena expresses only a single
isotype of a- and two isotypes of b-tubulin. however, tetrahymena tubulins are modified secondarily by a post-translational
mechanisms. each microtubule organelle type displays an
unique set of secondary tubulin modifications. both highprecision targeting of molecular motors to individual organelles
as well as organelle-specific tubulin modifications contribute
to the creation of diverse microtubules in a single cytoplasm
of tetrahymena (gaertig, 2000). it has been suggested that
posttranslational modifications contribute to microtubule

stability indirectly by generating epitopes to bind stabilizing
microtubule-associated proteins (boucher et al., 1994).
it was demonstrated in our previous experiments that two
types of cytoplasmic microtubule bands (longitudinal and
transversal) react differently to drugs affecting microtubular
structures (kovács and pintér, 2001; kovács and csaba,
2005a). e.g. in  xxxd2745xxx  or colchicine treated cells longitudinal microtubules became thinner without any change of
transversal ones. after taxol treatment lm also became thinner, however tm disappeared. vinblastine made tm thinner,
while it was ineffective to lm. these observations render
probable that in contrast to the identity in morphology and
main protein composition lm and tm are very different in
their reaction and binding ability. though in tetrahymena
we were the first who observed the different effect of taxol
to lm and tm; in heliozoan axonemes hausmann et al. observed the loss of intermicrotubule links under the effect of
taxol (hausmann et al., 1983). in our most recent experiments
fluorescent labelled taxol (arregui et al., 2002; lecke et al.,
2002) was used and the results further justified this idea: taxol
does not label transversal mts, while it stains longitudinal
ones (kovács and csaba, 2005b) in fixed and living preparations. this points to the indirect disappearing effect of taxol
to tms, while the effect to lms is caused by a direct binding.
however, how can be imagined this indirect mechanism?
under the effect of taxol treatment tms disappear quickly:
after ten minutes the sign of destructions are visible, and after
twenty minutes tms totally disappear. besides the cslm pictures also the em-pictures show this tm-degradation.
a possibility for disturbing tm-s is the hindrance of the
tubulin e gtp interaction. gtp bound to b-tubulin is hydrolyzed after addition of tubulin dimers to the microtubule ends,
which gives rise the dinamic microtubule behaviors: the
‘‘treadmilling’’ (net addition of tubulin at one microtubule
end and the net loss of tubulin at the opposite end) (margolis
and wilson, 1978), and the dynamic instability, is a stochastic
switching between shortening and growing phases at both ends
of individual microtubules (mitchison, 1988). growing and
shortening behavior may be due to a stochastic gain and loss
of a stabilizing cap at both microtubule ends, which is thought
to consist of a short region of gtp- or gdp-pi-liganded tubulin at the ends of the microtubules (carlier and pantaloni,
1981). taxol does not inhibit the binding of gtp to the tubulin
or the hydrolysis of gtp. thus taxol does not appear to directly affect gain and loss of the stabilzing gtp- (or gdppi) cap at the microtubule ends (schiff and horwitz, 1981).
since taxol does not inhibit these phenomena, an other possibility is the disturbing effect of the normal mitochondrial functions, which leads to the insufficient gtp-synthesis, and this
inhibits the tm-recovery e because of their supposed rapid
turnover.
some results indicate that taxol act on the different structures sometimes independently from the microtubules. taxol
act directly on mitochondria isolated from human neuroblastoma cells (andre et al., 2002); exerts rapid effects on the
cytosolic ca2þ signal via the opening of the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore (kidd et al., 2002). in

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

731

fig. 9. electron microscopic pictures of 50 nm taxol (for 1 h) treated tetrahymena. in certain cells (b and c) the mitochondria (m) are swollen and disintegrated,
and also the transversal microtubule bands are destroyed (c, arrowhead). but other individuals exhibit a normal looking structures (a). arrow and arrowhead ¼ microtubules; c ¼ cilia; b ¼ basal body; r ¼ rough endoplasmic reticulum; e ¼ exocytotic mucocyst.

tetrahymena taxol influences tubulin genes as well as chaperonin genes (casalou et al., 2001). in trichomonas it influences
hydrogenosomes, which had abnormal size and shape and autophage vacuoles appeared containing large amount of microtubules (madeiro da costa and benchimol, 2004). these
alterations also could influence the behavior of tms, however
the mechanisms are not known. palmitoylation or polyglutamylation does not explain the difference in the taxol-effect.
the effect of taxol on mitochondria seems to be especially
important. in mammalian models this effect also can be observed (andre et al., 2000; andre et al., 2002), and there is
an interrelation between the microtubular and mitochondial alterations. in taxol-treated cells the mitochondria are associated
with taxol-stabilized microtubule bundles (soltys and gupta,
1992). it is supposed that microtubules have a role in mitochondrial biogenesis and -which is more interesting- two subpopulations of mitochondria were detected in taxol-treated
cells (karbowsky et al., 2001). this latter observation could
explain why can be found normal and seriously harmed mitochondria in the same cell in our experiments.
treatment of mammalian cells with microtubule-depolymerizing and microtubule-polymerizing drugs causes decreases
and increases in tubulin mrna, respectively (cleveland,
1989). in striking contrast to the case with mammalian cells,
perturbation of microtubules in tetrahymena thermophila by
microtubule- depolymerizing or -polymerizing drugs increases
the level of the single alpha-tubulin gene message by increasing transcription. t. thermophila has distinct, gene-specific
mechanisms for modulating tubulin gene expression

depending on whether ciliary or cytoplasmic microtubules
are involved (stargell et al., 1992). this observation is distinct
from that we report in the present experiments. on the basis of
our flow cytometric measurements after taxol treatments the
tetrahymena cells are decorated to a lesser degree with antia-tubulin antibodies than the control (untreated) ones. however
it is possible that taxol increases the transcription of tubulin
mrna: in this case the activity of translation of tubulin
mrnas are inhibited, for this phenomenon it is responsible
presumably the impaired mitochondrial functions.

fig. 10. flow cytometric analysis of a-tubulin, acetylated tubulin and polyglutamylated tubulin of control (untreated) and taxol (50 nm, for 1 h) treated
tetrahymena. s ¼ p < 0,01 to the controls.

732

p. kovács et al. / cell biology international 31 (2007) 724e732

an other effect of taxol-treatment in tetrahymena the decreased acetylation of tubulin. after our facs measurements
the amount of acetylated-tubulin is significantly lower than in
the controls. this decreasing thought to the disappearing of the
tm-s and the decreased labeling of oral apparatus. these
treatments does not affect the another tubulin-modification,
the polyglutamylation.
acknowledgements
the author thank ms. m. steiner and ms. e. vanyek-zavadil for their skilled technical assistance. this work was supported by the national research fund (otka-t-037303),
hungary.

references
andre n, braguer d, brasseur g, goncalves a, lemesle-meunier d, guise s.
paclitaxel induces release of  xxxg569xxx  from mitochondria isolated
from human neuroblastoma cells’. cancer res 2000;60:5349e53.
andre n, carre m, braseur g, pourroy b, kovacic h, briand c, et al. paclitaxel targets mitochondria upstream of caspase activation in intact human
neuroblastoma cells. febs lett 2002;532:256e60.
arregui l, munoz-fontel c, serrano s, barasoain i, giuonea a. direct visualization of the microtubular cytoskeleton of ciliated protozoa with a fluorescent taxoid. j eukaryot microbiol 2002;49:312e8.
aufderheide kj. mitochondrial associations with specific microtubular components of the cortex of tetrahymena thermophila. ii. response of the
mitochondrial pattern to changes in the microtubule pattern. j cell sci 1980;
42:247e60.
bhalla kn. microtubule-targeted anticancer agents and apoptosis. oncogene
2003;22:9075e86.
boucher d, larcher jc, gros f, denoulet p. polyglutamylation of tubulin as
a progressive regulator of in vitro interactions between the microtubuleassociated protein tau and tubulin. biochemistry 1994;33:12471e7.
carlier mf, pantaloni d. kinetic analysis of cooperativity in tubulin polymerization in the presence of guanosine di- or  xxxd3444xxx  nucleotides. biochemistry 1981;20:1918e24.
carre m, andré n, carles a, borghi h, brichese l, briand c, et al. tubulin is
an inherent component of mitochondrial membranes that interacts with the
voltage-dependent anion channel. j biol chem 2002;277:33664e9.
casalou c, cyrne l, rosa mr, soares h. microtubule cytoskeleton perturbation induced by taxol and colchicine affects chaperonin containing tcp-1
(cct) subunit gene expression in tetrahymena cells. biochim biophys
acta 2001;1522:9e11.
cleveland dw. autoregulated control of tubulin synthesis in animal cells. curr
opin cell biol 1989;1:10e4.
gaertig j. molecular mechanisms of microtubular organelle assembly in
tetrahymena. j eukaryot microbiol 2000;47:185e90.
gu l, gaertig j, stargell la, gorovsky ma. gene-specific signal transduction
between microtubules and tubulin genes in tetrahymena thermophyla. mol
cell biol 1995;15:5173e9.

hausmann k, linnenbach m, patterson dj. the effects of taxol on microtubular arrays: in vivo effects on heliozoan axonames. j ultrastruct res 1983;82:
212e20.
karbowsky m, spodnik jh, teranishi m, wozniak m, nishizawa y, usukara j,
et al. opposite effects of microtubule-stabilizing and microtubule-destabilizing drugs on biogenesis of mitochondria in mammalian cells. j cell sci
2001;114:281e91.
kidd jf, pilkington mf, schell mj, fogarty ke, skepper jn, taylor cw, et al.
paclitaxel affects cytosolic calcium signals by opening the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore. j biol chem 2002;277:6504e10.
kovács p, csaba g. effect of drugs affecting microtubular assembly to microtubules phospholipid synthesis and physiological indexes (signaling,
growth, motility and phagocytosis) in tetrahymena pyriformis. cell biochem funct 2005a;23:1e11.
kovács p, csaba g. comparison of the binding of anti-a-tubulin antibodies
and the fluorescent taxol derivative (flutax-1) to the microtubular system
of tetrahymena. acta biol hung 2005b;57:323e9.
kovács p, pintér m. effects of phosphoprotein phosphatase inhibitors (phenylarsine oxide and cantharidin) on tetrahymena. cell biochem funct 2001;19:
197e205.
kovács p, pintér m, csaba g. effect of glucosphingolipid synthesis inhibitor
(ppmp and pdmp) treatment on tetrahymena pyriformis. data on the evolution of the signalling system. cell biochem funct 2000;18:269e80.
lecke sb, tasca t, souto aa, de carli ga. trichomonas vaginalis: microtubule cytoskeleton distribution using fluorescent taxoid. exp parasitol 2002;
102:113e6.
linden m, nelson bd, leterrier jf. the specific binding of the microtubuleassociated protein 2 ( xxxg1360xxx   xxxg1400xxx ) to the outer membrane of rat brain mitochondria. biochem j 1989;261:167e73.
madeiro da costa rf, benchimol m. the effect of drugs on cell structure of
trichomonas foetus. parasitol res 2004;92:159e70.
margolis rl, wilson l. opposite end assembly and disassembly of microtubules at steady state in vitro. cell 1978;13:1e8.
mitchison tj. microtubule dynamics and kinetochore function in mitosis.
annu rev cell biol 1988;4:527e49.
pasquier e, carre m, pourroy b, camoin l, rebai o, briand c, et al. antiangiogenic activity of paclitaxel is associated with its cytostatic effect, mediated by the initiation but not completion of a mitochondrial apoptotic
signaling pathway. mol cancer therapeutics 2004;3:1301e10.
popova js, greene ak, wang j, rasenick mm. phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate modifies tubulin participation in phospholipase cbeta1 signaling. j neurosci 2002;22:1668e78.
rowinsky ek, donehower rc. drug therapy: paclitaxel (taxol). n engl j med
1995;322:1004e14.
schiff pb, horwitz sb. taxol stabilizes microtubules in mouse fibroblast cells.
proc natl acad sci usa 1980;77:561e5.
schiff pb, horwitz sb. taxol assembles tubulin in the absence of exogenous
guanosine 50 -triphosphate or microtubule-associated proteins. biochemistry 1981;20:3247e52.
soltys bj, gupta rs. interrelationships of endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, intermediate filaments, and microtubules e a quadruple fluorescence
study. biochem cell biol 1992;70:1174e86.
stargell la, heruth dp, gaertig j, gorovsky ma. drugs affecting microtubule
dynamics increase alpha-tubulin mrna accumulation via transcription in
tetrahymena thermophyla. mol cell biol 1992;12:1443e50.
turner pf, margolis rl. taxol-induced bundling of brain-derived microtubules. j cell biol 1984;99:940e6.

