biochem. j. (1992) 281, 21-40 (printed in great britain)

21

review article

intracellular compartmentation, structure and function of creatine
kinase isoenzymes in tissues with high and fluctuating energy
demands: the 'phosphocreatine circuit' for cellular energy
homeostasis
theo wallimann,*ยง markus wyss,* dieter brdiczka,t klaas nicolayt
and hans m. eppenberger*
*institute for cell biology, swiss federal institute of technology, eth-h6nggerberg, ch-8093 zurich, switzerland, tdepartment
of biology, university of konstanz, d-7750 konstanz 1, federal republic of germany, and 4institute of molecular biology and
medical biotechnology, university of utrecht, nl-3584 ch utrecht, the netherlands
introduction

all the processes involved in growth and metabolism of cells
require an input of energy. in living cells, 'production, transport,
conversion and utilization of energy' are fundamental processes
that are facilitated via metabolic pathways involving a large
number of tightly regulated enzyme-catalysed reactions. the
regulation of an enzyme system can be accomplished in a number
of different ways, e.g. by modulation of its substrate concentrations, by specific regulatory molecules, by post-translational
modifications or by subcellular compartmentation. an example
of the latter type is creatine kinase (ck), a key enzyme of cellular
energetics, representing an enzyme system with a number of
isoenzymes, which are in part compartmentalized specifically at
those places where energy is 'produced' or 'utilized'. recent
experimental data suggest that ck is located near the sites where
the 'real action' occurs, e.g. where force generation by motor
proteins, ion-transport across membranes by ion pumps and
other atp-dependent processes take place. the creatine kinase/
phosphocreatine (ck/pcr) system seems to play a complex,
multi-faceted role in cellular energy homeostasis.
creatine kinase and high-energy phosphate
metabolism

atp is the universal energy currency for most of the energyrequiring processes in biological systems (lehninger, 1982).
excitable cells and tissues, e.g. skeletal and cardiac muscle, brain,
photoreceptor cells, spermatozoa and electrocytes, all depend on
the immediate availability of vast amounts of energy that may be
used in a pulsed or fluctuating manner. simply increasing
intracellular concentrations of atp for energy storage would
represent a bad choice to meet the energy requirements of these
cells and tissues, since local [atp], [adp] and [amp], as well as
the atp/adp ratio, are key regulators influencing many fundamental metabolic processes (cohen, 1968, 1976; newsholme
& start, 1973; atkinson, 1977; gyulai et al., 1985; chance et al.,
1986; from et al., 1990). indeed, excitable cells usually contain
only 2-5 mm concentrations of atp, which for example would
suffice for a muscle contraction of only a few seconds (infante &
davies, 1965). instead, however, large quantities of metabolically
inert phosphagens are accumulated in these cells or tissues
(eggleton & eggleton, 1928; meyer, 1988). whereas a variety of

different phosphagens, e.g. phosphoarginine, phospholombricine, phosphoglycocyamine and phosphotaurocyamine, are found
in lower phyla (watts, 1971; morrison, 1973; ellington, 1989),
phosphocreatine (pcr) is the sole  xxxd1759xxx  in vertebrate and
some invertebrate species. creatine (cr), synthesized mostly in
liver and kidney, but not in muscle, is transported through the
blood and taken up by tissues with high energy demands via an
active transport system (fitch et al., 1968). in skeletal muscle,
pcr concentrations may reach 20-35 mm or more (fitch, 1977),
depending on the species and the muscle fibre type (carlson &
wilkie, 1974; burt et al., 1976; ackerman et al., 1980), whereas
in other excitable tissues like brain, electric organ, smooth
muscle, kidney, etc. [pcr] is in the range of 5-10 mm (iyengar,
1984).
even though the cellular pools of atp are rather small, no
significant change in overall atp levels can be detected during
activation of excitable tissues (mommaerts & wallner, 1967;
seraydarian, 1980), because atp is continuously and efficiently
replenished from the large pool(s) of pcr through the reaction
catalysed by creatine kinase (ck; ec 2.7.3.2):
mgadp- + pcr2- + h+ ; mgatp2- + cr
(for reviews see watts, 1973; kenyon & reed, 1983).
in most muscles, the atp regeneration capacity of ck is very
high and considerably exceeds both atp utilization as well as
atp replenishment by oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis
(mcgilvery, 1975). for example, the maximal rate of atp
synthesis by the ck reaction in rat cardiac muscle (30 ismol/s
per g) is much higher than the maximal rate of atp synthesis by
oxidative phosphorylation (2.5 ,tmol/s per g) or by de novo
pathways (0.39 ,umol/s per g) (bittl & ingwall, 1985; ronca &
ronca-testoni, 1987; ingwall et al., 1990).
in addition to the regeneration of hydrolysed atp, the ck
system, with ck as a low-threshold adp sensor (km of mm-ck
for adp is 10-35 /vm) (matthews et al., 1982; levin et al., 1990),
plays a critical role in preventing a build-up of adp, especially
during transient periods in which energy utilization exceeds
energy production. the following metabolite concentrations have
been measured in resting muscle: [pcr] = 20-35 mm; [cr] =
5-10 mm; [atp] = 3-5 mm; [pi] = 1.5-2 mm; [free mg2+] =
3-4 mm; ph = 7.0-7.2 (ackerman et al., 1980; chance et al.,
1986). most of the adp in resting muscle is bound to the f-actin
filaments and is metabolically not available to ck for immediate

abbreviations used: ck, creatine kinase; m- and  xxxg467xxx  refer to the muscle and brain-type subunits of ck, respectively, forming mm-, mb- and
bb-ck dimers; mi-ck stands for mitochondrial ck; ant, adenine nucleotide translocator, the atp/adp carrier; p, outer mitochondrial membrane
pore = porin =  xxxg2409xxx ; pcr, phosphocreatine; cr, creatine; pi, inorganic phosphate; gpa, fl-guanidinopropionic acid; pkc, protein kinase c.
ยง to whom correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed.

vol. 281

22

wallimann and others
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t.

22

am p

amp

d earnriin ase

imp

nh4+
5 '-n lucle otidla se

ccell membrane

czd cic-:d
adenine

inosine

fig. 1. creatine kinase involvement in adenine nucleotide metabolism
ck is a fast atp-regenerating enzyme and a low-threshold sensor
for adp. two products of cellular atpases, that is, adp and h',
are substrates of the ck reaction and are consumed during the ckcatalysed regeneration of atp. thus, ck is preventing local
acidification near cellular atpases as well as a build-up of adp.
the latter would otherwise lead, after a series of enzymic conversions,
to a net loss of cellular adenine nucleotides, which would be
deleterious for a cell. adp ( x 2): two adp molecules are converted
by adenylate kinase to give one molecule of atp and amp each.

rephosphorylation (west et at., 1967). the cytoplasmic concentration of free adp in resting muscle has been determined by
equilibrium calculations as 37 4um (veech et at., 1979) and was
calculated from 31p-n.m.r. experiments to be in the range of only
1-20 /sm (taking ck equilibrium constants from solution
kinetics; bittl & ingwall, 1985; meyer et at., 1985; ackerman
et at., 1980). in contrast, chemical analysis revealed values in
the range of 100-500 4um, these values being too high due to
breakdown of atp and/or due to liberation of adp previously
bound to subcellular structur'es, e.g. f-actin (see chance et at.,
1986). a burst /of skeletal muscle activity in vivo is normally
paralleled by the utilization of pcr and the accumulation of free
creatine and inorganic phosphate (p1), but not with the appearance of equivalent amounts of free adp (mommaerts, 1969;
balaban et at., 1986; from et at., 1990). in stimulated muscle, the
adp levels usually rise to only about 100-400 /lm or less (bittl &
ingwall, 1985; meyer et at., 1985; chance et at., 1986).
*adp, besides p1, call, mitochondrially generated nadh and
oxygen supply, is thought to regulate the overall balance between
the consumption and oxidative generation of atp in the intact
cell (gyulai et at., 1985; chance et at., 1986). for example,
mitochondrial respiration is activated by [adp] in the /sm range
(some 20-30 gm-adp is required for half-maximal activation of
mitochondrial atp synthesis; chance & williams, 1955; chance
et at., 1986). however, even though 31p-n.m.r. experiments with
perfused hearts in vitro have shown that adp levels at a given
myocardial oxygen consumption rate (mvu ) m'ay vary
significantly, depending on the exogenous carbon source in the
perfusate, it was concluded that in vivo significant changes of

[adp] and [p,] are not essential for the stimulation of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, if the availability of mitochondrially generated nadh is increased to an appropriate
extent (from et at., 1990). indeed, an in vivo paced 31p-n.m.r.
study with mammalian heart indicated that the pcr/atp ratio
and thus most likely also the overall [adp] were surprisingly
stable and did not change with increasing work output (see
balaban et al., 1986), although, owing to changes in ph, the
relative fractions of mgadp and other adp species may change
somewhat. this is in contrast to experiments with skeletal muscle
in vivo and with saline-perfused hearts where, in general, changes
in the work output correlate with alterations of the pcr/atp
ratio and thus also with changes in [adp] (chance et at., 1985;
matthews et at., 1982). thus, in skeletal muscle, with less overall
oxidative capacity for aerobic atp production, when compared
with heart, brain or kidney, the phosphorylation potential is not
maintained with increases in work output, e.g. during work
jumps. therefore, in these muscles, adp and p1 may play a
significant role in the regulation of respiration (chance et at.,
1985) as well as of other metabolic processes such as glycogenolysis and glycolysis. the picture emerging now is that the
control of energy flux between sites of atp consumption and
production is a multistep process with control levels at several
sites involving the delivery of reducing equivalents (nadh),
oxygen and atpase hydrolysis products (adp, p1) (for review
see balaban, 1990). in this context, the ck reaction is directly
related to the role of adp and p1 in the regulation of oxidative
phosphorylation and other metabolic processes (jacobus et at.,
1983; wallimann et at., 1989).
as shown in fig. 1, a high level of ck can also regulate the
adenylate kinase reaction and thus, in effect, conserve the adenine
nucleotide pools in the cell (iyengar, 1984), because if adp is
allowed to accumulate in a cell, e.g. by ischaemia or anoxia
(mcgilvery & murray, 1974; connett, 1988), it is transphosphorylated via adenylate kinase to yield atp and amp
(noda, 1973; hamada & kuby, 1978). amp, an inhibitor of
adenylate kinase and of metabolic pathways like gluconeogenesis
(uyeda & racker, 1965; yamada & sugi, 1989), is converted
into imp and ammonia by amp deaminase (kushmerick &
davies, 1969; hamada & kuby, 1978; lowenstein, 1972) which
in muscle is bound to the myofibrils (ashby et at., 1979) at both
ends of the a-band (cooper & trinick, 1984). imp as well as
amp are dephosphorylated by 5'-nucleotidase located on the
sarcolemma (bowditch et at., 1985) to give inosine and adenosine,
respectively. since the sarcolemma is permeable to the latter two
compounds, an accumulation of adp for a prolonged period of
time would ultimately lead to a loss of adenine nucleotides
(jennings et at., 198 1).
concluding from these data, there are at least three important
metabolic consequences of keeping the cellular adp levels low
by the ck system: (i) ck keeps the free intracellular [adp] in a
range where it may participate in the regulation of mitochondrial
respiration, (ii) ck prevents the inactivation of atpases by
rising [adp], and (iii) ck also prevents a net loss of cellular
adenine nucleotides.
creatine kinase isoenzymes
in vertebrate tissues, at least four subunit isoforms of ck are
expressed in a tissue-specific manner: two 'cytosolic' forms, mck and  xxxg467xxx  (m standing for muscle; b standing for brain),
and two mitochondrial mi-ck isoforms (mi standing for mito-

chondrial).
in vivo,  xxxg468xxx  and  xxxg467xxx  subunits combine to give the three

typical dimeric 'cytosolic' mm-, mb- and bb-ck isoenzymes
with an approximate mr of 80000-86000 (eppenberger et at.,
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
sites of
utilization

'sites' of
production
(a)

glycolysis
de novo
pathways

-

atp

adp

dckm

oxidative
phosphorylation

|~~~~~

>r

(b)
glycolysis

oxidative
phosphorylation

(c)
glycolysis

oxidative
phosphorylation

fig. 2. models of ck function: temporal and spatial energy buffering

(a) the ck/pcr system is represented in the classical textbook style
as a 'temporal energy buffer' which is disconnected from the three
main atp-regenerating systems, i.e. oxidative phosphorylation,
glycolysis and de novo atp synthesis pathways. here, pcr and cr
provide exclusively parallel diffusion pathways for atp and adp,
as suggested by the 'facilitated diffusion model' (meyer et al., 1984).
this representation does not take into consideration the subcellular
compartmentation of ck, pcr and adenine nucleotides, as well as
the functional coupling of ck isoenzymes to glycolysis, oxidative
phosphorylation and to various subcellular atp-consuming processes (cellular atpases). (b) and (c) the ck/pcr system represented
as a 'temporal' as well as a 'spatial' energy buffering or 'energy
transport' system. in this model, cytosolic ck is functionally coupled
to glycolysis (ck,) or to various subcellular sites (cka) with high
atp consumption (black, filled squares with jagged arrow), whereas
mitochondrial ck (mi) is functionally coupled to oxidative
phosphorylation. a direct, parallel pathway of diffusion of atp,
produced by glycolysis or oxidative phosphorylation, to subcellular
sites of energy consumption is also indicated. (b) depicts
schematically the situation in a fast-twitch glycolytic muscle where
the 'energy buffering function' of the ck/pcr system is prominent.
this is reflected by the large pool size of pcr, the high relative
percentage of cytosolic ck (ckc) (yamashita & yoshioka, 1991),
functionally coupled to glycolysis, and the relatively small percentage
of mi-ck [5-10 % of total ck in skeletal muscle (ingwall & fossel
1983)]. (c) depicts schematically the situation in a slow-twitch
oxidative muscle or a cardiac muscle, where the 'energy transport
function' of the ck/pcr system is prominent. this is reflected by
the relatively small pool size of pcr, the high relative percentage of
mitochondrial ck being functionally coupled to oxidative
phosphorylation [up to 30 % mi-ck or more of total ck, e.g. in
cardiac muscle (ingwall & fossel, 1983)] and the relatively small
percentage (compared to glycolytic muscle) of cytosolic ck (ckc)
(yamashita & yoshioka, 1991). abbreviations: ckc, 'cytosolic',

vol. 281

23

1967). whereas mm-ck is rather specific for differentiated
sarcomeric muscle, bb-ck is found in brain and in a variety of
other tissues (eppenberger et al., 1967). interestingly, during
muscle cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo, a developmental
transition from bb-ck via the transitory mb-ck hybrid to the
mm-ck homodimer is observed (perriard et al., 1978; caravatti
et al., 1979; trask et al., 1988). in chicken, two distinct  xxxg467xxx 
subunit subspecies, ba. and bb-ck, with different isoelectric
points were identified (quest et al., 1989). these  xxxg467xxx  subspecies
arise by differential splicing of an unique  xxxg467xxx  gene (wirz et al.,
1990) and dimerize in a tissue-specific manner (quest et al.,
1990a).
mi-ck is accumulated specifically in mitochondria (jacobs
et al., 1964; jacobus & lehninger, 1973; scholte et al., 1973;
deluca & hall, 1980), and two isoforms, striated musclespecific, 'sarcomeric'  xxxg470xxx  (schlegel et al., 1988a; hossle
et al., 1988; haas & strauss, 1990) and so-called 'ubiquitous'
 xxxg469xxx  (schlegel et al., 1988b; hossle et al., 1988; haas et al.,
1989; wyss et al., 1990) are also expressed in a tissue-specific
manner l and b refer to the isoelectric points of the chicken
mi-ck isoenzymes with  xxxg469xxx  being more acidic (pl 8.4-9.0)
than  xxxg470xxx  (pi 9.3-9.5); wyss et al., 1990]. mib- and  xxxg469xxx 
differ not only in amino acid sequence, although there is a high
degree of sequence identity, but also in a number of biochemical
and biophysical parameters (schlegel et al., 1988b; wyss et al.,
1990). in contrast to the cytosolic ck isoenzymes, which are
always dimeric, mib- and  xxxg469xxx  were found in vivo and in vitro
to form also octamers with an mr of approx. 340000 (schlegel
et al., 1988a; quemeneur et al., 1988; belousova et al., 1991;
wyss et al., 1990) composed of four dimers with an mr of 86000
as the stable building blocks (schnyder et al., 1988; wyss et al.,
1990). some 20 members of the ck isoenzyme family have been
sequenced (for references see babbitt et al., 1986; hossle et al.,
1988; james et al., 1990), and sequence comparisons show
extensive homologies both at the dna and amino acid level
between all the  xxxd1759xxx  kinases that have been studied so far.
main functions of the creatine

kinase/phosphocreatine system
the first of the main functions of the ck/pcr system, which is
generally accepted and cited in most textbooks, is that of a
'temporal energy buffer' (see fig. 2a). besides this function, an
increasing body of evidence, discussed below, has been
accumulated in favour of a second main function, that of a
'spatial energy buffer' or 'energy transport' system. this idea,
for which the term 'cp-shuttle' was coined by bessman & geiger
(1981), has evolved over the past three decades, and a number of
authors, some of them listed here, have made significant contributions towards this metabolic concept (see figs. 2b, 2c and fig.
3) (klingenberg, 1964; gercken & schlette, 1968; naegle, 1970;
gudbjarnason et al., 1970; bessman, 1972; turner et al., 1973;
jacobus & lehninger, 1973; wallimann, 1975; seraydarian &
abbott, 1976; wallimann et al., 1977, 1989; saks et al., 1978;
bessman & geiger, 1981; jacobus et al., 1983; mcclellan et al.,
1983; iyengar, 1984; savabi et al., 1984; jacobus, 1985a,b;
bessman & carpenter, 1985; wallimann & eppenberger, 1985,
1990; ventura-clapier et al., 1987a,b; meyer, 1988; for a more
extensive bibliography, see the reference lists of the above articles
and reviews). in this role, pcr would serve as an 'energy carrier',
connecting sites of energy production with sites of energy
utilization via the subcellularly compartmentalized ck isomostly soluble, ck; cka, ck associated with atp-consuming
processes; mi, mitochondrial ck; small black squares with jagged
arrow, intracellular locations where atp is hydrolysed.

24
enzymes. on the basis of kinetic modelling it was suggested that
simply 'buffering' the concentration of atp by pcr and 'facilitated diffusion' are physiologically important, while 'transport',
'shuttling' or 'channelling' of pcr are not (meyer et al., 1984).
unfortunately, however, the subcellular compartmentation of
the ck isoenzymes, as well as that of adenine nucleotides and
creatine, were not considered in these model calculations, partly
due to a lack of data.
a third main function of the ck/pcr system is to prevent a
rise in intracellular [free adp], thus avoiding an inactivation of
cellular atpases and a net loss of adenine nucleotides (iyengar
et al., 1982; iyengar, 1984).
a fourth main function of the ck/pcr system is proton
buffering. since the ck reaction in the direction of atp
regeneration not only utilizes adp but also protons (hi), which
are both products of atp hydrolysis, an intimate functional
coupling of ck with atpases prevents the local or global
acidification of cells which are breaking down high amounts of
atp within a short period of time. this proton-buffering of the
ck/pcr system seems especially important in the early phase of
severe exercise, before glycogenolysis is activated.
in addition, the release of inorganic phosphate (pi) is another
metabolic function of the ck/pcr system. since net pcr
hydrolysis is the major source of pi, released at the onset of
muscle contraction, and since pi is required for activation of
glycogenolysis and glycolysis, ck action exerts an indirect
regulatory effect for the latter metabolic pathways in muscle
types which depend on glycogenolysis (davuluri et al., 1981).
thus, in these muscles, [pj] could become rate-limiting for
glycogenolysis in the absence of pcr hydrolysis, a fact supported
by 31p-n.m.r. work (see meyer et al., 1986).
a fifth main function of the ck/pcr system is to provide
appropriate local atp/adp ratios at subcellular sites where ck
is functionally coupled to atp-consuming enzymes or processes.
this can be achieved effectively since ck with its low km for
adp, in the range 10-35 #m (watts, 1973; jacobus & lehninger,
1973; saks et al., 1976a; matthews et al., 1982; levin et al.,
1990), can be considered as a low-threshold adp sensor. in
addition, by maintaining the atp/adp ratio high in the vicinity
of an atpase, ck increases the thermodynamic efficiency of
atp hydrolysis
(ag = agobs-rt ln[atp]/[adp] j[pj;
kammermeier, 1987). the same regulatory and thermodynamic
aspects also hold true, of course, for ck at the energy-producing
side, where the enzyme is coupled to the atp-generating systems
of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (see below) (for
review see wallimann & eppenberger, 1985, 1990; wallimann
et al., 1989). in this case, ck is minimizing the free energy
required for atp synthesis.
results concerning the subcellular localization and the relative
proportions of the ck isoenzymes as well as the pool sizes of pcr
in different tissues of high and fluctuating energy demands led to
the suggestion that the ck/pcr system works not only in
parallel with atp and adp diffusion (fig. 2a), but, depending
on the tissue, also functions as an obligatory link between sites
of atp production and consumption (figs. 2b and 2c). taking
into account more recent data concerning the structure,
localization and function of mitochondrial ck (see below), an
integrated 'pcr circuit' model (fig. 3) was recently proposed
(wallimann et al., 1989; wallimann & eppenberger, 1990). in
our opinion, the pcr circuit fulfils all five functions of the
ck/pcr system mentioned above and represents an intricate
'energy distribution network' connecting intracellular sites of
atp production (mitochondria and glycolysis) with sites of atp
consumption (atpases) (see figs. 2 and 3).
the pcr circuit hypothesis is based on and supported by the

following principal findings.

t. wallimann and others
subcellular and functional compartmentation of ck isoenzymes

sarcomeric muscle
in a variety of tissues, ck isoenzymes are subcellularly
compartmentalized in an isoenzyme-specific manner. fractions
of the 'cytosolic isoenzymes'  xxxg468xxx  or  xxxg467xxx  are in part
concentrated and specifically localized at sites of energy consumption as well as at sites of energy production, whereas mick is specifically localized in mitochondria (figs. 3 and 4)
(wallimann et al., 1977, 1983a, 1985, 1986a,b; for reviews see
saks et al., 1978; eppenberger et al., 1983; wallimann &
eppenberger, 1985, 1990; wallimann et al., 1989). in muscle, the
content of pcr and the proportions of ck isoenzymes found in
the different subcellular compartments depend strongly on the
physiological requirements. in fast-twitch muscle, for example,
glycolysis is the main pathway of atp production. thus,
functional coupling of ck with glycolysis, which is reflected by
an increased expression of cytosolic ck (ckc) and the colocalization of this ck, with glycolytic enzymes at the i-band
(see below), seems advantageous. together with the very large
pcr pool(s) (newsholme et al., 1978) and the small proportion of
mi-ck (yamashita & yoshioka, 1991), this points to an 'energy
buffer' function of the ck/pcr system in such muscles (fig. 2b).
by contrast, in slow-twitch, oxidative muscle or cardiac muscle,
where atp is mainly derived from fatty acid oxidation within
mitochondria, a functional coupling of mi-ck with oxidative
phosphorylation, which is reflected by the expression of mi-ck
at relatively high levels (ingwall et al., 1980), seems advantageous.
together with the rather small pcr pool(s) and the low levels of
cytosolic ck, (yamashita & yoshioka, 1991), this points to an
'energy transport' function of the ck/pcr system (fig. 2c). in
both kinds of muscles, some proportion of 'cytosolic' ck (cka)
is associated with sites of atp consumption where cka is
functionally coupled to atp-requiring processes (figs. 2b and
2c). parallel pathways of energy flux directly via atp and adp,
as suggested by the 'facilitated diffusion model' (meyer et al.,
1984) are also indicated by arrows. note the schematic representation of relative proportions of ck isoenzymes and pcr
pools in figs. 2(b) and 2(c).
m

functional coupling of ck with atp-requiring processes in
muscle
in muscle, 5-10 % of 'cytosolic' ck, depending on the muscle
fibre-type and the procedures used for preparation of myofibrils,
are localized at the myofibrillar m-band (turner et al., 1973;
wallimann et al., 1977, 1978, 1983a,b) where ck is functionally
coupled to the myofibrillar, actin-activated mg2+-atpase
(wallimann et al., 1984). this localization was shown to be
isoenzyme-specific for mm-ck (wallimann et al., 1983a), whereby the c-terminal half of  xxxg468xxx  seems to contain the major
epitope(s) responsible for binding of the enzyme to the m-band
(schafer & perriard, 1988). the amount of m-band ck is
sufficient to regenerate the atp hydrolysed during muscle
contraction even if the myofibrillar mg2+-atpase is working
under optimal conditions in vitro (wallimann et al., 1984). the
localization of ck at the m-band between the two acto-myosin
overlap zones seems favourable. during muscle contraction,
both the interdigitation of thin filaments into the thick filament
lattice, as well as the movement of myosin heads, seem to push
the reaction products of the myofibrillar mg2+-atpase (adp,
hi and pi), which are in part also the substrates for ck (adp
and hi) (fig. 1), from both a-band halves towards the m-band
(wallimann & eppenberger, 1985), as could be directly
demonstrated recently (winegrad et al., 1989). furthermore, in
an in vitro system, substrate channelling and coupled activity
between ck bound to frog heart muscle filaments and myosin
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
atpase was also shown (arrio-dupont, 1988). the data con-

cerning the functional role of myofibrillar ck discussed above
are in accord with physiological studies showing the dependence
of relaxation and tension development of intact muscle or skinned
muscle fibres on myofibrillar-bound ck and on the pcr content
(spande & schottelius, 1970; ventura-clapier et al., 1987a,b;
seraydarian, 1980; hoerter et al., 1991). in contrast to the
findings by otsu et al. (1989), we did not find mm-ck evenly
distributed over the entire a-band, but localized the enzyme
specifically at the m-band of skeletal and cardiac muscle (see
wallimann & eppenberger, 1985; wallimann et al., 1989) and
within the i-band (wegmann et al., 1987, 1991b). it seems that
mm-ck and other even smaller-sized 'soluble' enzymes, like
adenylate kinase, or glycolytic enzymes, like aldolase, are mostly
excluded from the acto-myosin overlap region of the a-band,
and are concentrated together at the i-band, where they form
multi-enzyme complexes (see brooks & storey, 1988) loosely
associated with the thin filaments (arnold & pette, 1970;
wegmann et al., 1991b; see below). besides its enzymic function
as an atp regenerator, the m-line-bound mm-ck also serves a
structural role in the myofibrillar architecture by forming the socalled m4 and m4' m-bridges (wallimann et al., 1983b; strehler
et al., 1983) which interlink and possibly also position the thick
filaments within the myofibril (luther et al., 1981; for review see
wallimann & eppenberger, 1985).
in muscle, additional portions of mm-ck have been found to
be specifically associated with the sarcoplasmic reticulum (sr;
baskin & deamer, 1970; khan et al., 1972; levitsky et al., 1977;
sharov et al., 1977; elizarova et al., 1987; rossi et al., 1990)
where ck is functionally coupled to the atp-dependent ca2+pump (levitsky et al., 1977, 1978) supporting atp-driven ca2+uptake into isolated sr vesicles (levitsky et al., 1978; rossi
et al., 1990). the specific association of ck with the sr and ttubule system, confirmed also by in situ immuno-gold labelling of
permeabilized muscle or by immuno-gold labelling of isolated
sr membrane vesicles (rossi et al., 1990), was resistant to highsalt and low-salt/edta treatment, indicating a rather strong
anchorage of fractions of ck either directly with the sr
membrane and/or an association of ck with sr proteins (rossi
et al., 1990). a direct interaction of cytosolic ck isoenzymes
with membranes was recently demonstrated with model membranes (rojo et al., 1991 a). ck associated with the sr membrane
is thought to be important not only for providing atp, but also
for regulating local atp/adp ratios (rossi et al., 1990).
recently, it was shown that inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptormediated ca2+-efflux from the sr is allosterically regulated by
external [atp] (ferris et al., 1990), so that an additional
regulatory role of sr-bound mm-ck for ca2+-release, as
suggested earlier (rossi et al., 1990), may be postulated. to
conclude, these results indicate that ck is critically involved in
regulation of ion fluxes taking place during excitationcontraction coupling.
relatively small, but significant, amounts of mm-ck have
also been found at the sarcolemma membrane (sharov et al.,
1977; jockers-wretou et al., 1977; elizarova et al., 1987) where
ck is functionally coupled to the atp-dependent na+/k+pump (saks et al., 1977; grosse et al., 1980; see wallimann et al.,
1989).
functional coupling of ck with glycogenolysis and glycolysis
net hydrolysis of pcr is the major source of inorganic
phosphate (pi) released at the onset of contraction. glycogenolysis and glycolysis require pi for activation. therefore, p,release indirectly mediated by ck may itself be an important
function of the ck system. a functional coupling of ck with
glycogenolysis and glycolysis is supported by several lines of
vol. 281

25
evidence. in muscle, the glycolytic enzymes, forming a so-called
'glycolytic complex' (brooks & storey, 1988), are located at the
i-band where they are loosely associated with the thin filaments
(arnold & pette, 1970; bronstein & knull, 1981). incidentally,
most of the soluble mm-ck is also specifically localized at the
i-band (wallimann et al., 1989; wegmann et al., 1991b) and is
eluted from skinned muscle fibres together with most of the
glycolytic enzymes (maughan & wegner, 1989). in addition, the
amount of soluble mm-ck correlates with the glycolytic potential of a muscle (wallimann et al., 1984), e.g. the highest
concentrations of pcr and ck are found in those skeletal
muscles with the greatest anaerobic potential (newsholme et al.,
1978). the atp produced by glycolysis upon stimulation of
a fast-twitch glycolytic muscle is not accumulated as such, but
is immediately and efficiently transphosphorylated by ck into
pcr to replenish the pcr pool(s) and to maintain a high pcr/cr
ratio in the cell (fig. 2b). this was also shown by studies with a
reconstituted glycolytic system of muscle, indicating that cr is
efficiently phosphorylated to pcr via ck coupled to anaerobic
glycolysis (scopes, 1973). a coupling of ck to glycolysis is also
supported by the finding that a depletion of [pcr] together with
lowered atp levels occurred in an animal model with defective
muscle glycolysis (brumback et al., 1983).
additionally, in heart cells, which in general depend on an
oxidative metabolism, energy derived from glycolysis can also
contribute, at least to some extent, to the maintenance of highenergy phosphate levels and contractility if oxidative phosphorylation of these cells is inhibited (doorey & barry, 1983). however,
the glycolytic flux and the functional coupling of ck with
glycolysis, seen at low pcr/cr ratios, is suppressed under
normoxic conditions (when respiration is normal and the
pcr/cr ratio is high; kupriyanov et al., 1980), the explanation
being a limited availability to glycolysis of adp, which in heart
is kept at low levels by mitochondrial respiration and by the ck
system. thus ck, as a low-threshold sensor for adp, is also
exerting some control over the glycolytic flux.
functional coupling of glycolysis and pcr utilization was also
demonstrated by 31p-n.m.r. experiments with anoxic muscle of a
fish species that can survive anaerobic conditions, deriving its
energy from glycogenolysis (van waarde et al., 1990). these
experiments showed that at elevated levels of free adp, the ck
reaction and anaerobic glycolysis are coupled via protons (hi) as
a common intermediate (hochachka & mommsen, 1983). the
coupling between ck and glycolysis seems to disappear upon
reoxygenation, when mitochondrial respiration causes a rapid
drop in [free adp] (van waarde et al., 1990). coupling of ck
and anaerobic glycolysis by protons is plausible, since the ck
reaction is strongly ph-dependent (wallimann et al., 1984), and
protons are consumed by the ck reaction in the direction of
atp regeneration (fig. 1). a drop in intracellular ph of muscle
observed in vivo from 7.2 (at rest) to 6.7 (upon prolonged
stimulation) (burt et al., 1976) was shown in vitro to activate
mm-ck by 50% in the direction of atp regeneration, the
reason for this being that the ph optimum of mm-ck in this
direction is between 6.5 and 6.7 (wallimann et al., 1984).
furthermore, a functional coupling of pyruvate kinase (pk) and
ck was demonstrated in vitro by 31p-n.m.r., showing that the
formation of a 'diazyme' complex of the two proteins via their
common substrate atp increases the net flux of substrates
through the two kinetically coupled reactions (dillon & clark,
1990). these findings fit into the concept that the formation of
multienzyme complexes as well as the 'metabolic coupling' of
sequential (srere, 1987) and non-sequential enzymic reactions,
like the pk-atp-ck system described above (dillon & clark,
1990), play a fundamental role in metabolic regulation
(srivastava & bernhard, 1986, 1987).

26

t. wallimann and others
[

porin in its anionjj selective state

atpase

adp

atpase

atp

adp

porin in its cationselective state

atp
s

adp

atp

~~~~ck.

ck

c

r

~

~

~
~ ~

acdp
others

~

~

~
g

,

ant

~

ycoly

s

~

~

~

~

~~~~c

)s9

\

,

k)~~~~~~~~~~ic
oxidative

phosphorylation

fig. 3. the pcr circuit model for tissues with high and fluctuating energy requirements
a complex regulated network is presented where the ck/pcr system is proposed to fulfil important functions (i) for 'temporal energy buffering',
(ii) for 'spatial energy buffering' directing intracellular 'energy flux', (iii) for keeping cellular [free adp] low and preventing a net loss of adenine
nucleotides, (iv) for removing protons and thus preventing acidification within a cell, and for indirectly stimulating glycogenolysis and glycolysis
by p1 released as a consequence of net pcr hydrolysis, (v) for controlling local atp/adp ratios and thus also for increasing the thermodynamic
efficiency of atp hydrolysis. atp is derived from the two major synthetic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation (shown at the lower half) and
glycogenolysis or glycolysis (shown at the left upper middle). four major compartments for ck isoenzymes are indicated: (i) 'cytosolic' ck (ckc),
functionally coupled to glycolysis on the producing side of the pcr circuit (at the left upper middle); (ii) mitochondrial ck (mi-ck), functionally
coupled to oxidative phosphorylation also on the&producing side of the pcr circuit (at the lower half); (iii) 'cytosolic' ck, specifically associated
(ck.) with subcellular structures at sites of high and fluctuating atp utilization on the receiving side of the pcr circuit where it is functionally
coupled to the corresponding atpases (at top left) and (iv) strictly soluble cytosolic ck (ck,,) freely equilibrating pcr/cr and atp/adp pools
of the cytosol (at the right upper middle). in sarcomeric muscle, the functional compartment where ckc is coupled with glycolysis is at the i-band
where mm-ck is co-localized with the glycolytic enzymes (wegmnann et a!., 1987, 1991b; wallimann et al., 1989). as represented schematically,
the relative pool sizes of phosphocreatine (pcr) and creatine (cr) are much larger than those of the adenine nucleotides. on the mitochondrial
side, the -functional and structural compartmentation of mi-ck octamers at the inner/outer mitochondrial membrane 'energy-transfer contact
sites' is depicted. the mi-ck octamer is shown -here to interact with adenine nucleotide translocators (ant) of the inner mitochondrial membrane
(im), possibly via an involvement of cardiolipin (*), and with voltage-gated ion-selective pores (p) of the outer membrane (om), to form an
efficient multienzyme trans-membrane 'energy-channelling complex'. it is important to note that the mi-ck octamer is able to induce and stabilize
close contacts between inner and outer mitochondrial membranes (rojo et a!., 1991b). according to this model, atp generated by oxidative
phosphorylation, after transport through the inner mitochondrial membrane by the adenine nucleotide translocator (ant) in exchange for adp,
is transphosphorylated by mi-ck to give pcr which then, as a net product of oxidative phosphorylation, leaves the mitochondrion just beyond
the contact sites through porin (p) of the outer membrane in its high-conductance, anion-selective state. in contrast, creatine (cr) is entering
through porin within the contact sites, where the porin channel is thought to be in its cation-selective state due to capacitative coupling of the inner
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit

mitochondrial ck: localization, structure
and functional coupling to oxidative
phosphorylation
interestingly, in cells with high energy demands, cytosolic ck
isoenzymes are generally co-expressed with mi-ck. mitochondrial ck isoenzymes, like cytosolic cks, are also encoded
for by nuclear genes, but are imported into mitochondria, as
revealed by the typical tripartite presequence (haas & strauss,
1990), by the appearance of a short-lived precursor protein
(perryman et al., 1983; haas et al., 1989), and by subcellular
fractionation (jacobs et al., 1964). efficient functional coupling
between the mi-ck reaction and oxidative phosphorylation has
been established by biochemical, kinetic and thermodynamic
methods as well as by radioisotope analysis (bessman & fonyo,
1966; jacobus & lehninger, 1973; saks et al., 1976a,b; yang
et al., 1977; altschuld & brierley, 1977; saks et al., 1980, 1984,
1985, 1986; defuria et al., 1980; moreadith & jacobus, 1982;
erickson-viitanen et al., 1982a,b; gellerich & saks, 1982;
barbour et al., 1984a; jacobus, 1985a; jacobus & diffley, 1986;
gellerich et al., 1987, 1989; kuznetsov et al., 1989; kottke et al.,
1991). thus, mi-ck seems to have privileged access to mitochondrial matrix-generated atp presented by the adenine
nucleotide translocator (ant) (for reviews see bessman &
carpenter, 1985; jacobus et al., 1983; jacobus, 1985a) (see figs.
2b, 2c and 3). even though no unambiguous proof for a direct
physical interaction of mi-ck with ant, the most prominent
integral membrane protein of the inner mitochondrial membrane
(klingenberg, 1979), has yet been reported, an association of mick with the inner membrane itself is supported by several lines
of evidence: (i) subfractionation studies have shown that mi-ck
is associated with the outer face of the inner membrane (scholte
et al., 1973; jacobus & lehninger, 1973). (ii) the enzyme,
present mostly in its octameric form in mitochondria (marcillat
et al., 1987; schlegel et al., 1988a, 1990; quemeneur et al., 1988;
lipskaya & trofimova, 1989a,b), remains bound to hypoosmotically swollen mitochondria or mitoplasts (scholte, 1973;
vial et al., 1979; font et al., 1981, 1987; brooks & suelter,
1987a) and can be released from mitoplasts with phosphate
predominantly in its octameric form (schlegel et al., 1988a, 1990;
wyss et al., 1990). mi-ck can be rebound to extracted mitoplasts
(lipskaya et al., 1980; hall & deluca, 1980; marcillat et al.,
1987), whereby at slightly alkaline ph, mi-ck octamers rebind
preferentially over dimers (schlegel et al., 1990). once mi-ck
dimers are bound to the mitoplasts, they can undergo octamerization most probably facilitated by lateral diffusion on the inner
membrane (schlegel et al., 1990; see fig. 3). the octamer/dimer
ratio of mi-ck is influenced in vitro by substrates, ph, ionic

27

strength and protein concentration (lipskaya et al., 1985;
marcillat et al., 1987; schlegel et al., 1988a). when mgadp,
creatine and nitrate, known to induce a transition-state-analogue
complex of ck (milner-white & watts, 1971) as well as to
dissociate octameric mi-ck in vitro into stable dimers (schlegel
et al., 1988a, 1990), are added to mitoplasts, mi-ck is concomitantly released from the membranes (marcillat et al., 1987).
(iii) mi-ck has been localized in situ by immuno-gold methods
along the mitochondrial cristae membranes (schlegel et al.,
1988a; wegmann et al., 1991a) (fig. 4). (iv) mi-ck interacts with
cardiolipin vesicles (schlame & augustin, 1985; muller et al.,
1985; cheneval & carafoli, 1988). cardiolipin is a prominent
phospholipid component and in fact the only negatively charged
phospholipid of inner mitochondrial membranes (hovius et al.,
1990). (v) recently, it was shown that mi-ck is able to interact
with model membranes of different phospholipid composition,
as well as with monolayers of inner mitochondrial membrane
phospholipids (rojo et al., 1991a) (fig. 5).
apart from an interaction of mi-ck with the inner mitochondrial membrane, some recent experimental evidence shows
that mi-ck also interacts with the outer membrane: (i) mi-ck,
mainly in its octameric form as in intact mitochondria, is enriched
in isolated boundary membrane contact site fractions together
with other peripheral kinases like hexokinase and nucleoside
diphosphate kinase (adams et al., 1989; kottke et al., 1991). mick within the contact sites displayed significant latency in its
enzymic activity to externally added substrates or inhibitors
(kottke et al., 1991). (ii) immuno-gold labelling often revealed a
clustering of mi-ck at those places where the inner approaches
the outer membrane (schlegel et al., 1988a; wegmann et al.,
1991a) (see fig. 4). (iii) in in situ histochemical experiments, ckspecific stain product was trapped at contact sites between inner
and outer mitochondrial membranes (biermans et al., 1989,
1990). both the extent of contact site formation and the area
occupied by accumulated stain product significantly increased or
decreased as a function of metabolic stimulation or inhibition,
respectively (biermans et al., 1990). this may indicate that the
formation and extent of inner-outer membrane contacts are
dynamic and depend on the metabolic state of the mitochondrion,
as suggested on the basis of freeze-fracturing electron micrographs of intact mitochondria (knoll & brdiczka, 1983; bucheler
et al., 1991). (iv) in several reports, it was stressed that the outer
mitochondrial membrane and in particular the mitochondrial
pore protein play a significant role for the 'dynamic compartmentation' of adenine nucleotides in the mitochondrial
intermembrane space (erickson-viitanen et al., 1982b; gellerich
et al., 1987, 1989; brooks & suelter, 1987b) and for the transfer
of pcr to the cytosol (brdiczka, 1990; kottke et al., 1991). the

and outer membrane being in close apposition at these sites (benz et al., 1990; brdiczka, 1991; see the text). the possible regulatory aspects of
the dynamic octamer/dimer equilibrium of mi-ck, while bound to the inner membrane (2) or in solution in the intermembrane space (4), and
the differential ph-dependent rebinding of the two oligomeric mi-ck species to the inner mitochondrial membrane (3, dimers; 5, octamers; 2,
octamerization of membrane-bound dimers), all observed in vitro (schlegel et al., 1990), are also shown schematically and are indicated by
numbers. although the mi-ck octamers are distributed over the entire inner membrane, an accumulation of mi-ck was noted at the inner/outer
membrane contacts (1). it should be stressed here that by the schematic representation it is not intended to suggest that mi-ck octamers are only
enzymically active at the contacts, but rather that functional coupling of mi-ck with atp/adp translocators (ant) and with outer
mitochondrial membrane pores (p), facilitating the transport of matrix-generated atp through the inner membrane, the transphosphorylation
of this atp into pcr as well as the export of pcr with concomitant import of cr, may be most efficient at these sites. at the receiving side of the
pcr circuit, cka, being functionally coupled to a variety of cellular atpases, e.g. to atp-requiring cellular motor proteins, and being associated
with various subcellular microcompartments, e.g. with myofibrils and membranes, is also included in this model (atpases, top left). for example,
cka is associated with myofibrils, sarcoplasmic reticulum and plasma membranes where the enzyme has been shown to be functionally coupled
to the myofibrillar atpase, the ca2+-atpase (wallimann et al., 1984; rossi et al., 1990) and the na+/k+-atpase (blum et al., 1991), respectively.
at these sites, as well as at the producing sites of the pcr circuit, only small pools of atp are turned over with no need for atp or adp diffusion
over long distances. instead, ck isoenzymes are specifically compartmentalized at these locations, and the 'transport of energy' is facilitated by
the pcr circuit via pcr and cr, the former representing not only an inert 'energy buffer' but also a 'transport form' of high-energy phosphates
(for details see the text). the pcr circuit model presented here emphasizes the functional coupling with atp production and consumption and
stresses the diffusion pathways of pcr and cr. however, it is not intended to exclude parallel pathways for atp and adp.

vol. 281

28

t. wallimann and

others

substrate pcr, if these compounds were added externally
(kuznetsov et al., 1989; kottke et al., 1991). (v) recently, mick was shown to interact not only with monolayers of inner

fig. 4. localization of
mi-ck in
mitochondria
immunogold labelling of chicken photoreceptor cell mitochondria
after freeze-substitution and low-temperature embedding, using a
specific rabbit anti-(chicken mi-ck) antibody, followed by goat
anti-(rabbit igg) conjugated to 5 nm colloidal gold particles (for
experimental details see wegmann etal., 1991). note that mi-ck is
located along the cristae membranes, and is also concentrated
peripherally at places where inner and outer mitochondrial
membranes are in close proximity, presumably at contact sites (as
indicated by arrows). bar = 250 nm. (reprinted from wegmann
et al., 1991a, with copyright permission from springer-verlag,
heidelberg,

germany.)

translocation of adenine nucleotides, pcr and cr across the
outer mitochondrial membrane is suggested to be restricted to
the pore-forming protein or 'porin' (roos et at., 1982), also
known as  xxxg2409xxx  (voltage-dependent anion carrier) (colombini,
1979). porin can assume two different states: a high-conductance,
anion-selective and a low-conductance, cation-selective state
(benz et at., 1990; brdiczka, 1990). it was suggested that the
latter, which does not permit passage of negatively charged
compounds like adp, atp and pcr (see fig. 3), is induced at
mitochondrial contact sites by 'capacitive coupling' between the
inner membrane, known to display a membrane potential, and
the outer membrane. the pores beyond the contacts would
remain anion-selective, since there, the separation distance between the two membranes is too large to allow 'capacitive
coupling' (benz et at., 1990) (see also fig. 3). as a consequence,
creatine (cr) would pass the cation-selective pores at the contacts,
whereas pcr would leave the intermembrane compartment
through the anion-selective pores just beyond the contacts (fig.
3). all these notions are supported by the findings that, although
the outer membrane was disrupted by digitonin, a specific poreblocking polyanion reversibly inhibited mi-ck activity by blocking the transport of externally added adenine nucleotides through
the outer membrane pore (kottke et at., 1991) and that mi-ck
was inaccessible to negatively charged ck inhibitors and to the

membrane phospholipids, but also with such of outer membrane
phospholipid mixtures (rojo et al., 1991a). furthermore, mick octamers were able to induce close contacts between a
monolayer of spread outer membranes and inner membrane
vesicles (nicolay et al., 1990; rojo et al., 1991b; see fig. 5).
compared to octamers, mi-ck dimers were significantly less
effective in inducing close contacts. in addition, neither cytosolic
ck isoenzymes (mm- and bb-ck) nor mitochondrial adenylate
kinase, also a basic intermembrane protein like mi-ck, showed
any tendency to induce membrane contacts (rojo et al., 1991b)
(see fig. 5). (vi) data on the structure of the mi-ck octamer
itself (fig. 6) also explain the property of mi-ck octamers to
link inner (im) and outer membranes (om) together (fig. 5),
exactly as one would expect it to happen at mitochondrial energy
transfer contact sites (fig. 3). the octamer is composed of four
identical dimers forming an indentation or channel in the midst
of the cube-like molecule, as revealed by various electron
microscopical techniques (deluca & hall, 1980; schnyder et al.,
1988, 1991a,b; belousova et al., 1991; winkler et al., 1991) (see
fig. 6), as well as by x-ray analysis of mi-ck crystals (schnyder
et al., 1990). these results point out that the cube-like octamer
has two identical top and bottom faces, differing from the four
side faces, and that the funnel-like central depressions of the top
and bottom face are connected by a central channel (schnyder
etal., 1991a) (fig. 6). thus, it seems very likely that the mi-ck
octamer via its two opposing top and bottom faces can interact
simultaneously with the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, and it is tempting to speculate that the translocation of
substrates and products occurs through the central channel of
the mi-ck octamer (wallimann etal., 1989; schlegel etal.,
1990; brdiczka, 1991) (see fig. 3). it may even be hypothesized
that octameric mi-ck, tetrameric atp/adp translocator
(ant) (vignais etal., 1989) and oligomeric porin (p) (krause
etal., 1986; linden & gellerfors, 1983) form an extended, highly
organized multienzyme 'energy transport channel' through the
inner and outer membrane at the contact sites (fig. 3).
it should be stressed here that by the schematic representation
in fig. 3, it is not intended to suggest that mi-ck octamers are
only enzymically active at the mitochondrial contact sites, but
rather that functional coupling of mi-ck with atp/adp
translocators and with porin facilitates the transphosphorylation
of matrix-generated atp into pcr, its export out of the mitochondrion, and the import of cr into the mitochondrion.
up to now, the regulatory cycle concerning the mi-ck
octamer/dimer equilibrium and the differential interaction of
octamers versus dimers with the inner mitochondrial membrane
were investigated in vitro (lipskaya et at., 1985; schlegel et at.,
1990; rojo et at., 1991a,b) (schematically depicted in fig. 3). the
estimated in vivo concentration of mi-ck in the intermembrane
space would clearly favour an 'all-octamer situation' of mi-ck
(see schlegel et at., 1990). however, since the octamer/dimer
equilibrium as well as the interaction of octamers and dimers
with mitochondrial membranes are sensitive to substrates and
products of the ck and the atp/adp translocator reactions as
well as to ph, and since a certain proportion of dimeric mi-ck
is always found when mi-ck is released from mitochondria,
such dynamic cycles are likely to exist also in vivo.
the function of mi-ck in conservation of the mitochondrial
phosphorylation potential
the specific location of mi-ck between the mitochondrial

envelope membranes raises the question of the metabolic advantage of such a localization. at first glance, it would appear
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
more efficient to produce the pcr inside the matrix compartment
and then to export it as such. however, one has to consider that
the intramitochondrial phosphorylation potential is significantly
lower than that in the cytosol (8 kcal or 33.5 kj/mol in the
mitochondria versus 12 kcal or 50.2 kj/mol in the cytosol). in
spite of the low atp/adp quotient in the matrix [approx.
0.2-2.0 or 6-12, as measured in rat liver mitochondria by
chemical determination (soboll et al., 1978) or by 31p-n.m.r.
(ogawa & lee, 1982), respectively], mitochondria are still able to
contribute to the high extramitochondrial phosphorylation potential because of the asymmetric, electrogenic exchange of atp
versus adp by the adenine nucleotide translocator (ant)
(klingenberg et al., 1969). thus, due to the significantly higher
atp/adp quotient at the outer side of the inner membrane
compared to that in the matrix compartment, the free energy of
atp hydrolysis increases during the export of atp through the
inner mitochondrial membrane. according to klingenberg
(klingenberg et al., 1969; klingenberg, 1980), the inner membrane potential can generate atp/adp quotients of 15-30
which are comparable to those determined in the cytosol of liver
cells (soboll et al., 1978), but much lower than in muscle where
the same parameter is in the range of 100-200 (hebisch et al.,
1986). klingenberg investigated the efficiency of atp export in
competitive in vitro experiments without an active transphosphorylation system, like ck, present (klingenberg, 1980).
however, it is obvious that a direct coupling of ck to the inner
membrane and to the ant itself could significantly improve the
efficiency of the mitochondrial energy exchange system since the
free energy of hydrolysis of atp, just exported from the matrix,
is directly conserved in the form of pcr, which is not a substrate
for the translocator. thus mi-ck is minimizing the free energy
required for atp synthesis in the mitochondria. concomitantly
with this transphosphorylation of atp to give pcr, the ant
gets saturated with adp and is ready for another atp/adp
antiport reaction. due to the facts that the free energy of
hydrolysis of atp exported by the ant is kept at a very high
level and that the intermembrane pcr and cr levels probably do
not equilibrate with the extramitochondrial ones, mi-ck is able
to phosphorylate cr even at a high cytosolic phosphorylation
potential. a further advantage for efficient pcr production by
the mitochondria might result from the location of mi-ck just
behind the cation-selective outer membrane pore in the contacts
(benz et al., 1990; kottke et al., 1991) (fig. 3). in this shielded
position, mi-ck would be unable to sense external pcr/cr
levels and could produce pcr in spite of a high phosphorylation
potential in the cytosol (brdiczka, 1991).
correlation between relative amounts of mitochondrial ck and
energy fluxes through the ck reaction measured by 31p-n.m.r.
it is accepted that in living muscle the ck reaction velocity can
be several-fold larger than the rates of atp hydrolysis and atp
synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation. this overcapacity of the
ck system is probably one of the reasons why a positive
correlation between oxygen consumption of heart muscle and the
ck reaction velocity could only recently be verified by 31p-n.m.r.
techniques applied to perfused heart (kupriyanov et al., 1984;
perry et al., 1988), by direct biochemical measurements (mahler,
1985) and by model calculations (connett, 1988) (figs. 2b and
2c).
the correlation factor between oxygen consumption and ck
reaction flux in cardiac muscle depends on the relative proportion
of mi-ck in the tissue (perry et al., 1988). mi-ck is absent from
embryonic rat, mouse and rabbit cardiac muscle (hall & deluca,
1975; ingwall et at., 1980; ingwall & fossel, 1983) and is
gradually expressed in increasing amounts during postnatal
development of these insessorial animals (mcauliffe et al., 1989)

vol. 281

29
whereby the 'transport function' of mi-ck becomes increasingly
important. during this period, the flux of energy through the
ck/pcr system was found to increase in parallel with the
developmental accumulation of mi-ck (perry et al., 1988), with
relative proportions of mi-ck reaching the 20-30% level of
total ck activity observed in adult heart at about 3-4 weeks
after birth (ingwall & fossel, 1983). in large animals like sheep
(ingwall et al., 1980) or in autophagous birds like chickens,
which have to walk and feed on their own shortly after birth,
maturation of the ck system occurs around birth or hatching,
respectively (hall & deluca, 1976; wegmann et al., 1991a).
interestingly, during chronic stimulation of skeletal muscle
(schmitt & pette, 1985) or training for long distance running
(apple & rogers, 1986), the conversion of fast-twitch to slowtwitch muscle fibres is accompanied by a significant decrease in
total ck activity as well as in pcr pool size. at the same time,
however, a severalfold elevation of mi-ck activity was noticed.
therefore, the absolute amount of mi-ck correlates with the
oxidative potential of the corresponding muscle fibres
(wallimann et al., 1989; yamashita & yoshioka, 1991). this, in
our opinion, is a strong argument for two of the main functions
proposed for the pcr circuit, that is, for the 'energy buffering'
function which is more prominent in glycolytic, fast-twitch
muscles with high levels of cytosolic ck and large pcr pools
(wallimann & eppenberger, 1985) (fig. 2b), and for the 'energy
transport' or 'channelling' function which is more pronounced
in oxidative slow-twitch and cardiac muscle, both containing
relatively high amounts of mi-ck (approx. 12 and 15-25 % mick of total ck, respectively, compared to glycolytic muscle with
only 4%) (ingwall & fossel, 1983; wallimann et al., 1989;
wallimann & eppenberger, 1990; yamashita & yoshioka, 1991)
(fig. 2c).

cellular response to creatine depletion: mi-ck and long-term
metabolic adaptation to a low cellular energy status
feeding of animals with the creatine analogue ,?-guanidinopropionic acid (gpa) leads to quite dramatic metabolic changes
in their skeletal muscles. for example, a 90 % depletion of pcr,
a 20-50% decrease of total ck activity and a decrease in
glycolytic potential concomitant with an increased oxidative
capacity have been described (fitch et al., 1974; shoubridge
et al., 1985a). since there was no significant difference in muscle
performance in such animals, these results were taken as an
argument that neither pcr nor the activity of ck are critical for
aerobic metabolism (shoubridge & radda, 1984). however, the
pcr levels in animals 'intoxicated' with gpa were still in the km
range of myofibrillar m-band ck (1.67 mm; saks et al., 1976a)
and larger than the pcr concentration differential or gradient
(0.1-0.2 mm) necessary to support maximal energy flux from
mitochondria to the myofibrils (jacobus, 1985b). furthermore,
long-term compensatory metabolic adaptations take place in
muscles of gpa-fed animals (shoubridge et al., 1985b), and
metabolic fibre-type transformations and alterations in isoenzyme expression were noted as a consequence of a chronically
low pcr and low atp status. the extent of adaptation, specifically the increase in mitochondrial content, the ability of the
muscles of animals fed with gpa to activate aerobic metabolism
more effectively than in control animals, and the metabolic shift
towards an endurance, low-fatigue type of muscle (shoubridge &
radda, 1984) argue for the importance of the pcr circuit still
operating in gpa-treated animals. most significant is the recent
finding that, in contrast to earlier results with skeletal muscle
(meyer et al., 1986), in cardiac muscle, gpa-phosphate, although
a poorly metabolized pcr analogue (chevli & fitch, 1979), is
used by ck during work jumps and can therefore buffer
transitions between work states quite efficiently (conley &

30

t. wallimann and others

fitd t)-(11v5 l{ l

air

_w l ;

l

om monolayer
water

l;

r

om
mi-ck
octamer

a

im

fig. 5. mediation by mi-ck of contact formation between mitochondrial membranes
a monolayer of outer mitochondrial membrane (om) or om phospholipids was spread at the air-water interface, and mi-ck molecules (shaded
squares) injected into the water subphase. mi-ck penetrated into the monolayers (shown schematically on the left) as evidenced by an increase
in surface pressure (rojo et al., 1991a). after washing of the subphase, radioactively labelled inner mitochondrial membrane vesicles (im) or
im phospholipid vesicles were injected into the subphase, and the increase in surface radioactivity, caused by mi-ck-mediated binding of vesicles
to the surface monolayer, was monitored before and after washing of the subphase (rojo et al., 1991b). the membrane contact formation observed
(shown at higher magnification on the right) was specific for mi-ck and occurred neither with cytosolic ck isoenzymes nor with a number of
cationic mitochondrial intermembrane space enzymes. most interestingly, the two oligomeric forms of mi-ck, octamer and dimer, differed in their
ability to induce intermembrane adhesion, the octamer being more potent in this respect (rojo et al., 1991b). the structure of the cube-like mick octamer with two similar top and bottom faces and four distinct side faces (schnyder et al., 1990, 1991a,b; see fig. 6) is consistent with its
role in mediating the formation of contacts between two membranes and with the localization of mi-ck octamers at mitochondrial contact sites.
we propose that mi-ck octamers behave similarly in the intermembrane space of mitochondria in vivo, i.e. that they interact simultaneously with
the inner and outer membrane at contact sites and possibly also with apposed cristae membranes (rojo et al., 1991b; see the text and fig. 3).

kushmerick, 1990). in addition, the most recent study with epafed rats suggests that pcr-depleted hearts display fundamental
biochemical, physiological and thermodynamic differences compared with control hearts (zweier et al., 1991).
as part of the adaptations described, large cylindrical mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions, highly enriched in mick, were found in adult rat cardiomyocytes cultured in a
creatine-free medium (eppenberger-eberhardt et al., 1991). the
inclusions and mi-ck accumulation therein disappeared or
reappeared simply by the addition to the culture medium of
20 mm-creatine or 10 mm-gpa, respectively. it is our opinion
that these cultured heart cells compensate for the low intracellular
energy (low total cr) status in two ways: an accumulation of mick would (i) increase the catalytic (vmax/km) efficiency of pcr
production even at substantially lower cytosolic total cr levels
than normal, and it would (ii) also increase the 'energy transport'
function of the pcr circuit. such an interpretation is in line with
a 31p-n.m.r. study using a normoxic heart model, perfused with
2-deoxy-d-glucose and insulin (hoerter et al., 1988). although in
this case the pcr levels were depleted by as much as 85-90 % of
the original and atp was no longer measurable by n.m.r.,
surprisingly, the hearts were still beating with 65 % of their
original systolic pressure. obviously, under normoxic conditions,
when the oxygen supply is normal, the energy transport function
of the ck/pcr system was still sufficiently operational (compare
figs. 2b and 2c) to maintain a reasonably high 'energy flux'
despite the very low levels of high-energy phosphates (low
'energy buffering capacity') observed after deoxyglucose and
insulin administration. this contrasts to the hypoxic situation, in
which heart performance was seen to correlate with pcr levels,
i.e. if the resupply of atp by oxidative phosphorylation was
inhibited and therefore the 'energy transport' function of the
ck/pcr system diminished, heart performance dropped very
quickly due to exhaustion of the cellular pcr pool(s) (hoerter
et al., 1988). experiments measuring pcr depletion and 02 uptake
in frog sartorius muscle (mahler, 1985) fully agree with this
interpretation, suggesting that respiration in muscle may be ratelimited by the production of adp via mi-ck.

diffusion limitations of adenine

nucleotides
as far as the energy transport function of the ck/pcr system
is concerned, pcr and cr seem to be better suited as 'transport
molecules' than atp and adp, since the former are available at
much higher concentrations within cells with high, fluctuating
energy requirements. in addition, pcr and cr are smaller
compounds with either no or lower negative charge compared to
the adenine nucleotides. the suitability of pcr and cr as
'transport molecules' was recently confirmed by non-invasive
31p-pulsed gradient n.m.r. measurements in vivo, indicating that
the mean diffusion lengths of pcr and cr (57 and 37,um) are
significantly higher than those of adp and atp (1.8 and 22 ,um)
(yoshizaki et al., 1990). these results also confirmed that, in vivo,
adp, with a mean diffusion length of 1.8 ,um, is clearly the most
diffusion-limited of all the above metabolites (jacobus, 1985b;
mahler, 1985; yoshizaki et al., 1990), but its diffusiveness may
still be sufficient for energy transport in small-sized cells or in
structurally specialized, larger-sized cells. for example, certain
insect flight muscles, capable of extremely high aerobic energy
fluxes, do not seem to contain mitochondrial  xxxd1759xxx  kinases
(schneider et al., 1989; ellington & hines, 1991). in these
specialized muscles, rows of densely packed mitochondria are
lined up in close apposition to individual myofibrils (smith,
1966) in such a way that diffusion distances from mitochondria
to myofibrils are very small. however, in muscle fibres with large
diameters and with mostly subsarcolemmal mitochondria, rather
large diffusion distances (10-100 /m) have to be overcome.
there, the adp diffusion rates are 1-2 orders of magnitude
below those required for the highest rates of oxidative metabolism
(kammermeier, 1987). in addition, at a certain distance from
any mitochondrion (2-3 ,um), the limitation of adp diffusion
would induce a drop in the free energy of atp hydrolysis by
4-7,9 kj/mol, that is, below the values critical for the regular
function of the respective atp-dependent processes (mainwood
& rakusan, 1982).
the problem of 'energy supply' and 'transport' between sites
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit

a

31

a

b-

fiig. 6. high-resolution electron micrographs of mi-ck octamers
(a) projections of individual mi-ck octamers after negative staining with uranyl acetate. (a) is the corresponding averaged image at a resolution
of approximately 2 nm and (b) represents a grey-level contour representation of (a). note the four-fold symmetry of the mi-ck octamer having
a side length of approximately 10 nm and a central cavity of 2.5 nm in diameter, filled by negative stain. (b) surface relief structure of mi-ck
after high-resolution heavy metal (ta/w) shadowing at -250 ยฐc under ultra-high vacuum (for experimental details see schnyder et al., 1991 a,
and winkler et al., 1991). the corresponding averaged pictures with a resolution of approximately 2.5 nm are displayed in (a') and in (b') as greylevel contour representation. note again the four-fold symmetry of the mi-ck octamer (10 nm x 10 nm), the cross-like surface indentation
indicating the boundaries of the four dimers, as well as the central funnel-like access leading into the interior of the molecule.

of atp production and sites of atp utilization, including the
thermodynamic consequences stated above, seems to be especially
pronounced in highly polar cells with spatially compartmentalized ck isoenzymes, e.g. in photoreceptor cells
(wallimann et al., 1986a; hemmer et al., 1989; wegmann et al.,
199 la) and in spermatozoa (tombes & shapiro, 1985; wallimann
et al., 1986b; tombes et al., 1987). in these cells, diffusion
limitations of adenine nucleotides are likely to occur, since the
sites of energy production (mitochondria containing mi-ck)
and the sites of energy consumption (with a specific association
of  xxxg467xxx ; quest & shapiro, 1991) are separated by large distances,
e.g. by 50 ,um from the inner segment to the outer segment of
photoreceptors and by up to 100 /am from the midpiece to the
distal end of the sperm tail (see below). the properties of the
ck/pcr system seem well suited to overcome the diffusional
limitations in these polar cells by utilizing pcr and cr as
mediators between mitochondria and sites of energy utilization.
vol. 281

intracellular compartmentation of highenergy phosphates

since the ck isoenzymes are compartmentalized within a cell,
and since the enzymic ck reaction works in opposite directions
at energy-producing and energy-consuming sites, it is likely that
the substrates and products of the ck reaction are also compartmentalized to some extent within a cell, at least locally.
recent work indeed indicates that within a cell, certain low-mr
metabolites like adenine nucleotides may not be evenly
distributed, but may be microcompartmented even without
separation by membranes (jones, 1986; miller & horowitz,
1986, and references therein). this may be especially relevant for
muscle with its highly structured contractile apparatus with
locally changing donnan potentials (bartels & elliott, 1985).
biochemical as well as recent 31p-n.m.r. studies on muscle are
clearly in favour of distinct intracellular atp pools

32

(gudbjarnason et al., 1970; nunnally & hollis, 1979; ugurbil

t. wallimann and others

etal., 1984; koretsky etal., 1985, 1986, 1990; zahler et al., 1987;
gellerich et al., 1987; ishida & paul, 1989; brindle et al., 1990)
as well as creatine pools (savabi, 1988), for example in mitochondria and myofibrils. in addition, some of the atp pools are
invisible by 31p-n.m.r. (toyo-oka et al., 1986; murphy et al.,
1988). although the n.m.r. visibility of cellular atp is still a
matter of debate, an elegant study by hutson et al. (1989)
suggests that at least in isolated mitochondria, all matrix atp is
n.m.r.-visible in vitro. the 'dynamic compartmentation' of
adenine nucleotides in the mitochondrial intermembrane space
(gellerich et al., 1987, 1989) is also relevant in this respect, since
intermembrane [adp] was shown to depend on the mitochondrial
respiratory rate (gellerich et al., 1989), even though overall
[adp] may be rather constant when measured globally by 31p_
n.m.r. (balaban et al., 1986; balaban, 1990; from et al., 1990).
these facts may all complicate the calculation of [free adp] by
31p-n.m.r. methods, because the determination of the latter value
relies on the actually measured overall concentrations of atp,
cr and pcr and on the equilibrium constant of the ck reaction
taken from enzyme kinetics in solution. indeed, in a very recent
study it was shown that the reaction velocities of ck in vivo,
measured by 31p-n.m.r. magnetization transfer, do not always
agree with the reaction velocities predicted from solution kinetics
(mcauliffe et al., 1991), even if the ck flux measurements were
corrected for the exchange of y-p, from atp to pi, imposing a
problem in these measurements (ugurbil et al., 1986). thus the
actual adp concentrations, especially on a subcellular level, may
differ significantly due to subcellular compartmentation of ck
and of its metabolites. this compartmentation should be taken
into account and the consequences thereof borne in mind if
experimental data, resulting from the measurement of global
events, are to be evaluated.

microtubules (tombes et al., 1988), thereby leading to compartmentation of the enzyme within the sperm flagellum. in
addition, a subspecies of tail ck, presumably corresponding to
the 10 % of tail ck associated with the plasma membrane in vivo,
was shown to bind readily to phospholipid liposomes and
detergent micelles in vitro (quest & shapiro, 1991). this agrees
with the findings that all major vertebrate ck isoenzymes are
able to interact, although to different extents, with model
membranes (rojo et al., 1991a).
energy utilization by the flagellum of sea urchin sperm is
tightly coupled to the rate of energy production by the mitochondria. this coupling was shown to be mediated by a pcr
shuttle since (i) 31p-n.m.r. results confirmed that in sperm, pcr is
used as an acute source of energy (christen et al., 1983), and (ii)
inhibition of sperm ck with increasing, but low, concentrations
of dinitrofluorobenzene led to a progressive flagellar wave
attenuation starting at the distal end of the sperm tail (tombes
et al., 1987), though mitochondrial respiration was not affected
(tombes & shapiro, 1985). tail movement, however, was
restored when these ck-inhibited spermatozoa were demembranated and transferred into a medium containing mgatp
(tombes et al., 1987). these results provide strong support for
the idea that the ck/pcr system is an obligatory link in the
transport of high energy phosphates between the mitochondria
near the sperm head and the axoneme running the length of the
sperm tail, which depending on the species, may be as long as
100 um. thus, in these highly polarized cells, the 'transport of
energy' as atp seems to be severely diffusion-limited and is
facilitated instead by pcr. despite appropriate controls performed by shapiro and colleagues, some reservations concerning
the 'absolute' specificity of dinitrofluorobenzene for ck may
still be justified, even when the reagent is used at very low
concentrations. nevertheless, the sperm model is still the best
example for the pcr circuit at work in vivo.

subcellular compartmentation and
function of ck isoenzymes in tissues other
than sarcomeric muscle
multiple ck isoenzymes, cellular and subcellular compartmentation, isoenzyme-specific subcellular localization and
functional compartmentation of ck were also observed in a
number of tissues other than sarcomeric muscle, e.g. in
spermatozoa (tombes & shapiro, 1985; wallimann et al., 1986b),
retina photoreceptor cells (wallimann et al., 1986a; hemmer
et al., 1989; wegmann et al., 1991a), electrocytes (barrantes et al.,
1983a,b, 1985; wallimann et al., 1985), visceral and vascular
smooth muscles (ishida et al., 1991), intestinal epithelial cells
(keller & gordon, 1991), kidney (ikeda, 1988) and brain
(hamburg et al., 1990).
ck compartmentation and function in spermatozoa: metabolite
channelling via a pcr shuttle between mitochondria and tail
two isoforms of ck, brain-type bb-ck and mitochondrial
mi-ck, were identified in spermatozoa from rooster and man.
immunolocalization studies showed that the two ck isoforms
are spatially segregated, that is, bb-ck was found in the sperm
tail while mi-ck was confined to the mitochondria within the
mid-piece (wallimann et al., 1986b). similarly, two main ck
isoforms have been characterized in sea urchin sperm; a headform, presumably corresponding to the mitochondrial ck
isoform, as well as a unique tail-form with an mr of 145000
(tombes & shapiro, 1985, 1987), which during evolution has
originated from a gene triplication (wothe et al., 1990). the tail
ck occurs free in the cytosol as well as bound to the sperm tail
plasma membrane (quest & shapiro, 1991) and to axonemal

ck isoenzyme compartmentation and function in smooth muscle
and intestinal epithelial cells
while the main ck isoform in smooth muscle is brain-type
bb-ck, small amounts of mb- and traces of mm-ck were also
found in this tissue (iyengar et al., 1982). only recently was mick, mostly in its octameric form, detected in mitochondrial
fractions of intestinal and vascular smooth muscles of guinea pig
(ishida et al., 1991) and rat (payne et al., 1991). whereas chicken
small intestine also contained significant amounts of mi-ck (our
unpublished work), in chicken gizzard, which contains high
levels of bb-ck (quest et al., 1990a), no mi-ck has been found
so far (schlegel et al., 1988a; ishida et al., 1991). since pcr levels
are significantly lower in smooth compared to striated muscle
(iyengar, 1984; hellstrand & vogel, 1985), e.g. 1-3 mm versus
20-30 mm, respectively, the kinetic characteristics of smooth
muscle  xxxg467xxx , namely, the lower km values for adp and pcr
(iyengar et al., 1982; quest et al., 1990b), are particularly suited
for the role of ck in maintaining a constant level of atp at the
expense of the available cellular pcr. furthermore, for  xxxg467xxx 
from chicken and mouse, it was shown that the km for pcr is
regulated by phosphorylation of the enzyme (quest et al., 1990b;
chida et al., 1990a,b).
the presence of mi-ck in mitochondria of guinea-pig smooth
muscles may provide the molecular basis for the dependence of
pcr production on oxidative metabolism, i.e. in the guinea-pig
taenia caeci smooth muscle, which responds to stimulation with
very long tonic contractures, some 60 % of the total atp
demand is met by oxidative phosphorylation (ishida & paul,
1990). this was corroborated by 31p-n.m.r. studies using porcine
arteries, where a two-site molecular exchange between atp and
pcr due to ck reactions was assumed (clark & dillon, 1990).

et al., 1979; mcclellan et al., 1983; barbour et al., 1984b; saks

1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
thus, one may postulate that these sites in a smooth muscle cell
correspond to cytosolic bb-ck (possibly associated at the
subcellular level with sites of high atp turnover) and to mi-ck
(working in the opposite direction within the mitochondria),
forming a pcr circuit also in mammalian smooth muscles (ishida
et al., 1991). in contrast, smooth muscle strips from chicken
gizzard respond to stimulation with relatively fast phasic contractures without a tonic component (fischer & pfitzer, 1989).
thus, the presence of mi-ck in guinea-pig smooth muscles, but
not in chicken gizzard, reflects the different physiological properties of these muscles (ishida et al., 1991).
in the uterus, pcr levels increase significantly before labour,
when large metabolic demands are made on the contracting
myometrium; they remain high during parturition and return to
pre-partum levels within a week after birth (dawson & wray,
1983), thus indicating that pcr is also critically involved in the
energetics of uterine contraction. interestingly, in uterus,  xxxg467xxx 
gene transcription is oestrogen-induced (reiss & kaye, 1981).
high concentrations of bb-ck were detected in smooth muscle
and in epithelial cells of the human colon (jockers-wretou et al.,
1977). in intestinal epithelial cells, the discrete subcellular compartmentation of bb-ck, concentrated distinctly in the brush
border terminal web region and partially associated with the
brush border itself, and of mi-ck, located in the mitochondria
just subjacent to the terminal web, were shown to be of
physiological relevance by in vitro contraction experiments
(gordon & keller, 1991). when in these polarized cells, high
energy phosphate was supplied as pcr, brush border bb-ck
imparted to the circumferential-ring myosin a selective accessibility of pcr and thus of atp over other atpases, suggesting a
specific functional coupling of bb-ck with brush border myosin.
membrane association and function of ck in electrocytes of
electric fish
high concentrations of ck are also present in the electric
organ of electric fish (barrantes et al., 1983a). the so-called nonreceptor, peripheral v2-protein, found in highly purified preparations of acetylcholine receptor-rich (achr-rich) membranes
obtained from torpedo marmorata electric organ, was identified
as membrane-associated ck (barrantes et al., 1983b). biochemical and immunohistochemical studies showed that, as in
muscle, the majority of ck in electrocytes is soluble (barrantes
et al., 1985), but significant fractions of the enzyme were also
localized in situ at the post-synaptic achr-rich membrane, on
synaptic vesicles at the innervated ventral side of electrocytes,
and on isolated achr-rich vesicles (wallimann et al., 1985;
gysin et al., 1986). most importantly, additional ck was also
found in association with the entire canicular membrane system
at the non-innervated dorsal face of the same cells (wallimann
et al., 1985) where the atp-requiring na+/k+-atpase is highly
concentrated.
some conflicting reports on the ck isoenzymes present in
electrocytes have appeared in the literature. while some groups
claimed that in torpedo electrocytes, only the muscle-type mmck is synthesized (witzemann, 1985), others demonstrated the
presence of at least two ck isoforms in these cells (barrantes
et al., 1985; gysin et al., 1986). based on the much higher
immunoreactivity with rabbit anti-chicken  xxxg467xxx  relative to antim-ck antibodies, barrantes et al. (1983a,b, 1985) concluded
that the v2-protein corresponds to a brain-type  xxxg467xxx  isoenzyme.
in contrast, gysin et al. (1986), using homologous anti-(torpedo
ck) antibodies, presented conclusive evidence that the major
ck species in electrocytes is muscle-type  xxxg468xxx  (see also
perryman et al., 1985), that significant amounts of a ck isoform,
tentatively identified as mb-ck, are also present, and that the
enzyme bound to highly purified achr-rich membranes is
vol. 281

33
muscle-type ck. two cks were cloned from torpedo californica
and t. marmorata electric organ (west et al., 1984; giraudat
et al., 1984). interestingly, sequence comparison with avian and
mammalian ck isoenzymes showed that neither of the torpedo
ck sequences fell definitely into either the muscle or brain class,
but instead were both sharing m- and b-like ck domains
(babbitt et al., 1986), thus explaining the apparently aberrant
cross-reactivity of heterologous anti- xxxg467xxx  antibodies. therefore,
the categorization of ck into brain or muscle isoenzymes may
not be valid for species divergent from the mammalian or avian
system from which such categorization arose. the correct assignment of these ck isoenzymes in electric fish has distracted
the attention away from the physiological implications of ck at
these various subcellular locations, as proposed by wallimann
et al. (1985).
in electric organs of various electric fish, the levels of ck and
pcr are high, although aerobic and anaerobic metabolic synthetic
pathways are slow (blum et al., 1990). upon discharge of the
electric organ, [pcr] rapidly falls (borroni, 1984) due to activation
of the na+/k+-atpase which is the major energy-utilizing
pathway in electrocytes (blum et al., 1990). this is supported by
the fact that ouabain, a specific inhibitor of the na+/k+-atpase,
prevents pcr depletion (blum et al., 1991). by saturation transfer
31p-n.m.r., a coupled activity of ck and the sodium pump, both
enzymes being membrane-bound and co-localized in the dorsal
electrocyte membrane (wallimann et al., 1985), was directly
demonstrated in vivo (blum et al., 1991). thus, in electrocytes as
in muscle, high energy demands, caused by electric discharge and
subsequent recharge, are met at the expense of pcr, and recovery
of the electric organ is closely related to the restoration of pcr
levels (borroni, 1984). in addition, the release of acetylcholine
from torpedo synaptosomes, where ck was also localized
(wallimann et al., 1985), was shown to be severely affected by
inhibition of ck by dinitrofluorobenzene (dunant et al., 1988).
since in electrocytes, the atp synthetic pathways are slow, but
upon discharge, large amounts of energy are needed at once,
these cells represent an instructive example for an almost exclusive
"energy buffer function' of the ck/pcr system.

cellular and subceliular compartmentation of ck isoenzymes in
retina and photoreceptor cells
high amounts of ck activity were found in retina where two
ck isoenzymes, bb-ck and mi-ck, are present in several layers
and cell types (wallimann et al., 1986a). in adult retina, most of
the ck is concentrated within the photoreceptor cell layer, as
judged from immunofluorescence staining. other neuronal and
glial cells stained to a lesser extent. in photoreceptors, bb-ck
was found in the myoid and ellipsoid portions of the inner
segments, as well as in the peripheral region of the outer segments
(ros), partially in association with the ros plasma membrane
(hemmer et al., 1989; wegmann et al., 1991a). mi-ck is
specifically sequestered in the ellipsoid portion of the inner
segment where most of the photoreceptor's mitochondria are
clustered (wallimann et al., 1986a). mi-ck has been localized in
these mitochondria along the cristae membranes as well as at
those sites where outer and inner membrane are in close
proximity, presumably at the contact sites (wegmann et al.,
1991 a). interestingly, mi-ck is expressed in retina rather late
during embryonic development of the chicken and turned out to
be a good marker of photoreceptor differentiation.
photoreceptor cells, like spermatozoa, are highly polarized.
atp synthesis, that is, glycolysis as well as oxidative phosphorylation, is confined entirely to the inner segment (lowry et al.,
1961; berger et al., 1980; wallimann et al., 1986a; hemmer
et al., 1989), whereas many energy-requiring reactions take place
in the outer segment, e.g. regeneration of gtp,  xxxd1274xxx  and

34

34

atp, utilized during phototransduction (see chabre & deterre,
1989). the sites of atp synthesis and utilization are therefore

spatially separated by appreciable distances. the rather narrow
connecting cilium between the inner and outer segment may
additionally reduce the diffusion flux. thus, the presence of
segregated ck isoenzymes in photoreceptor cells, which are
subject to high and fluctuating energy requirements, as well as
their relatively high content of pcr (wallimann et at., 1986a) are

indicative for a pcr circuit involved also in the bioenergetics of
vision.

photoreceptor cells and neuronal cells of the retina,
glia
mmller cells also contain appreciable amounts of  xxxg467xxx  as
judged from immunofluorescence staining (wegmann et al.,
1991a), indicating that these glia cells possess a high energy
status and that the ck/pcr system may be involved in the
of
and other atp-dependent functions
energetics
k+-resorption
besides

attributed to glia cells (newman, 1985).

ck in brain

aerobic glycolysis is the primary pathway of atp synthesis in
brain (sokoloff, 1989). with only small stores of glucose, glycogen
and 02, the rate of glycolysis in brain is closely coupled to
cerebral blood flow and oxygen uptake. these rates in turn are
coupled to the utilization of atp by factors such as [adp],
local ph, or extracellular
(holtzman & olson, 1983). a
rapidly available source for atp synthesis in brain is the ck/pcr
system. the high activity of ck in brain (norwood et at., 1983)
justifies the assumption that ck is a key enzyme in the energy
metabolism of this tissue.
ck isoenzymes in brain. bb-ck is the major 'cytosolic' ck
isoenzyme present in brain (eppenberger et at., 1967; quest
etal., 1989). for chicken  xxxg467xxx , a considerable heterogeneity was
found, with two major b-type subunits and additional subspecies
ribosomal initiation (soldati et 1990)
arising from
1990b, 1991).
and post-translational modifications (quest et
in adult human brain, the presence of mm-ck has also been

[k+]

alternative

al.,

al.,

al.,

reported (lindsey & diamond, 1978; hamburg et 1990).
while northern blot analysis failed to detect any  xxxg468xxx  message,
this determination was only achieved by polymerase chain
reaction (hamburg et
1990). initial immunolocalization
studies suggest that mm-ck is restricted to specific regions of

al.,

the brain (hamburg etal., 1990).

jacobs et al. (1964) and swanson (1967) reported on ck
associated with brain mitochondria, which was later
identified and characterized as authentic brain mi-ck (booth &
clark, 1978; wevers et al., 1981; wyss et 1990). recently,
were shown to be
 xxxg469xxx  from brain, and  xxxg470xxx  from heart
1988b; hossle et
two different isoenzymes (schlegel et
1988; wyss et al., 1990; haas et 1989; haas & strauss, 1990;
payne et al., 1991), but both form dimeric and octameric
molecules (schlegel et al., 1988b; wyss et 1990). furthermore,
 xxxg469xxx  was found to be localized preferentially as octamers in
mitochondrial boundary membrane contact site fractions of
brain mitochondria (kottke et
1988). thus, the major
but
bb-ck
and
are
tissues
in
and
neural
brain
enzymes
the presence of small amounts of mm-ck has now also to be

activity

al.,

al.,

al.,

al.,

al.,

al.,

 xxxg469xxx ,

considered.

regional and cellular compartmentation. ck is an abundant
enzyme in the entire brain, but microdissection studies already
content
pointed to the existence of regional differences in ck
and pcr concentrations, with ck activity varying more than
two-fold among different areas of the brain (chandler et al.,
1988). in cerebellar cortex, especially in the molecular layer,

higher levels of ck and pcr were measured than in white matter
(maker etal., 1973). the cerebellum, striatum and pyramidal
tracts also contain higher ck activities than whole brain (manos

et at., 199 1). these

findings

t. wallimann and others

are in accordance with recent 31p_

n.m.r. imaging showing that the flux through the ck reaction as
well as
are significantly higher in grey compared to white
matter (cadoux-hudson et at., 1989). in addition, creatine was
also found by magnetic resonance imaging to be unevenly
distributed in the brain (moonen et at., 1990).
early localization studies in the cerebellum by histochemical
staining for ck activity displayed a more intense staining in the
molecular layer than in the granular layer of the cerebellar cortex
and much less staining in the cerebellar white matter (khan et at.,
1971), which is in agreement with the above findings. the ck
activity was especially high in cerebellar purkinje cells (khan,
1976; kato et at., 1986). using a rabbit anti-rabbit  xxxg468xxx 
auto-antibody, ikeda & tomonaga (1987) found by immunoperoxidase staining of mouse brain a distinctive group of positive
neurons in the zona incerta and the lateral hypothalamic area, as
well as positive staining of purkinje cells and their dendrites. in
addition, positive immunostaining for ck was also demonstrated
in nerve terminals in the hypothalamic area and the superior
colliculus (ikeda & tomonaga, 1988). ck, however, is not
restricted to neuronal cells, but was also found in oligodendrocytes (manos et at., 1991), astrocytes (thompson et at., 1980;
yoshimine et at., 1983; manos et at., 1991) and cerebellar
bergmann glia cells (scalabrini et at., 1989). surprisingly, the
levels of ck seem to be higher in certain glia cells than in neurons
(scalabrini et at., 1989), a fact which has been confirmed with
cultured, purified brain cells (manos et at., 1991), indicating that
oligodendrocytes contain nearly fourfold higher levels of ck
activity than do neurons (manos et at., 1991). thus, these
authors speculated that in oligodendrocytes, representing cells
with large energy requirements, ck function is coupled to
myelin synthesis, transport or assembly. this notion is supported
by the fact that ck levels continue to rise during development
within the period of most active myelination (see manos et
1991). glia cells contain not only relatively high amounts of ck
and pcr, but, according to recent findings with cultured astroglia,
creatine uptake
also use an active, saturable

[pcr]

at.,

na+-dependent

system which is competitively inhibited by fl-guanidinopropionic
acid (gpa), whereas a similar transport system was not observed
in neuron-rich cell cultures (m6ller & hamprecht, 1989). the
high energy status of glia cells is surprising, because initially,
these cells were thought to fulfil only a supportive function for
neuronal cells, e.g. to serve as developmental scaffolds. however,
it is fully in line with recent evidence that glia cells play an
important role in a number of atp-dependent processes, e.g.
resorption ofk+ and neurotransmitters released from neurons,
and maintenance of ion balance at the blood-brain barrier
(newman, 1985; for review see kimelberg & norenberg, 1989).
in muscle,
compartmentation of ck in brain. unlikesubcellular
subcellular
the
known
about
little
is
and
electrocytes,
sperm
distribution and specific function of ck in brain. this may in
part be due to the very high degree of regional and cellular
complexity of the vertebrate brain. while  xxxg469xxx  is clearly
restricted to mitochondria, only little evidence for specific subcellular association of 'soluble' brain ck is available at this
time. similar to electrocytes (wallimann et al., 1985), brain ck
has been found in association with synaptic vesicle (friedhoff &
lerner, 1977) and plasma membranes (lim et al., 1983). as
shown for electrocytes, brain ck, bound to synaptic vesicles and
to the plasma membrane, is also likely to be involved in
acetylcholine release (dunant et al., 1988) and, in conjunction
with the na+/k+-atpase, in the maintenance of membrane
potentials (blum et al., 1991).

furthermore, ck, together with nerve-specific enolase,
belongs to a group of proteins known as slow component b
(scb). these proteins are synthesized in neuronal cell bodies and
1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
are directed by axonal transport to the axonal extremities (brady
& lasek, 1981; oblinger et al., 1987). the question of whether
ck participates in the actual energetics of axonal transport
remains to be answered. however, the association of a fraction
of 'soluble' ck with scb proteins shows an intracellular
compartmentation of the enzyme also in nerve cells. the fact that
during preparation of  xxxg702xxx , brain ck cochromatographs with the latter  xxxg1053xxx  (gerbitz et al.,
1983), may also indicate a functional coupling of brain ck with
glycolysis, as was demonstrated in muscle (see above).
developmental changes in ck activity and phosphorus
metabolites. in the altricial neonate, including mouse, rat, rabbit,
pig and human, marked quantitative and qualitative changes in
the physiology of atp metabolism occur postnatally (see
holtzman et al., 1991). similarly, rather dramatic postnatal
increases in total ck activity (booth & clark, 1978) as well as in
pcr content were noted (tofts & wray, 1985; norwood et al.,
1983). for example, in the narrow time-window between days
12-15 of postnatal development of mouse and rat, (i) the in vivo
rate of ck-catalysed atp synthesis increased 4-fold, as measured
by saturation transfer 31p-n.m.r. (holtzman et al., 1991), (ii) the
brain developed the capacity to increase atp synthesis in
response to sudden changes in energy demand, and (iii) a
population of cerebral brain mitochondria appeared with tight
contacts between inner and outer membranes (holtzman et al.,
1979). these observations suggest that the increase in ck reaction
rates is due to the appearance of mi-ck, an interpretation
supported by measurements in vitro (booth & clark, 1978;
norwood et al., 1983). accordingly, in immature brain, hypoxia
resulted in an almost complete loss of pcr and an about 50 %
decrease in [atp], whereas in adult brain, [atp] remained rather
stable, with pcr levels decreasing by 30 % (see holtzman et al.,
1991; d. holtzman, personal communication). interesting with
respect to brain development is the acute stimulation of total
brain ck activity by vitamin d metabolites observed in the
developing cerebellum (binderman et al., 1988).
brain ck and pcr in mice fed an analogue of creatine. in
skeletal muscle, feeding of mice with gpa results in an almost
complete replacement of pcr by the phosphorylated analogue
gpap (shoubridge & radda, 1984). in brain, a gpa-inaccessible
pool of pcr which could not be replaced by the analogue was
found by 3tp-n.m.r. (holtzman et al., 1989). this residual fraction
of pcr was hypothesized to represent the same compartmentalized pool which is stable in hypoxic or seizing animals.
this view is consistent with the observation that cellular and
subcellular compartmentation of energy metabolism exists in
brain, e.g., higher rates of aerobic glycolysis and the capacity to
increase this rate with increased energy demand are characteristic
of astrocytes rather than of neurons (holtzman & olson, 1983;
see holtzman et al., 1989). these data indicate that the control,
coupling and kinetics of the pcr/ck/atp system in brain are
much more complex in vivo than previously appreciated from
studies in vitro (siesj6, 1978) and that further experimentation is
needed to understand these complexities which, nevertheless,
may be relevant to clinical conditions, such as the pathogenesis
of hypoxia in the neonate, or of seizures and stroke.

ck in kidney
cellular compartmentation of  xxxg467xxx , mainly confined to the
epithelial cells of the thick ascending limb of the henle's loop
and the collecting tubule of the renal medulla, as well as to
certain epithelial cells in cortical tubules, has been described
(ikeda, 1988). the defined cellular localization of  xxxg467xxx  at these
places raises the possibility that ck may participate in certain
renal tubular functions, e.g. by supplying atp to the membranevol. 281

35
bound ion exchangers and ion pumps present in these subpopulations of cells. although mi-ck is expressed at high
concentrations also in kidney (payne et al., 1991), the cellular
and subcellular localization of this isoenzyme is still unknown
and thus, the question of whether a pcr circuit is also operational
in certain kidney cells remains to be answered.

regulation of ck and connection of the
enzyme to signalling pathways
since intracellular atp/adp ratios regulate a variety of
cellular processes and since the ck system is involved in
regulation of local atp/adp ratios (watts, 1971; newsholme
et al., 1978; rossi et al., 1990), it is of interest to consider that
ck itself may also be subject of regulation, e.g. by posttranslational modification. indeed, bb-ck was shown to be a
phospho-protein (mahadevan et al., 1984; quest et al., 1990b).
phosphorylation decreases the km of chicken and mouse bb-ck
for pcr by approximately a factor of two, e.g. from 1.6 mm to
0.8 mm-pcr for the chicken enzyme (quest et al., 1990b; chida
et al., 1990a). this change is especially relevant in brain where
the concentration of pcr is only 4-6 mm (cadoux-hudson et al.,
1989), where the pcr concentration rapidly falls during hypoxia
or seizures (thulborn et al., 1982) and where evidence for
compartmentation of pcr, as in muscle, has also been reported
(holtzman et al., 1989). by stimulation of keratinocytes with
phorbol esters, protein kinase c (pkc) was identified as a likely
candidate to be responsible for ck phosphorylation in vivo
(chida et al., 1990b). in addition, covalent modification of ck
by autophosphorylation has recently been discovered (hemmer
et al., 1991).
thus, ck isoenzymes are subject to complex regulation not
only as far as their association with subcellular structures is
concerned (see above), but also with respect to enzyme kinetics,
since the ck system seems to be connected to signal transduction
pathways via pkc (mahadevan et al., 1984; quest et al., 1990b;
chida et al., 1990b; see also wallimann et al., 1989). it is
conceivable that phosphorylation-dependent membrane attachment and detachment as a mechanism of reversible membrane
targeting could also take place for the ck isoenzymes, as has
very recently been shown for the myristoylated alanine-rich
pkc substrate (thelen et al., 1991). furthermore, it is likely that
the enzyme is connected to signal transduction pathways also at
a different level, that is, by locally providing atp for protein
kinases, some of which, like pkc, are in part also compartmentalized themselves.
concluding remarks and perspectives
the tissue-specific distribution, subcellular localization and
function of ck isoenzymes in tissues and cells with high and
fluctuating energy requirements, as well as the molecular structure
of mi-ck, point to an important physiological role of the highly
compartmentalized ck system for cellular energetics.
the phosphocreatine circuit (pcr circuit) proposed here serves
(i) as an 'energy buffering system' and (ii) as a regulated 'energy
transport and distribution network' connecting intracellular sites
of high energy demand with sites of atp production. at these
sites, ck isoenzymes are specifically localized, and the 'transport
of energy' between them is accomplished by pcr and cr. ck,
representing a low-threshold sensor of adp, further serves by its
enzymic reaction (iii) to prevent, upon cell activation, a rise of
[free adp] which would otherwise inhibit atp-dependent
processes and, in addition, lead to a net loss of cellular adenine
nucleotide pools by the action of adenylate kinase, ampdeaminase and 5'-nucleotidase. furthermore, the ck/pcr system serves (iv) to prevent a local rise in [hi] and thus also a

36

global acidification of the cell, caused by high atp breakdown.
this is achieved by the functional coupling of the ck reaction to
various cellular atpases. additionally, since the net breakdown
of pcr in conjunction with atpase reactions leads to a release of
pi, the ck reaction stimulates indirectly also glycogenolysis.
furthermore, the ck/pcr circuit system serves (v) as a 'regulatory system' for the maintenance of appropriate subcellular
atp/adp ratios and, by keeping this ratio high in the vicinity
of cellular atpases, increases the thermodynamic efficiency of
atp hydrolysis which itself is a crucial parameter in energy
homeostasis. the correspondingly high free energy for the
resynthesis of atp is obtained on the mitochondrial side of the
pcr circuit, where the mi-ck is part of a multi-enzyme compartment for 'metabolic channeling', and where the inner
mitochondrial membrane potential acts on the free energy of
hydrolysis of atp in two steps: during the synthesis and during
the electrogenic export of atp in exchange for adp.
mi-ck, located on the outer side of the inner mitochondrial
membrane as well as at the inner/outer membrane contact sites,
serves to facilitate, by functional coupling with the atp/adp
translocator (ant), (i) the electrogenic export of mitochondrial
matrix-generated atp in exchange for adp through the inner
mitochondrial membrane, (ii) the transphosphorylation of this
atp into pcr, and by doing so, (iii) conserves the free energy of
hydrolysis of atp just exported by the ant. in addition, by
being functionally coupled to the outer mitochondrial membrane
pore, mi-ck is probably also involved in (iv) the regulation of
the import of cr into mitochondria and of the export of pcr into
the cytosol. therefore, through the concerted kinetic coupling of
the three enzymes ant, mi-ck and mitochondrial pore protein
(porin), a microcompartment important formitochondrial 'energy
transport' and cellular energy metabolism is formed (see the
model in fig. 3).
the ck/pcr circuit seems to fulfil the requirements of a
highly organized 'energy buffer' and 'energy transport' system,
as well as that of a 'regulatory system' for the control of
subcellular atp/adp ratios, together leading to a more efficient
utilization of energy in thermodynamic terms. depending on the
metabolic needs of a cell or tissue, one of these different functions
of the ck/pcr circuit may be dominating, e.g. in fast-twitch,
glycolytic muscle fibres, the 'buffer function' may be more
prominent than the 'transport function', whereas in slow-twitch,
oxidative or cardiac muscle, as well as in spermatozoa or
photoreceptor cells, the 'transport function' may be of greater
relevance than the 'buffer function' (figs. 2 and 3).
future studies on the ck system should focus on the isolation
and functional characterization of further ck/atpase microcompartments from different tissues, using a multidisciplinary
biochemical and immunohistochemical approach which has
been quite successfully applied to m-line- and sr-bound ck
(wallimann & eppenberger, 1985; rossi et al., 1990).
in addition, the elucidation of the functional details of mi-ck
in mitochondrial energy transfer requires more experimentation.
the interaction of mi-ck directly with inner and outer mitochondrial membranes (rojo et al., 1991a,b) and with proteins
thereof deserves full attention in the future. furthermore, solving
the crystal structure of ck, especially that of the mi-ck octamer
(schnyder et al., 1990), is a project of high priority, as the
detailed knowledge of the structure of this 'energy channelling
molecule' should also provide valuable information about its
function within the mitochondrion. these biochemical, cell
biological and molecular biological approaches will be complemented by non-invasive 3'p-n.m.r. studies applied to isolated
organelles (mitochondria), tissues and whole animals with improved resolution in space and time.
the possibility to over-express cloned ck genes coding for b-

t. wallimann and others

ck,  xxxg468xxx  and mi-ck isoenzymes in escherichia coli (koretsky
& traxler, 1989; babbitt et al., 1990; chen et al., 1991; furter
& wallimann, 1991, respectively), in yeast (brindle et al., 1990)
or in transgenic mice (koretsky et al., 1990) offers a variety of
advantages, e.g. for obtaining large amounts of homogeneous
enzyme for kinetic and structural studies. very specific questions
can also be asked in the future by applying site-directed mutagenesis to study ck isoenzyme structure and function. in vivo
31p-n.m.r. experiments with cells that otherwise would not express
ck will be useful to address questions concerning the determination of [free adp] and of atp/adp ratios in the cell
(koretsky et al., 1990). most interestingly, in experiments with
transgenic mice expressing variable amounts of bb-ck in liver,
metabolic questions concerning, for example, the role of adp
during a fructose load can be approached (brosnan et al., 1991).
the data gathered by such powerful multidisciplinary
approaches should provide further insights into the structural/
functional aspects of ck and the physiological function of the
ck/pcr system. this information may provide important clues
for muscle disease and pathology. relevant in this respect is the
recent finding that the highly ordered crystalline mitochondrial
inclusions, particularly occurring in mitochondria of 'raggedred' skeletal muscle fibres in patients suffering from chronic
progressive external ophthalmoplegia or from other mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, are highly enriched in mi-ck,
representing the major component of these mitochondrial inclusions (stadhouders et al., 1990, 1991).
note added in proof
very recently the complete gene structure of the human
sarcomeric and ubiquitous mi-ck, the location of these genes on
chromosomes 5 and 15 respectively and regulatory elements of
the tissue-specific mitochondrial ck genes have been described
(klein et al., 1991).
t. w. would like to dedicate this review to all his scientific colleagues,
collaborators and graduate students who actively contributed over the
past years by experimental work, stimulating discussions and support to
the outcome of this research. special thanks go to drs. thomas
schnyder, heinz gross and hanspeter winkler for the processed images
of mi-ck molecules. dr. elizabeth furter-graves, wolfram hemmer
and manuel rojo are acknowledged for carefully reading the manuscript
and for discussion. this work was supported by graduate student
training grants from the eth-zurich, by grants from the swiss national
science foundation (to t.w. and h. m. e.), the swiss foundation for
muscle diseases (to t. w.), the helmut horten foundation (to t. w.),
grants of the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft (to d. b.) and by a
christiaan and constantijn huygens fellowship of the dutch
organization for scientific research (to k. n.).

references
ackerman, j. j. h., grove, t. h., wong, g. g., gadian, d. g. & radda,
g. k. (1980) nature (london) 283, 167-170
adams, v., bosch, w., schlegel, j., wallimann, t. & brdiczka, d. (1989)
biochim. biophys. acta 981, 213-225
altschuld, r. a. & brierley, g. p. (1977) j. mol. cell. cardiol. 9,
875-896
apple, f. s. & rogers, m. a. (1986) j. appl. physiol. 61, 482-485
arnold, h. & pette, d. (1970) eur. j. biochem. 15, 360-366
arrio-dupont, m. (1988) febs lett. 240, 181-185
ashby, b., frieden, c. & bischoff, r. (1979) j. cell biol. 81, 361-373
atkinson, d. e. (1977) cellular energy metabolism and its regulation,
academic press, new york
babbitt, p. c., kenyon, g. l., kuntz, i. d., cohen, f. e., baxter, j. d.,
benfield, p. a., buskin, j. d., gilbert, w. a., hauschka, s. d., hossle,
j. p., ordahl, c. p., pearson, m. l., perriard, j.-c., pickering, l. a.,
putney, s. d., west, b. l. & ziven, r. a. (1986) j. protein, chem. 5,
1-14
babbitt, p. c., west, b. l., buechter, d. d., kuntz, i. d. & kenyon,
g. l. (1990) biotechnology 8, 945-949

1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
balaban, r. s. (1990) am. j. physiol. 258, c377-c389
balaban, r. s., kantor, h. l., katz, l. a. & briggs, r. w. (1986)
science 232, 1121-1123
barbour, r. l., ribaudo, j. & chan, s. h. p. (1984a) j. biol. chem. 259,
8246-8251
barbour, r. l., sotak, c. h., levy, g. c. & chan, s. h. p. (1984b)
biochemistry 23, 6053-6062
barrantes, f. j., mieskes, g. & wallimann, t. (1983a) febs lett. 152,
270-275
barrantes, f. j., mieskes, g. & wallimann, t. (1983b) proc. natl. acad.
sci. u.s.a. 80, 5440-5444
barrantes, f. j., braceras, a., caldironi, h. a., mieskes, g., moser, h.,
toren, c. e., roque, m. e., wallimann, t. & zechel, a. (1985) j. biol.
chem. 260, 3024-3034
bartels, e. m. & elliott, g. f. (1985) biophys. j. 48, 61-76
baskin, r. j. & deamer, d. w. (1970) j. biol. chem. 245, 1345-1347
belousova, l. v., fedosov, s. n., orlova, e. v. & stel'mashchuk, v. ya.
(1991) biochem. int. 24, 51-58
benz, r., kottke, m. & brdiczka, d. (1990) biochim. biophys. acta
1022, 311-318
berger, s. j., devries, g. w., carter, j. g., schulz, d. w., passonneau,
p. n., lowry, 0. h. & ferrendelli, j. a. (1980) j. biol. chem. 255,
3128-3133
bessman, s. p. (1972) israel j. med. 3, 344-351
bessman, s. p. & carpenter, c. l. (1985) annu. rev. biochem. 54,
831-862
bessman, s. p. & fonyo, a. (1966) biochem. biophys. res. commun.
22, 597-602
bessman, s. p. & geiger, p. j. (1981) science 211, 448-452
biermans, w., bernaert, i., de bie, m., nijs, b. & jacob, w. (1989)
biochim. biophys. acta 974, 74-80
biermans, w., bakker, a. & jacob, w. (1990) biochim. biophys. acta
1018, 225-228
binderman, i., harel, s., earon, y., tomer, a., weisman, y., kaye,
a. m. & somjen d. (1988) biochim. biophys. acta 972, 9-16
bittl, j. a. & ingwall, j. s. (1985) j. biol. chem. 260, 3512-3517
blum, h., nioka, s. & johnson, r. g. (1990) proc. natl. acad. sci.
u.s.a. 87, 1247-1251
blum, h., balschi, j. a. & johnson, r. g. (1991) j. biol. chem. 266,
10254-10259
booth, r. f. g. & clark, j. b. (1978) biochem. j. 170, 145-151
borroni, e. (1984) j. neurochem. 43, 795-798
bowditch, j., nigdikar, s., brown, a. k. & dow, j. w. (1985) biochem.
biophys. acta 845, 21-26
brady, s. t. & lasek, r. j. (1981) cell 23, 515-523
brdiczka, d. (1990) experientia 46, 161-167
brdiczka, d. (1991) biochim. biophys. acta 1071, 291-321
brindle, k., braddock, p. & fulton, s. (1990) biochemistry 29,3295-3302
bronstein, w. w. & knull, h. r. (1981) can. j. biochem. 59, 494499
brooks, s. p. j. & storey, k. b. (1988) arch. biochem. biophys. 267,
13-22
brooks, s. p. j. & suelter, c. h. (1987a) arch. biochem. biophys. 253,
122-132
brooks, s. p. j. & suelter, c. h. (1987b) arch. biochem. biophys. 257,
144-153
brosnan, j. m., chen, l. h., wheeler, c. e., vandyke, t. a. & koretsky,
a. p. (1991) am. j. physiol. 260, c1191 -c1200
brumback, r. a., gerst, j. w. & knull, h. r. (1983) muscle nerve 6,
52-55
bulcheler, k., adams, v. & brdiczka, d. (1991) biochim. biophys. acta
1056, 233-242
burt, c. t., glonek, t. & barany, m. (1976) j. biol. chem. 251,
2584-2591
cadoux-hudson, t. a., blackledge, m. j. & radda, g. k. (1989) faseb
j. 3, 2660-2666
caravatti, m., perriard, j. c. & eppenberger, h. m. (1979) j. biol.
chem. 254, 1388-1394
carlson, f. d. & wilkie, d. r. (1974) muscle physiology, prentice-hall,
inc., englewood cliffs, nj
chabre, m. & deterre, p. (1989) eur. j. biochem. 179, 255-266
chance, b. & williams, g. r. (1955) j. biol. chem. 217, 409-427
chance, b., leigh, j. s., clark, b. j., maris, j. m., kent, j., nioka, s. &
smith, d. (1985) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 82, 8384-8388
chance, b., leigh, j. s., kent, j., mccully, k., nioka, s., clark, b. j.,
maris, j. m. & graham, t. (1986) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 83,
9458-9462

vol. 281

37
chandler, w. l., fine, j. s., emery, m., weaver, d., reichenbach, d. &
clayson, k. j. (1988) stroke 19, 251-255
chen, l. h., babbitt, p. c., vasquez, j. r., west, b. l. & kenyon, g. l.
(1991) j. biol. chem. 266, 12053-12057
cheneval, d. & carafoli, e. (1988) eur. j. biochem. 171, 1-9
chevli, r. & fitch, c. d. (1979) biochem. med. 21, 162-167
chida, k., tsunenaga, m., kasahara, k., kohno, y. & kuroki, t.
(1990a) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 173, 346-350
chida, k., kasahara, k., tsunenaga, m., kohno, y., yamada, s.,
ohmi, s. & kuroki, t. (1990b) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 173,
351-357
christen, r., schackmann, r. w., dahlquist, f. w. & shapiro, b. m.
(1983) exp. cell res. 149, 289-294
clark, j. f. & dillon, p. f. (1990) biophys. j. 57, 156a
cohen, g. n. (1968) the regulation of cell metabolism, hermann,
paris; holt, rinehart and winston, new york
cohen, p. (1976) control of enzyme activity, chapman and hall,
london; j. wiley and sons, new york
colombini, m. (1979) nature (london) 279, 643-645
conley, k. & kushmerick, m. j. (1990) proc. annu. meet. 9th int. soc.
magn. reson. med. 2, 902
connett, r. j. (1988) am. j. physiol. 254, r949-r959
cooper, j. & trinick, j. (1984) j. mol. biol. 177, 137-152
davuluri, s. p., hird, f. j. r. & mclean, r. m. (1981) comp. biochem.
physiol. 69b, 329-336
dawson, m. j. & wray, s. (1983) j. physiol. (london) 336, 19p-20p
defuria, r. a., ingwall, j. s., fossel, e. t. & dygert, m. k. (1980) in
heart creatine kinase (jacobus, w. e. & ingwall, j. s., eds.), pp.
135-139, williams & wilkins, baltimore, london
deluca, m. & hall, n. (1980) in heart creatine kinase (jacobus, w. e.
& ingwall, j. s., eds.), pp. 18-27, williams & wilkins, baltimore,
london

dillon, p. f. & clark, j. f. (1990) j. theor. biol. 143, 275-284
doorey, a. j. & barry, w. (1983) circ. res. 53, 192-201
dunant, y., loctin, f., marsal, j., muller, d., parducz, a. & rabasseda,
x. (1988) j. neurochem. 50, 431-439
eggleton, p. & eggleton, g. p. (1928) j. physiol. (london) 65, 15-26
elizarova, g. v., sukhanov, a. a., sharov, v. g. & saks, v. a. (1987)
in creatine phosphate: biochemistry, pharmacology and clinical
efficiency (saks, v. a., bobkov, y. g. & strumia, e., eds.), pp. 8-14,
edizioni minerva medica, torino, italy
ellington, w. r. (1989) j. exp. biol. 143, 177-194
ellington, w. r. & hines, a. c. (1991) biol. bull. 180, 505-507
eppenberger, h. m., dawson, d. m. & kaplan, n. 0. (1967) j. biol.
chem. 242, 204-209
eppenberger, h. m., perriard, j. c. & wallimann, t. (1983) curr. top.
biol. med. res. 7, 19-38
eppenberger-eberhardt, m., riesinger, i., messerli, m., schwarb, p.,
muller, m., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1991) j. cell biol.
113, 289-302
erickson-viitanen, s., viitanen, p., geiger, p. j., yang, w. c. t. &
bessman, s. p. (1982a) j. biol. chem. 257, 14395-14404
erickson-viitanen, s., geiger, p. j., viitanen, p. & bessman, s. p. (1982b)
j. biol. chem. 257, 14405-14411
ferris, c. d., huganir, r. l. & snyder, s. h. (1990) proc. natl. acad.
sci. u.s.a. 87, 2147-2151
fischer, w. & pfitzer, g. (1989) febs lett. 258, 59-62
fitch, c. d. (1977) in pathogenesis of human muscle dystrophy
(rowland, p., ed.), pp. 328-336, excerpta medica, amsterdam
fitch, c. d., shields, r. p., payne, w. f. & dacus, j. m. (1968) j. biol.
chem. 243, 2024-2027
fitch, c. d., jellinek, m. & mueller, e. j. (1974) j. biol. chem. 249,
1060-1063
font, b., vial, c., goldschmidt, d., eichenberger, d. & gautheron,
d. c. (1981) arch. biochem. biophys. 212, 195-203
font, b., eichenberger, d., goldschmidt, d. & vial, c. (1987) mol. cell.
biochem. 78, 131-140
friedhoff, a. j. & lerner, m. h. (1977) life sci. 20, 867-873
from, a. h. l., zimmer, s. d., michurski, s. p., mohanakrishnan, p.,
ulstad, v. k., thoma, w. j. & ugurbil, k. (1990) biochemistry 29,
3731-3743

furter, r. & wallimann, t. (1991) experientia 47, a73
gellerich, f. & saks, v. a. (1982) biochem. biophys. res. commun.
105, 1473-1481
gellerich, f. n., schlame, m., bohnensack, r. & kunz, w. (1987)
biochim. biophys. acta 890, 117-126

38
gellerich, f. n., bohnensack, r. & kunz, w. (1989) in anion carriers
of mitochondrial membranes (azzi, a., nalecz, k. a., nalecz, m. j.
& wojtczak, l., eds.), pp. 349-359, springer-verlag, berlin
gerbitz, k. d., deufel, t., summer, j., thallemer, j. & wieland, 0. h.
(1983) clin. chim. acta 133, 233-239
gercken, g. & schlette, u. (1968) experientia 24, 17-19
giraudat, j., devillers-thiery, a., perriard, j. c. & changeux, j. p.
(1984) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 81, 7313-7317
gordon, p. v. & keller, t. c. s. (1991) cell motil. cytoskel., in the press
grosse, r., spitzer, e., kupriyanov, v. v., saks, v. a. & repke, k. r. h.
(1980) biochim. biophys. acta 603, 142-156
gudbjarnason, s., mathes, p. & ravens, k. g. (1970) j. mol. cell.
cardiol. 1, 325-339
gysin, r., yost, b. & flanagan, s. d. (1986) biochemistry 25, 1271-1278
gyulai, l., roth, z., leigh, j. s. & chance, b. (1985) j. biol. chem. 260,
3947-3954
haas, r. c. & strauss, a. w. (1990) j. biol. chem. 265, 6921-6927
haas, r. c., korenfeld, c., zhang, z., perryman, b., roman, d. &
strauss, a. w. (1989) j. biol. chem. 264, 2890-2897
hall, n. & deluca, m. (1975) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 66,
988-994
hall, n. & deluca, m. (1976) anal. biochem. 76, 561-567
hall, n. & deluca, m. (1980) arch. biochem. biophys. 201, 674-677
hamada, m. & kuby, s. a. (1978) arch. biochem. biophys. 190,
772-792
hamburg, r. j., friedman, d. l., olson, e. n., ma, t. s., cortez,
m. d., goodman, c., puleo, p. r. & perryman, m. b. (1990) j. biol.
chem. 265, 6403-6409
hebisch, s., sies, h. & soboll, s. (1986) pfluigers arch. 406, 20-24
hellstrand, p. & vogel, h. j. (1985) am. j. physiol. 248, c320- xxxd406xxx 
hemmer, w., quest, a. f. g., zanolla, e., eppenberger, h. m. &
wallimann, t. (1989) experientia 45, a70-a71
hemmer, w., glaser, s. j., hartmann, g. r., eppenberger, h. m. &
wallimann, t. (1991) nato asi ser. h 56, 143-147
hochachka, p. w. & mommsen, t. p. (1983) science 219, 1391-1397
hoerter, j. a., lauer, c., vassort, g. & gueron, m. (1988) am. j.
physiol. 255, c192-c201
hoerter, j. a., kuznetsov, a. & ventura-clapier, r. (1991) circ. res.
69, 665-676
holtzman, d., herman, m. m., desautel, m. & lewiston, n. (1979)
j. neurochem. 33, 453-460
holtzman, d. & olson, j. e. (1983) in basic mechanisms of neuronal
hyper-excitability (jaspers, h. & vangelder, w., eds.), pp. 423-429,
alan r. liss, new york
holtzman, d., mcfarland, e., moerland, t., koutcher, j., kushmerick,
m. j. & neuringer, l. j. (1989) brain res. 483, 68-77
holtzman, d., mcfarland, e. w., jacobs, d., offutt, m. c. & neuringer,
l. j. (1991) dev. brain res. 58, 181-188
hossle, j. p., schlegel, j., wegmann, g., wyss, m., b6hlen, p.,
eppenberger, h. m., wallimann, t. & perriard, j. c. (1988) biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 151, 408-416
hovius, r., lambrechts, h., nicolay, k. & de kruijff, b. (1990) biochim.
biophys. acta 1021, 217-226
hutson, s., berkich, d., williams, g. d., lanoue, k. f. & briggs, r. w.
(1989) biochemistry 28, 4325-4332
ikeda, k. (1988) experientia 44, 734-735
ikeda, k. & tomonaga, m. (1987) brain res. 435, 348-350
ikeda, k. & tomonaga, m. (1988) neurosci. lett. 85, 51-55
infante, a. a. & davies, r. e. (1965) j. biol. chem. 240, 3996-4001
ingwall, j. s. & fossel, e. t. (1983) perspect. cardiovasc. res. 7, 601-617
ingwall, j. s., kramer, m. f. & friedman, w. f. (1980) in heart creatine
kinase (jacobus, w. e. & ingwall, j. s., eds.), pp. 9-17, williams &
wilkins, baltimore, london
ingwall, j. s., atkinson, d. e., clarke, k. & fetters, j. k. (1990) eur.
heart j. 11, (suppl. b), 108-115
ishida, y. & paul, r. j. (1989) progr. clin. biol. res. 315, 417-428
ishida, y. & paul, r. j. (1990) j. physiol. (london) 424, 41-56
ishida, y., wyss, m., hemmer, w. & wallimann, t. (1991) febs lett.
283, 37-43
iyengar, m. r. (1984) j. muscle res. cell motil. 5, 527-534
iyengar, m. r., fluellen, c. e. & iyengar, c. l. (1982) j. muscle res.
cell motil. 3, 231-246
jacobs, h., heldt, h. w. & klingenberg, m. (1964) biochem. biophys.
res. commun. 16, 516-521
jacobus, w. e. (1985a) annu. rev. physiol. 47, 707-725
jacobus, w. e. (1985b) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 133,
1035-1041

t. wallimann and others
jacobus, w. e. & diffley, d. m. (1986) j. biol. chem. 261, 16579-16583
jacobus, w. e. & lehninger, a. l. (1973) j. biol. chem. 248, 4803-4810
jacobus, w. e., moreadith, r. w. & vandegaer, k. m. (1983) ann.
n.y. acad. sci. 414, 73-89
james, p., wyss, m., lutsenko, s., wallimann, t. & carafoli, e. (1990)
febs lett. 273, 139-143
jennings, r. b., reimer, k. a., hill, m. l. & mayer, s. e. (1981) circ.
res. 49, 892-900
jockers-wretou, e., giebel, w. & pfleiderer, g. (1977) histochemistry
54, 83-97
jones, d. p. (1986) am. j. physiol. 250,  xxxd2655xxx -c675
kammermeier, h. (1987) j. mol. cell. cardiol. 19, 115-118
kato, k., suzuki, f., shimizu, a., shinohara, h. & semba, r. (1986)
j. neurochem. 46, 1783-1788
keller, t. c. s. & gordon, p. v. (1991) cell motil. cytoskel. 19, 169-180
kenyon, g. l. & reed, g. h. (1983) adv. enzymol. 54, 367-426
khan, m. a., papadimitrou, j. m., holt, p. g. & kakulas, b. a. (1971)
excerpta medica int. congr. ser. 294, 1-347
khan, m. a. (1976) histochemistry 48, 29-32
khan, m. a., holt, p. g., papadimitrou, j. m., knight, j. 0. & kakulas,
b. a. (1972) histochemie 32, 49-59
kimelberg, h. k. & norenberg, m. d. (1989) sci. am. 260, 44-52
klein, s. t., haas, r. c., perryman, b. h., billadello, j. j. & strauss,
a. w. (1991) j. biol. chem. 266, 18058-18065
klingenberg, m. (1964) ergeb. physiol. biol. chem. exp. pharmakol. 55,
131-189
klingenberg, m. (1979) trends biochem. sci. 4, 249-252
klingenberg, m. (1980) j. membr. biol. 56, 97-105
klingenberg, m., wulf, r., heldt, h. w. & pfaff, e. (1969) in mitochondrial structure and function (ernster, l. & drakota, z., eds.),
pp. 59-77, academic press, london, new york
knoll, g. & brdiczka, d. (1983) biochim. biophys. acta 733, 102-110
koretsky, a. p. & traxler, b. a. (1989) febs lett. 243, 8-12
koretsky, a. p., basus, v. j., james, t. l., klein, m. p. & weiner,
m. w. (1985) magn. reson. med. 2, 586-594
koretsky, a. p., wang, s., klein, m. p., james, t. l. & weiner, m. w.
(1986) biochemistry 25, 77-84
koretsky, a. p., brosnan, j. m., chen, l. h., chen, j. d. & vandyke,
t. a. (1990) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 87, 3112-3116
kottke, m., adams, v., riesinger, i., bremm, b., bosch, w., brdiczka,
d., sandri, b. & panfili, e. (1988) biochim. biophys. acta 935, 87-102
kottke, m., adams, v., wallimann, t., kumar nalam, v. & brdiczka,
d. (1991) biochim. biophys. acta 1061, 215-225
krause, j., hay, r., kowollik, c. & brdiczka, d. (1986) biochim.
biophys. acta 860, 690-698
kupriyanov, v. v., seppet, e. k., emelin, i. v. & saks, v. a. (1980)
biochim. biophys. acta 592, 197-210
kupriyanov, v. v., steinschneider, a. ya., ruuge, e. k., kapel'ko,
v. i., zueva, m. yu., lakomkin, v. l., smirnov, v. n. & saks, v. a.
(1984) biochim. biophys. acta 805, 319-331
kushmerick, m. j. & davies, r. e. (1969) proc. r. soc. london ser. b
174, 315-353
kuznetsov, a. v., khuchua, z. a., vassil'eva, e. v., medved'eva, n. v.
& saks, v. a. (1989) arch. biochem. biophys. 268, 176-190
lehninger, a. l. (1982) principles of biochemistry, worth publishers
inc., new york
levin, r. m., longhurst, p. a., levin, s. s., hangaard, n. & wein,
a. j. (1990) mol. cell. biochem. 97, 153-159
levitsky, d. o., levchenko, t. s., saks, v. a., sharov, v. g. & smirnov,
v. n. (1977) biochemistry ussr 42, 1766-1773
levitsky, d. o., levchenko, t. s., saks, v. a., sharov, v. g. & smirnov,
v. n. (1978) membr. biochem. 2, 81-96
lim, l., hall, c., leung, t., mahadevan, l. & whatley, s. (1983)
j. neurochem. 41, 1177-1182
linden, m. & gellerfors, p. (1983) biochim. biophys. acta 736, 125-129
lindsey, g. g. & diamond, e. m. (1978) biochim. biophys. acta 524,
78-84
lipskaya, t. yu. & trofimova, m. e. (1989a) biochem. int. 18,
1029-1039
lipskaya, t. yu. & trofimova, m. e. (1989b) biochem. int. 18,
1149-1159
lipskaya, t. yu., templ, v. d., belousova, l. v., molokova, e. v. &
rybina, i. v. (1980) biochemistry ussr 45, 877-886
lipskaya, t. yu., kedishvili, n. yu. & kalenova, m. e. (1985) biochemistry ussr 50, 1339-1348
lowenstein, j. m. (1972) physiol. rev. 52, 382-414

1992

creatine kinase isoenzymes and the phosphocreatine circuit
lowry, 0. h., roberts, n. r., schulz, d. w., clow, j. e. & clark, j. r.
(1961) j. biol. chem. 236, 2813-2836
luther, p. k., munroe, p. m. g. & squire, j. (1981) j. mol. biol. 125,
313-324
mahadevan, l. c., whatley, s. a., leung, t. k. c. & lim, l. (1984)
biochem. j. 222, 139-144
mahler, m. (1985) j. gen. physiol. 86, 135-165
mainwood, g. w. & rakusan, k. a. (1982) can. j. physiol. pharmacol.
60, 98-102
maker, h. s., lehrer, g. m., silides, d. j. & weiss, c. (1973) exp.  xxxg1507xxx .
38, 295-300
manos, p., bryan, g. k. & edmund, j. (1991) j. neurochem. 56,
2101-2107
marcillat, o., goldschmidt, d., eichenberger, d. & vial, c. (1987)
biochim. biophys. acta 890, 233-241
matthews, p. m., bland, j. l., gadian, d. g. & radda, g. k. (1982)
biochim. biophys. acta 721, 312-320
maughan, d. & wegner, e. (1989) progr. clin. biol. res. 315, 137-147
mcauliffe, j. j., perry, s. b., brooks, e. e. & ingwall, j. s. (1989) progr.
clin. biol. res. 315, 581-592
mcauliffe, j. j., perry, s. b., brooks, e. e. & ingwall, j. s. (1991)
biochemistry 30, 2585-2593
mcclellan, g., weisberg, a. & winegrad, s. (1983) am. j. physiol. 245,
 xxxd1861xxx - xxxd45xxx 
mcgilvery, r. w. (1975) in metabolic adaptation to prolonged physical
exercise, proc. ii. int. symposium on biochemistry of exercise,
magglingen (1973) (howald, h. & poortmans, j. r., eds.), pp. 12-26,
birkhauser-verlag, basel
mcgilvery, r. w. & murray, t. w. (1974) j. biol. chem. 249, 5845-5850
meyer, r. a. (1988) am. j. physiol. 254, c548-c553
meyer, r. a., sweeney, h. l. & kushmerick, m. j. (1984) am. j.
physiol. 246, c365-c377
meyer, r. a., brown, t. r. & kushmerick, m. j. (1985) am. j. physiol.
248, c279- xxxd234xxx 
meyer, r. a., brown, t. r., krilowicz, b. l. & kushmerick, m. j.
(1986) am. j. physiol. 250, c264-c267
miller, d. s. & horowitz, s. b. (1986) j. biol. chem. 261, 13911-13915
milner-white, e. j. & watts, d. c. (1971) biochem. j. 122, 727-740
m6ller, a. & hamprecht, b. (1989) j. neurochem. 52, 544-550
mommaerts, w. f. h. m. (1969) physiol. rev. 49, 427-508
mommaerts, w. f. h. m. & wallner, a. (1967) j. physiol. (london)
193, 343-357
moonen, c. t. w., vanzijl, p. c. m., frank, j. a., lebihan, d. &
becker, e. d. (1990) science 250, 53-61
moreadith, r. w. & jacobus, w. e. (1982) j. biol. chem. 257, 899905

morrison, j. f. (1973) the enzymes 3rd ed., 8, 457-486
muller, m., moser, r., cheneval, d. & carafoli, e. (1985) j. biol. chem.
260, 3839-3843
murphy, e., gabel, s. a., funk, a. & london, r. e. (1988) biochemistry
27, 526-528
naegle, s. (1970) klin. wochenschr. 48, 332-341
newman, e. a. (1985) trends neurosci. 8, 156-159
newsholme, e. a. & start, c. (1973) regulation in metabolism, john
wiley & sons, london
newsholme, e. a., beis, i., leech, a. r. & zammit, v. a. (1978)
biochem. j. 172, 533-537
nicolay, k., rojo, m., wallimann, t., demel, r. & hovius, r. (1990)
biochim. biophys. acta 1018, 229-233
noda, l. (1973) the enzymes 3rd ed. 8, 279-305
norwood, w. i., ingwall, j. s., norwood, c. r. & fossel, e. t. (1983)
am. j. physiol. 244,  xxxd75xxx -c210
nunnally, r. l. & hollis, d. p. (1979) biochemistry 18, 3642-3646
oblinger, m. m., brady, s. t., mcquarrie, i. g. & lasek, r. j. (1987)
j.  xxxd122xxx . 7, 433-462
ogawa, s. & lee, t. m. (1982) biochemistry 21, 4467-4473
otsu, n., hirata, m., tuboi, s. & miyazawa, k. (1989) j. histochem.
cytochem. 37, 1465-1470
payne, r. m., haas, r. c. & strauss, a. w. (1991) biochim. biophys.
acta 1089, 352-361
perriard, j. c., caravatti, m., perriard, e. r. & eppenberger, h. m.
(1978) arch. biochem. biophys. 191, 90-100
perry, s. b., mcauliffe, j., balschi, j. a., hickey, p. r. & ingwall, j. s.
(1988) biochemistry 27, 2165-2172
perryman, m. b., strauss, a. w., olson, j. & roberts, r. (1983) biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 110, 967-972
vol. 281

39
perryman, m. b., knell, j. d., ifegwu, j. & roberts, r. (1985) j. biol.
chem. 260, 9399-9404
quemeneur, e., eichenberger, d., goldschmidt, d., vial, c., beauregard,
g. & potier, m. (1988) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 153,
1310-1314
quest, a. f. g. & shapiro, b. m. (1991) j. biol. chem. 266, 19803-19811
quest, a. f. g., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1989) enzyme
41, 33-42
quest, a. f. g., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1990a) febs
lett. 262, 299-304
quest, a. f. g., soldati, t., hemmer, w., perriard, j. c., eppenberger,
h. m. & wallimann, t. (1990b) febs lett. 269, 457-464
reiss, n. a. & kaye, a. m. (1981) j. biol. chem. 256, 5741-5749
rojo, m., hovius, r., demel, r., wallimann, t., eppenberger, h. m. &
nicolay, k. (1991a) febs lett. 281, 123-129
rojo, m., hovius, r., demel, r., nicolay, k. & wallimann, t. (1991b)
j. biol. chem. 266, 20290-20295
ronca, g. & ronca-testoni, s. (1987) in creatine phosphate: biochemistry, pharmacology and clinical efficiency (saks, v. a., bobkov,
y. g. & strumia, e., eds.), pp. 72-79, edizioni minerva medica,
torino, italy
roos, n., benz, r. & brdiczka, d. (1982) biochim. biophys. acta 686,
204-214
rossi, a. m., eppenberger, h. m., volpe, p., cotrufo, r. & wallimann,
t. (1990) j. biol. chem. 265, 5258-5266
saks, v. a., chernousova, g. b., vetter, r., smirnov, v. n. & chazov,
e. i. (1976a) febs lett. 62, 293-296
saks, v. a., lipina, n. v., smirnov, v. n. & chazov, e. i. (1976b) arch.
biochem. biophys. 173, 34-41
saks, v. a., lipina, n. v., sharov, v. g., smirnov, v. n., chazov, e. &
grosse, r. (1977) biochim. biophys. acta 465, 550-558
saks, v. a., rosenshtraukh, l. v., smirnov, v. n. & chazov, e. i.
(1978) can. j. physiol. pharmacol. 56, 691-706
saks, v. a., kupriyanov, v. v., elizarova, g. v. & jacobus, w. e.
(1980) j. biol. chem. 255, 755-763
saks, v. a., ventura-clapier, r., khuchua, z. a., preobrazhensky,
a. n. & emelin, i. v. (1984) biochim. biophys. acta 803, 254265
saks, v. a., kuznetsov, a. v., kupriyanov, v. v., miceli, m. v. &
jacobus, w. e. (1985) j. biol. chem. 260, 7757-7764
saks, v. a., khuchua, z. a., kuznetsov, a. v., veksler, v. i. & sharov,
v. g. (1986) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 139, 1262-1271
savabi, f. (1988) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 85, 7476-7480
savabi, f., geiger, p. j. & bessman, s. p. (1984) am. j. physiol. 247,
c424- xxxd1917xxx 
scalabrini, c., hemmer, w. & wallimann, t. (1989) experientia 45, al9
schafer, b. & perriard, j. c. (1988) j. cell biol. 106, 1161-1170
schlame, m. & augustin, w. (1985) biomed. biochim. acta 44,
1083-1088

schlegel, j., zurbriggen, b., wegmann, g., wyss, m., eppenberger,
h. m. & wallimann, t. (1988a) j. biol. chem. 263, 16942-16953
schlegel, j., wyss, m., schiirch, u., schnyder, t., quest, a., wegmann,
g., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1988b) j. biol. chem. 263,
16963-16969

schlegel, j., wyss, m., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1990)
j. biol. chem. 265, 9221-9227

schmitt, t. & pette, d. (1985) febs lett. 188, 341-344
schneider, a., wiesner, r. j. & grieshaber, m. k. (1989) insect biochem.
19, 471-480
schnyder, t., engel, a., lustig, a. & wallimann, t. (1988) j. biol.
chem. 263, 16954-16962
schnyder, t., sargent, d. f., richmond, t. j., eppenberger, h. m. &
wallimann, t. (1990) j. mol. biol. 216, 809-812
schnyder, t., gross, h., winkler, h., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann,
t. (1991a) j. cell biol. 112, 95-101
schnyder, t., winkler, h., gross, h., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann,
t. (1991b) j. biol. chem. 266, 5318-5322
scholte, h. r. (1973) biochim. biophys. acta 305, 413-427
scholte, h. r., weijers, p. j. & wit-peeters, e. m. (1973) biochim.
biophys. acta 291, 764-773
scopes, r. k. (1973) biochem. j. 134, 197-208
seraydarian, m. w. (1980) in heart creatine kinase (jacobus, w. e. &
ingwall, j. s., eds.), pp. 82-90, williams & wilkins, baltimore, london
seraydarian, m. w. & abbott, b. c. (1976) j. mol. cell. cardiol. 8,
741-746

sharov, v. g., saks, v. a., smirnov, v. n. & chazov, e. i. (1977)
biochim. biophys. acta 468, 495-501

40
shoubridge, e. a. & radda, g. k. (1984) biochim. biophys. acta 805,
79-88

shoubridge, e. a., jeffry, f. m. h., keogh, j. m., radda, g. k. &
seymour, a. m. l. (1985a) biochim. biophys. acta 847, 25-32
shoubridge, e. a., challiss, r. a. j., hayes, d. j. & radda, g. k.
(1985b) biochem. j. 232, 125-131
siesjo, b. k. (1978) brain energy metabolism, wiley, chichester
smith, d. s. (1966) progr. biophys. mol. biol. 16, 107-142
soboll, s., scholz, r. & heldt, h. w. (1978) eur. j. biochem. 87,
377-390
sokoloff, l. (1989) in basic neurochemistry (siegel, g., agranoff, b.,
albers, r. w. & molinoff, p., eds.), pp. 565-591, raven press, new
york
soldati, t., schafer, b. & perriard, j. c. (1990) j. biol. chem. 265,
4498-4506
spande, j. i. & schottelius, b. a. (1970) am. j. physiol. 219, 14901495
srere, p. a. (1987) annu. rev. biochem. 56, 89-124
srivastava, d. k. & bernhard, s. a. (1986) science 234, 10811086
srivastava, d. k. & bernhard, s. a. (1987) annu. rev. biophys. biophys.
chem. 16, 175-204
stadhouders, a., jap, p. & wallimann, t. (1990) j.  xxxd122xxx . sci. 98,
304-305
stadhouders, a., jap, p., winkler, h. p. & wallimann, t. (1991)
j. muscle res. cell motil., in the press
strehler, e. e., carlsson, e., eppenberger, h. m. & thornell, l. e.
(1983) j. mol. biol. 166, 141-158
swanson, p. (1967) j. neurochem. 14, 343-356
thelen, m., rosen, a., nairn, a. c. & aderem, a. (1991) nature
(london) 351, 320-322
thompson, r. j., kynoch, p. a. m. & sarjant, j. (1980) brain res. 201,
423-426
thulborn, k. r., desboulay, b. m., duchen, l. w. & radda, g. k.
(1982) j. cereb. blood flow 2, 299-306
tofts, p. & wray, s. (1985) j. physiol. (london) 359, 417-429
tombes, r. m. & shapiro, b. m. (1985) cell 41, 325-334
tombes, r. m. & shapiro, b. m. (1987) j. biol. chem. 262, 1601116019
tombes, r. m., brokaw, c. j. & shapiro, b. m. (1987) biophys. j. 52,
75-86
tombes, r. m., farr, a. & shapiro, b. m. (1988) exp. cell res. 178,
307-317
toyo-oka, t., nagayama, k., umeda, m., eguchi, k. & hosoda, s.
(1986) biochem. biophys. res. commun. 135, 808-815
trask, r. v., strauss, a. w. & billadello, j. j. (1988) j. biol. chem. 263,
17142-17149
turner, d. c., wallimann, t. & eppenberger, h. m. (1973) proc. natl.
acad. sci. u.s.a. 70, 702-705
ugurbil, k., holmsen, h. & shulman, r. g. (1979) proc. natl. acad.
sci. u.s.a. 76, 2227-2231
ugurbil, k., petein, m., maiden, r., michurski, s. & from, a. h. l.
(1986) biochemistry 25, 100-107
uyeda, k. & racker, e. (1965) j. biol. chem. 240, 4682-4688; 46894693
van waarde, a., van den thillart, g., erkelens, c., addink, a. &
lugtenburg, j. (1990) j. biol. chem. 265, 914-923
veech, r. l., lawson, j. w. r., cornall, n. w. & krebs, h. a. (1979)
j. biol. chem. 254, 6538-6547
ventura-clapier, r., mekhfi, h. & vassort, g. (1987a) j. gen. physiol.
89, 815-837
ventura-clapier, r., saks, v. a., vassort, g., lauer, c. & elizarova,
g. v. (1987b) am. j. physiol. 253, c444-c455
vial, c., font, b., goldschmidt, d. & gautheron, d. c. (1979) biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 88, 1352-1359

t. wallimann and others
vignais, p. v., brandolin, g., boulay, f., dalbon, p., block, m. r. &
gauche, i. (1989) in anion carriers of mitochondrial membranes
(azzi, a., nalecz, k. a., nalecz, m. j. & wojtczak, l., eds.), pp.
133-146, springer-verlag, berlin
wallimann, t. (1975) ph.d. thesis, eth zurich
wallimann, t. & eppenberger, h. m. (1985) in cell and muscle motility,
vol. 6 (shay, j. w., ed.), pp. 239-285, plenum, new york
wallimann, t. & eppenberger, h. m. (1990) progr. clin. biol. res. 344,
877-889
wallimann, t., turner, d. c. & eppenberger, h. m. (1977) j. cell biol.
75, 297-317
wallimann, t., pelloni, g., turner, d. c. & eppenberger, h. m. (1978)
proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 75, 4296-4300
wallimann, t., moser, h. & eppenberger, h. m. (1983a) j. muscle res.
cell motil. 4, 429-441
wallimann, t., doetschman, t. c. & eppenberger, h. m. (1983b) j. cell
biol. 96, 1772-1779; 98, 785
wallimann, t., schl6sser, t. & eppenberger, h. m. (1984) j. biol.
chem. 259, 5238-5246
wallimann, t., walzth6ny, d., wegmann, g., moser, h., eppenberger,
h. m. & barrantes, f. j. (1985) j. cell biol. 100, 1063-1072
wallimann, t., wegmann, g., moser, h., huber, r. & eppenberger,
h. m. (1986a) proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 83, 3816-3819
wallimann, t., moser, h., zurbriggen, b., wegmann, g. & eppenberger,
h. m. (1986b) j. muscle res. cell motil. 7, 25-34
wallimann, t., schnyder, t., schlegel, j., wyss, m., wegmann, g.,
rossi, a. m., hemmer, w., eppenberger, h. m. & quest, a. f. g.
(1989) progr. clin. biol. res. 315, 159-176
watts, d. c. (1971) in biochemical evolution and the origin of life
(schoffeniels, e., ed.), pp. 150-173, north-holland, amsterdam
watts, d. c. (1973) in the enzymes, 3rd ed. 8, 383-455
wegmann, g., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1987) j. muscle
res. cell motil. 8, 90
wegmann, g., huber, r., zanolla, e., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann,
t. (1991a) differentiation 46, 77-87
wegmann, g., zanolla, e., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t. (1991 b)
j. muscle res. cell motil, in the press
west, b. l., babbitt, p. c., mendez, b. & baxter, j. d. (1984) proc. natl.
acad. sci. u.s.a. 81, 7007-7012
west, j. j., nagy, b. & gergely, j. (1967) j. biol. chem. 242, 1140-1145
wevers, r. a., reutelingsperger, c. p. m., dam, b. & soons, j. b. j.
(1981) clin. chim. acta 119, 209-223
winegrad, s., weisberg, a., lin, l. e. & mcclellan, g. (1989) progr.
clin. biol. res. 315, 473-479
winkler, h., gross, h., schnyder, t. & kunath, w. (1991) j. electron
microscop. techn. 18, 135-141
wirz, t., brdndle, u., soldati, t., hossle, j. p. & perriard, j. c. (1990)
j. biol.chem. 265, 11656-11666
witzemann, v. (1985) eur. j. biochem. 150, 201-210
wothe, d. d., charbonneau, h. & shapiro, b. m. (1990) proc. natl.
acad. sci. u.s.a. 87, 5203-5207
wyss, m., schlegel, j., james, p., eppenberger, h. m. & wallimann, t.
(1990) j. biol. chem. 265, 15900-15908
yamada, t. & sugi, h. (1989) progr. clin. biol. res. 315, 149-157
yamashita, k. & yoshioka, t. (1991) j. muscle res. cell motil. 12,
37-44
yang, w. c. t., geiger, p. j., bessman, s. p. & borrebaek, b. (1977)
biochem. biophys. res. commun. 76, 882-887
yoshimine, t., morimoto, k., homburger, h. a. & yanagihara, t.
(1983) brain res. 265, 101-108
yoshizaki, k., watari, h. & radda, g. k. (1990) biochim. biophys.
acta 1051, 144-150
zahler, r., bittl, j. a. & ingwall, j. s. (1987) biophys. j. 51, 883-893
zweier, j. l., jacobus, w. e., korecky, b. & brandejs-barry, w. e.
(1991) j. biol. chem. 266, 20296-20304

1992

