0163-769x/07/$20.00/0
printed in u.s.a.

endocrine reviews 28(2):187–218
copyright © 2007 by the endocrine society
doi: 10.1210/er.2006-0038

␤-cell failure in diabetes and preservation by clinical
treatment
bernardo l. wajchenberg
endocrine service and diabetes and heart center of the heart institute, hospital das clinicas of the university of são
paulo medical school, são paulo, sp 05403-000, brazil
there is a progressive deterioration in ␤-cell function and mass
in type 2 diabetics. it was found that islet function was about 50%
of normal at the time of diagnosis, and a reduction in ␤-cell mass
of about 60% was shown at necropsy. the reduction of ␤-cell
mass is attributable to accelerated apoptosis. the major factors
for progressive loss of ␤-cell function and mass are glucotoxicity,
lipotoxicity, proinflammatory cytokines, leptin, and islet cell
amyloid. impaired ␤-cell function and possibly ␤-cell mass appear to be reversible, particularly at early stages of the disease
where the limiting threshold for reversibility of decreased ␤-cell
mass has probably not been passed.
among the interventions to preserve or “rejuvenate”
␤-cells, short-term intensive insulin therapy of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes will improve ␤-cell function, usually
leading to a temporary remission time. another intervention
is the induction of ␤-cell “rest” by selective activation of atpsensitive kⴙ (katp) channels, using drugs such as  xxxd1868xxx .
a third type of intervention is the use of antiapoptotic
drugs, such as the thiazolidinediones (tzds), and incretin
mimetics and enhancers, which have demonstrated significant clinical evidence of effects on human ␤-cell function.
the tzds improve insulin secretory capacity, decrease ␤-cell
apoptosis, and reduce islet cell amyloid with maintenance of
neogenesis. the tzds have indirect effects on ␤-cells by being
insulin sensitizers. the direct effects are via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ␥ activation in pancreatic islets, with
tzds consistently improving basal ␤-cell function. these beneficial effects are sustained in some individuals with time. there
are several trials on prevention of diabetes with tzds.
incretin hormones, which are released from the gastrointestinal tract in response to nutrient ingestion to enhance glucose-

dependent insulin secretion from the pancreas, aid the overall
maintenance of glucose homeostasis through slowing of gastric
emptying, inhibition of glucagon secretion, and control of body
weight. from the two major incretins, glucagon-like peptide-1
(glp-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(gip), only the first one or its mimetics or enhancers can be used
for treatment because the diabetic ␤-cell is resistant to gip action. because of the rapid inactivation of glp-1 by dipeptidyl
peptidase (dpp)-iv, several incretin analogs were developed:
 xxxg899xxx  agonists (incretin mimetics) exenatide (synthetic  xxxd2076xxx ) and  xxxd2495xxx , by conjugation of glp-1 to
circulating albumin. the acute effect of glp-1 and  xxxg899xxx  agonists on ␤-cells is stimulation of glucose-dependent
insulin release, followed by enhancement of insulin biosynthesis
and stimulation of insulin gene transcription. the chronic action is stimulating ␤-cell proliferation, induction of islet neogenesis, and inhibition of ␤-cell apoptosis, thus promoting expansion of ␤-cell mass, as observed in rodent diabetes and in
cultured ␤-cells. exenatide and  xxxd2495xxx  enhanced postprandial ␤-cell function.
the inhibition of the activity of the  xxxg651xxx  enzyme enhances endogenous glp-1 action in vivo, mediated not only by
glp-1 but also by other mediators. in preclinical studies, oral
active  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors (sitagliptin and  xxxd3510xxx ) also
promoted ␤-cell proliferation, neogenesis, and inhibition of
apoptosis in rodents. meal tolerance tests showed improvement in postprandial ␤-cell function.
obviously, it is difficult to estimate the protective effects of
incretin mimetics and enhancers on ␤-cells in humans, and there
is no clinical evidence that these drugs really have protective
effects on ␤-cells. (endocrine reviews 28: 187–218, 2007)

i. introduction

first published online march 12, 2007
abbreviations: age, advanced glycation end-product; air, acute insulin response; airg, air to iv glucose; auc, area under the curve; coa,
 xxxd1739xxx ; csii, continuous sc insulin infusion; dm2, type 2 diabetes
mellitus;  xxxg651xxx , dipeptidyl peptidase-iv; er, endoplasmic reticulum; fa,
fatty acid; ffa, free fa; fsivgtt, frequently sampled iv glucose tolerance
test; gip, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; glp-1, glucagonlike peptide-1;  xxxg899xxx ,  xxxg899xxx ; hba1c, glycated hemoglobin;
hiapp, human iapp; homa, homeostasis model assessment; homa-␤,
homa of ␤-cell function; homa-ir, homa of insulin resistance; iapp,
islet amyloid polypeptide; ifg, impaired fasting glucose; igt, impaired
glucose tolerance; isr, insulin secretion rate; nf-␬b, nuclear factor ␬b;
 xxxg70xxx , pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; pdx-1, pancreas
duodenum homeobox-1; pi/iri ratio,  xxxg1193xxx  to total immunoreactive
insulin ratio; ppar, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; ros, reactive oxygen species; si, sensitivity index; tzd, thiazolidinedione; zdf,
zucker diabetic fatty (rat).
endocrine reviews is published by the endocrine society (http://
www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the
endocrine community.

ii. decline of ␤-cell function
a. epidemiology
b. pathophysiology
c. decreased ␤-cell mass
iii. factors for progressive loss of ␤-cell function and mass
a. glucotoxicity
b. lipotoxicity
c. proinflammatory cytokines and leptin
d. islet cell amyloid
e. linkage of reduced ␤-cell mass and dysfunction
iv. clinical intervention to preserve or “rejuvenate” ␤-cells
a. short-term intensive insulin therapy of newly
diagnosed dm2
b. modulation of the ␤-cell atp-sensitive k⫹ (katp)
channel
c. antiapoptotic drugs
187

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

188

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

i. introduction

i

t is well known that there is a progressive deterioration in ␤-cell function over time in type 2 diabetes
mellitus (dm2), as indicated by the united kingdom prospective diabetes study (ukpds) (1, 2), regardless of therapy
allocation, albeit conventional (mainly diet), insulin,  xxxd1678xxx ,  xxxd2215xxx , or metformin treatment. moreover, the pancreatic islet function was found to be about 50%
of normal at the time of diagnosis, independent of the degree
of insulin resistance, with the reduction in function probably
commencing 10 –12 yr before diagnosis and aggravated by
increasing fasting plasma glucose levels (3). in the cited work
(1–3), along with other studies, particularly those of butler et
al. (4) evaluating human pancreatic tissue from 124 autopsies
in obese impaired fasting glucose (ifg), obese dm2, obese
nondiabetic, lean dm2, and lean nondiabetic subjects, and
observing a reduction in ␤-cell mass in impaired glucose
tolerance (igt) (40%) being greater still in dm2 (60%) compared with their respective nondiabetic control group, the
underlying mechanism was found to be increased ␤-cell apoptosis, whereas new islet formation and ␤-cell replication
(normalized to relative ␤-cell volume) remained normal or
increased. also, islet amyloid deposits were present in the
majority of dm2 cases, compared with nondiabetic controls,
but were not increased in obese igt subjects. the role of
declining ␤-cell mass and function in the development of
dm2 has drawn attention to the need for agents that can
address this process. emerging evidence suggests that several medical therapies could offer specific benefits by preventing or delaying the decline in ␤-cell mass/function,
thereby representing a substrate for early intervention efforts
to lower the burden of dm2. moreover, in individuals with
established dm2, the inhibition of the increased apoptosis
may lead to restoration of ␤-cell mass because islet neogenesis appeared to be unaffected.

ii. decline of ␤-cell function
a. epidemiology

as outlined above, ␤-cell function has been shown by the
ukpds (1–3) to be low at diagnosis and to decline, associated
with a deterioration in glycemic control, with increasing
duration of diabetes, notwithstanding the use of a number of
therapies existing at the time the study was performed.
moreover, the importance of maintaining adequate ␤-cell
function to offset the need for combination therapy is clearly
demonstrated in the ukpds findings; after 6 yr of sulfonylurea monotherapy, 62% of patients with baseline ␤-cell function [updated homeostasis model assessment (homa 2);
ref. 5] below 27% (in relation to a reference group of normoglycemic subjects aged 18 –25 yr) required additional
therapy to maintain glycemic targets. in contrast, only 28%
of those patients with ␤-cell function above 55% required
additional therapy (6, 7). the skaraborg hypertension and
diabetes project, a swedish community-based follow-up of
376 primary care patients with dm2, found glycated hemoglobin (hba1c) levels to increase over time in association
with a corresponding decline in ␤-cell function (8). an

hba1c level of 6.5% or higher was associated with impairment of ␤-cell function (homa) (9) and longer duration of
diabetes, irrespective of age and gender. these associations
are likely to be causal because ␤-cell function in dm2 is
diminished, as indicated previously and discussed below.
b. pathophysiology

insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion are usually present in patients with classical dm2 as well as in most
individuals with igt. the relative contributions of impaired
␤-cell function and insulin sensitivity in dm2 have been
controversial, especially over what constitutes the primary
genetic defect. current evidence points to ␤-cell dysfunction
as the first demonstrable defect with limited capacity to
compensate for the presence of insulin resistance. however,
the modulating effect of insulin sensitivity on ␤-cell function
has to be considered for the assessment of insulin release in
individuals at risk of developing dm2. the nature of this
relationship is such that insulin sensitivity and ␤-cell function are inversely and proportionally related, whereby the
product of these two parameters is constant, being referred
to as the disposition index (10), and in turn can be interpreted
as a measure of the ability of the ␤-cells to compensate for
insulin resistance. mathematically, this relationship is described by the hyperbolic relationship between the acute
insulin response (air) and the metabolic action of insulin to
stimulate glucose disposal (m) and is referred to as glucose
homeostasis, with glucose concentration assumed to remain
constant along the hyperbola. according to stumvoll et al.
(11), because glucose is one of the signals stimulating air in
response to decreasing m, hypothetically, as with any normally functioning feed-forward system, air should not fully
compensate for worsening m, since this would remove the
stimulus for compensation. evidence was provided from
cross-sectional, longitudinal, and prospective data on pima
indians (n ⫽ 413) and caucasians (n ⫽ 60), demonstrating
that fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations increase
with decreasing m despite normal compensation of air. to
denote this physiological adaptation to chronic stress (insulin resistance), stumvoll et al. (11) have proposed the term
“glucose allostasis.” allostasis (stability through change)
would ensure continued homeostatic response (stability
through remaining the same) to acute stress at some cumulative costs to the system. with increasing severity and over
time, the allostatic load (increase in glycemia), while increasing the burden that persistent increases in insulin secretion
place on the ␤-cell and perhaps other parts of the system, may
have pathological consequences, such as the development of
dm2. however, not all insulin-resistant subjects develop this
disease where, in approximately 80% of cases, increased insulin secretion is sufficient to offset overt hyperglycemia (12).
nevertheless, in some individuals, failure of the ␤-cell to
maintain adequate supplies of insulin triggers the development of dm2. prospective studies (average follow-up of 7 yr)
in pima indians, a very high-risk population for developing
dm2, have shown that impaired ␤-cell function, as assessed
by air to glucose (airg), was a predictor of developing
diabetes, independent of obesity and insulin resistance
(prevalent in this population), evaluated by the hyperinsu-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

linemic glucose clamp (13). in a longitudinal study of 48 pima
indians with normal glucose tolerance followed for an average of 5 yr with multiple measurements performed during
this period, 17 of these individuals progressed from normal
glucose tolerance through igt to diabetes and insulin secretion declining progressively by 78%, whereas insulin sensitivity declined by 14%, associated with an increase in mean
body weight from 93.7 to 106.9 kg. in the remaining 31
individuals who did not develop diabetes, a similar 11%
decrease in insulin sensitivity was associated with a 30%
increase in insulin secretion. at baseline, however, when all
subjects had normal glucose tolerance, those individuals
who subsequently progressed to diabetes had ␤-cell function
markedly decreased for their degree of insulin resistance
compared with those subjects who did not progress over
time (14). from this and other studies, some of them previously reviewed, substantial evidence has accumulated showing that deterioration in ␤-cell function typically precedes
hyperglycemia and has an important influence on its course.
furthermore, most of the available evidence supports the
view that dm2 is a heterogeneous disorder in which the
major genetic factor is impaired ␤-cell function, whereas
insulin resistance is the major acquired factor at least in
caucasian populations. however, this may differ in a highrisk non-caucasian population with severe genetic predisposition to insulin resistance, e.g., indians (15). compelling
evidence that impaired insulin secretion is the major genetic
trait has been provided via the assessment of the degree of
␤-cell compensation to reduced insulin sensitivity among
normal glucose-tolerant offspring or siblings of caucasian
familial dm2 kindreds (i.e., families with at least two siblings
diagnosed with dm2 before age 65 yr) (16, 17). in effect,
glucose-tolerant members of caucasian familial dm2 kindreds (but not similar obese control subjects) exhibit impairment in ␤-cell compensation for obesity-related insulin resistance. furthermore, the heritability of insulin secretion is
67% (16).
the demonstration of ␤-cell dysfunction before the onset
of dm2 and the recognition of the confounding effect of
obesity on insulin sensitivity cast doubt on the theory that
insulin resistance is the primary cause of dm2 (15). several
studies of the insulin-secretory capacity of glucose-tolerant
individuals with a predisposing ethnicity or a family history
of dm2 have indicated that ␤-cell dysfunction, like insulin
resistance, occurs in genetically predisposed individuals
with normal glucose tolerance, well before the emergence of
overt diabetes (see references cited in ref. 15). of note in
these studies is the fact that there were no significant differences with respect to insulin sensitivity between the predisposed subjects and the control groups (glucose-tolerant
subjects with no family history of dm2), suggesting that
alterations in insulin secretion precede insulin resistance in
patients at risk for developing dm2.
considering that the vast majority (85–90%) of dm2 patients are obese and that intraabdominal obesity, being the
major determinant of insulin resistance (not only in obese
individuals but also in apparently nonobese individuals who
have evidence of increased abdominal fat) represents a significant genetic component (18), then insulin resistance occurring as a result of this could be considered genetic. nev-

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 189

ertheless, most obese individuals who are insulin resistant
are not diabetic and what distinguishes them from those who
are diabetic is, as indicated previously, the ability of their
pancreatic ␤-cells to compensate for insulin resistance. although insulin resistance may be critical for the development
of diabetes, irreversibly impaired insulin secretion plays, as
expected, an essential role in diabetes persistence after
weight loss and restoration to normal or near-normal insulin
sensitivity (19).
regarding the 10 –15% of patients with dm2 who are not
obese, whether they become diabetic depends on the balance
between the severity of insulin resistance and the ability of
the ␤-cell to compensate for the insulin resistance, as in the
case of obese individuals. a spectrum could exist; at one
extreme, the nonobese individual may be insulin resistant
before or after the development of diabetes. high-fat diet,
decreased physical fitness, increase in visceral fat, smoking,
pregnancy, certain medications, and hyperglycemia itself
(glucose toxicity) can all cause insulin resistance. at the other
extreme of the spectrum, insulin resistance is absent, and the
immediate cause of diabetes is then impaired insulin secretion. only a minority of dm2 patients belong to this group,
such as those with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
nonobese blacks and swedes. there are no well-documented
cases in which impaired insulin secretion is absent and insulin resistance is the immediate cause of dm2 (20).
the defect of insulin secretion in dm2 is related to two
confounding components: insulin deficiency and disturbed
kinetics of secretion combined with impaired glucose stimulus-secretion coupling (21).
1. insulin deficiency. insulin deficiency in dm2 is relative to
the prevailing hyperglycemia and its measurement (immunoreactive or “true” insulin), at least in the early stages of the
disease where these could show normal or increased values.
however, because this level of insulin is insufficient to control the prevailing hyperglycemia, it would indicate that
“insulin deficiency” is more evident when “true” insulin is
measured. besides, dm2 is characterized by an increased
fasting ratio of  xxxg1193xxx  [long-chain precursor of insulin
which is processed in the ␤-cell to produce equimolar quantities of mature (“true”) insulin and c-peptide] to total immunoreactive insulin (reflecting all immunoreactive species
including  xxxg1193xxx  and conversion intermediates) (pi/iri)
indicating a reduced processing of  xxxg1193xxx , which correlates with ␤-cell dysfunction and is predictive of disease
development (22). from the observed significant negative
correlation between fasting pi/iri ratio and the acute maximal insulin responses to arginine and glucose in dm2, it has
been proposed that the pi/iri ratio, a relatively easy parameter to obtain, indicates a reduced ␤-cell capacity in patients with dm2 (23).
the determination of insulin in fasting plasma samples has
the caveat that in this situation the demand for insulin is at
its lowest. only after stimulation does the magnitude of the
insulin deficiency become fully manifested.
2. ␤-cell secretory defect. it is well recognized that the relatively selective loss of glucose stimulation manifested by the
lack of the first phase of secretion and decreased second

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

190

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

phase (24) in dm2 patients as well in subjects with igt,
demonstrates multiple abnormalities in both qualitative and
quantitative measures of insulin secretion. prandial insulin
release after an oral glucose load or mixed meal is also delayed (25), permitting the elevated postprandial glucose concentrations characteristic of these individuals, despite relatively normal fasting glucose levels in igt (26). sensitivity to
nonmetabolizable stimuli such as arginine remains normal,
although the magnitude of glucose-dependence of the insulin response may be attenuated. baseline insulin secretion is
normally pulsatile, with a periodicity of 5 to 10 min. the
defective release of insulin in dm2 involves reduced diurnal
oscillations (27), impaired ultradian oscillations (28), and
their reduced entrainment (29) as well as impaired rapid
pulsatile secretion (30). the hypothesis of impaired insulin
oscillations as a primary ␤-cell defect in dm2 was supported
by the observation of defective oscillatory insulin release in
first-degree relatives of such patients (31). however, ritzel et
al. (32) observed that the parameters of pulsatile insulin
secretion were similar in normal subjects and dm2 and igt
subjects by deconvolution, spectral, and autocorrelation
analysis and approximate entropy. this could also partly
account for some of the insulin resistance in a number of
studies showing that equal amounts of insulin presented to
target organs have improved action when delivered in a
pulsatile manner (see references cited in ref. 33). these defects of secretion, particularly the lack of response to glucose,
acting in concert with the insulin deficiency along with disproportionate amounts of  xxxg1193xxx , compromise the ability
of residual ␤-cells to provide sufficient insulin to achieve
euglycemia in the presence of insulin resistance or otherwise.
c. decreased ␤-cell mass

insights into changes that occur in the ␤-cells have been
gained mainly from diabetic animal models that support
reduced ␤-cell mass as a significant contributory factor to
diminished insulin secretion in dm2. many of the signals
that regulate the balance of replication of the existing cells/
neogenesis from stem cells and cell death through necrosis
or apoptosis and thus determine net ␤-cell mass have been
identified, but it is less clear which of these factors contribute
to the failure of ␤-cell mass augmentation. obviously, diminished proliferation or increased apoptosis or both will
result in lower ␤-cell mass. there is evidence that increased
␤-cell apoptosis in the zucker diabetic fatty rat (zdf), an
animal model of dm2, underlies the decreased ␤-cell mass
seen in these animals (34). autopsy data examining ␤-cell
mass in obese and diabetic humans have been sparse and
sometimes contradictory. it is difficult to distinguish between the two mechanisms, cell formation and cell death, in
human tissue sections mainly because dead cells are removed rapidly from the islet by macrophages and neighboring cells, making it hard to quantify cell death. although
cell proliferation can be quantified in tissue sections using
markers, this only provides a single snapshot in time that
probably does not reflect accurately the complex dynamic of
the process (21). recently, the study by butler et al. (4), as
mentioned in section i, showed relative ␤-cell volume to be
increased by 50% in obese compared with lean nondiabetic

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

pancreas and was attributed to increased neogenesis of islets
from exocrine ductal tissue. relative ␤-cell volume was decreased in obese igt and more in obese dm2 compared with
nondiabetic controls, being attributable to accelerated cell
apoptosis. other studies (35, 36) have also shown a reduction
in ␤-cell mass in dm2, leading to a rapid emphasis of this
etiological factor.
potential mechanisms of ␤-cell adaptation can be summarized as follows (37): 1) functional up- and down-regulation
of secretory machinery; 2) ␤-cell recruitment; 3) ␤-cell turnover and islet mass changes [evidence mainly from rodent
work: increasing/decreasing cell size; ␤-cell turnover; de novo
differentiation (neogenesis) of ␤-cells within islets and new
islets budding from exocrine acinar cell pancreas; and ␤-cell
death by necrosis vs. apoptosis (programmed ␤-cell death)].
opinions diverge regarding the relative contribution of a
decrease in cell mass vs. an intrinsic defect in the secretory
machinery. a decrease in ␤-cell mass is likely to play a role
in the pathogenesis of human dm2 as it does in rodent
models of the disease, as indicated above. however, in contrast with type 1 diabetes, which has ␤-cell mass reduction
of 70 – 80% at the time of diagnosis, dm2 initial pathological
studies suggested ␤-cell loss of 25–50% (38, 39), although this
has been disputed by others (40). because ␤-cells cannot be
measured in vivo, it remains unclear whether dm2 has a
lower ␤-cell mass early in life, has failed to increase ␤-cell
mass in the face of a given insulin resistance, or has a progressive ␤-cell loss as suggested by epidemiological evidence
(1–3). moreover, the secretion defect is probably more severe
than could be accounted for solely by the reduction in ␤-cell
mass in dm2 (41). based on results obtained in rodent models
of the disease and cultured rodent and human islets, it seems
reasonable to assume that dyslipidemia and hyperglycemia
negatively affect ␤-cell mass by increasing ␤-cell apoptosis in
human dm2 (21, 42). section iii discusses recent hypotheses
on the mechanisms of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity besides
other factors for progressive loss of ␤-cell function and mass.
summary/conclusions. there is a progressive deterioration
in ␤-cell function over time in dm2, independent of the type
of treatment, where pancreatic islet function has been found
to be about 50% of normal at the time of diagnosis, regardless
of the degree of insulin resistance, as indicated by the ukpds. the decline of ␤-cell function, the first demonstrable
defect, is the limited capacity to compensate for the presence
of insulin resistance, both usually present in classical dm2 as
well as in most individuals with igt. most of the evidence
supports the view that dm2 is a heterogeneous disorder in
which the major genetic factor is impaired ␤-cell function
where insulin resistance would be the major acquired factor
at least in caucasians. the defect of insulin secretion in dm2
is related to two confounding components: insulin deficiency
and ␤-cell secretory defect. on the other hand, there is an
impaired glucose sensing in the ␣-cells leading to
hyperglucagonemia.
the reduction of ␤-cell mass is attributable to accelerated
apoptosis. regarding the relative contribution of a decrease
in cell mass vs. an intrinsic defect in the secretory machinery,
the latter is probably more severe than could be accounted
for by the reduction in ␤-cell mass in dm2.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

iii. factors for progressive loss of ␤-cell function
and mass
a. glucotoxicity

because glucose is the key physiological regulator of insulin secretion, it appears logical that it also regulates the
long-term adaptation of insulin production by regulating
␤-cell turnover. however, it is important to stress that in
human and psammomys obesus ␤-cells in vitro, graded increase in glucose from a physiological concentration of 5.6 to
11.2 mmol/liter and above induces apoptosis (43, 44),
whereas in rat islets the same graded glucose increment
decreases apoptosis (45), indicating that glucose affects survival of islets differently in both species, which has lead to
some confusion in the field. this difference in glucose sensitivity between p. obesus and rat islets highlights the importance of genetic backgrounds. in effect, although glucose
was capable of inducing ␤-cell apoptosis in most batches of
human islets studied by donath et al. (21, 46), striking variations were observed in the magnitude of this response. all
this points to a limitation in most studies performed in cell
lines and rodent and human islets. glucotoxicity of the islets
can be defined as nonphysiological and potentially irreversible ␤-cell damage caused by chronic exposure to supraphysiological glucose concentrations along with the characteristic decreases in insulin synthesis and secretion caused by
decreased insulin gene expression (47). in this context it is
important to consider the possible detrimental effect on
␤-cell turnover of transient postprandial glycemic excursions
early in the development of overt diabetes. this could perhaps underlie the decrease in ␤-cell mass documented in
patients with igt, the earliest manifest stage of dm2 (4).
␤-cell exhaustion, according to robertson et al. (47), refers to
a physical depletion of ␤-cell insulin stores secondary to
prolonged chronic stimulation with glucose or nonglucose
secretagogues, so that insulin secretion is not possible, even
if the ␤-cell were to become resensitized to glucose. an important distinction between ␤-cell exhaustion and glucose
toxicity is that the exhausted islet has no defect in insulin
synthesis, and therefore cell function fully recovers as it rests.
glucose toxicity, on the other hand, implies the gradual,
time-dependent establishment of irreversible damage to cellular components of insulin production and consequently to
insulin content and secretion (47).
the fact that glucose induces apoptosis in ␤-cells is probably linked to the relative specificity of this toxicity toward
the ␤-cell but not to other islet or most nonislet cell types. the
␤-cell is extremely sensitive to small changes in ambient
glucose. when these changes are of short duration and lie
within the physiological range, such as after a meal, they lead
to insulin secretion. when of longer duration and more pronounced in magnitude, perhaps they are translated by the
␤-cell glucose-sensing pathways into proapoptotic signals
(21). one such signal might be endoplasmic reticulum (er)
stress triggered by an increase in insulin biosynthesis (48)
leading to increased insulin secretion as well as increased
 xxxg1193xxx  biosynthesis to replenish ␤-cell insulin stores. the
increase in  xxxg1193xxx  biosynthesis in turn causes an increased flux of protein through the er of the ␤-cell, which is

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 191

quite high compared with other cell types even under physiological conditions, and any further increase is expected to
be conducive to er stress. furthermore, chronic hyperglycemia could also lead to long-term increases in cytosolic ca2⫹
[as opposed to the normal short-term increases arising from
glucose-induced closure of atp-dependent potassium channels (katp)] that could in turn be proapoptotic (49).
long-term hyperglycemia also induces the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ros) leading to chronic oxidative
stress because the islets express very low levels of antioxidant enzymes and activity. ros, particularly hydroxyl radicals, interfere with normal processing pdx-1 (pancreas duodenum homeobox-1) mrna, a necessary transcription
factor for insulin gene expression and glucose-induced insulin secretion besides being a critical regulator of ␤-cell
survival (47, 46). the generation of ros (and reactive nitrogen species) will ultimately activate stress-induced pathways
[nuclear factor ␬b (nf-␬b), stress kinases, and hexosamines]
to manipulate cell fate (50 –52). del guerra et al. (53), studying
islets isolated from the pancreata of 13 dm2 patients (age
ranging from 49 to 75 yr, and diabetes duration from 2 to 8
yr, except one patient with 23-yr known duration of the
disease) and 13 matched nondiabetic cadaveric organ donors, demonstrated several functional and molecular defects,
confirming that dm2 islets release less insulin than control
islets accompanied by altered expression of glucotransporters and of glucokinase, reduced activation of amp-activated
protein kinase and alterations in some transcription factors
regulating ␤-cell differentiation and function. markers of
oxidative stress, such as nitrotyrosine and 8-hydroxy-2⬘-deoxyguanosine concentrations, were significantly higher in
dm2 than control islets and correlated with the degree of
glucose-stimulated insulin release impairment. the addition
of glutathione in the incubation medium determined reduction of oxidative stress (as suggested by diminished levels of
nitrotyrosine), improved glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, and increased insulin mrna expression. thus, del
guerra et al. (53) concluded that the functional impairment
of dm2 islets could be, at least in part, reversible by reducing
islet cell oxidative stress. it is important to emphasize that in
this study the percentage of ␤-cells was only slightly (⬃10%),
although significantly, reduced in diabetic islets compared
with control islets. as reasoned by robertson et al. (47), if the
steady decline in ␤-cell function in dm2 is attributable to any
significant extent to ongoing apoptosis via chronic oxidative
stress with no deterioration in ␤-cell replication, then interference with apoptosis by antioxidants or any other therapy,
might provide a much needed new approach to conventional
treatment that could stabilize ␤-cell mass.
b. lipotoxicity

diabetes is associated with dyslipidemia characterized by
an increase in circulating free  xxxd2154xxx  (ffas) and changes
in lipoprotein profile. in healthy humans, besides the hyperinsulinemia induced by an acute elevation of ffas, there
is also an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion
after prolonged ffa infusion (48 and 96 h) (54, 55) but not
in nondiabetic individuals genetically predisposed to developing dm2 (55). in healthy control subjects, the ffa-induced

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

192

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

insulin resistance was compensated by the enhanced insulin
secretion, whereas persistently elevated ffas may contribute to progressive ␤-cell failure (␤-cell lipotoxicity) in individuals genetically predisposed to dm2. santomauro et al.
(56) have demonstrated that overnight administration of the
 xxxd2715xxx  analog acipimox lowered plasma ffa as well
as fasting insulin and glucose levels, reduced insulin resistance, and improved oral glucose tolerance with decreased
insulin levels in lean and obese nondiabetic subjects and in
subjects with igt and dm2. the significant decrease in insulin levels suggested that plasma ffa support between 30
and 50% of basal insulin levels. a sustained (7-d) reduction
in plasma ffa concentrations in dm2, with acipimox, was
also associated with enhanced insulin-stimulated glucose
disposal (reduced insulin resistance) associated with a decreased content of intramyocellular long-chain  xxxd2154xxx 
(fas) and improvement in oral glucose tolerance test with a
slight decrease in mean plasma insulin levels (57). these data
suggest that physiological increases in plasma ffa concentrations in humans potentiate glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and are unlikely to be “lipotoxic” to ␤-cells (58) but
may contribute to progressive ␤-cell failure in at least some
individuals who are genetically predisposed to developing
dm2 (55). for all studies reported in relation to the ffa-␤cell interaction it is important to emphasize that the stimulatory effects on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion are
physiological in nature, particularly during the fasted-to-fed
transition. circulating ffas help maintain a basal rate of
insulin secretion, keeping adipose tissue lipolysis in check.
in rodent islets, increased ffas have been shown to be
proapoptotic in ␤-cells (59). exposure of cultured human
islets to saturated fas such as palmitate are highly toxic to
the ␤-cell, inducing ␤-cell apoptosis, decreased ␤-cell proliferation, and impaired ␤-cell function. in contrast, the
monounsaturated fas such as  xxxd2777xxx  are protective against
both palmitate and glucose-induced apoptosis and increase
in proliferation. the deleterious effect of  xxxd2833xxx  was
mediated via ceramide-mitochondrial apoptotic pathways,
whereas induction of the mitochondrial protein bcl-2 by oleic
acid may contribute to the protective effect of monounsaturated fas, such as palmitoleic or oleic acids (60).
a similar balance between pro- and antiapoptotic effects
is found for lipoprotein action on insulin-secreting cells from
mouse pancreatic islets. the sole available study testing the
hypothesis that lipoproteins modulate the function and survival of the cells has demonstrated that purified human very
low-density lipoprotein and low-density lipoprotein particles reduced insulin mrna levels and ␤-cell proliferation
and were proapoptotic, whereas high-density lipoprotein
protected ␤-cells against these proapoptotic effects. the protective effects of high-density lipoprotein were mediated,
partially at least, by inhibition of caspase-3 cleavage and
activation of akt/protein kinase b, whereas proapoptotic
lipoproteins seem to act via c- xxxg1370xxx  (61).
these results are highly suggestive that the changes in lipoprotein profile observed in dm2 could contribute to the
pathogenesis and progression of ␤-cell failure.
regarding the mechanism(s) by which lipotoxicity can
impair ␤-cell function, the emerging evidence has suggested
that long-chain fatty acyl- xxxd1739xxx  (coa) might be in-

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

volved in the ␤-cell dysfunction that occurs after prolonged
exposure to ffas, mediating its deleterious effects, at least
in rodents, as initially proposed by prentki and corkey (62)
and recently reviewed by yaney and corkey (63). according
to these authors, the simultaneous presence of elevated glucose and fa results from glucose as an oxidative fuel, in
accumulation of cytosolic citrate, the precursor of malonylcoa, which in turn inhibits carnitine- xxxd2832xxx -transferase-1, the enzyme responsible for transport of fa into the
mitochondria, blocking their oxidation and energy production, resulting in cytosolic accumulation of long-chain fatty
acyl-coas. thus, this model proposes that glucose concentration plays a critical role in the effect of fas. whether
long-chain acyl-coa accumulation directly affects ␤-cell
function or whether it serves as a precursor for other active
molecules such as diacylglycerols or phospholipids directly
activating protein kinase c isoforms somehow synergizing
with glucose to enhance insulin secretion was not characterized, whereas the nature of the effectors downstream of
lipid metabolite accumulation remains unknown (62– 64).
as reported by poitout and robertson (64), the “malonylcoa/long chain-acyl-coa” proposed as a biochemical basis
for lipotoxicity implies that the effects of fa are greatly
influenced by concomitant glucose concentration. therefore,
in the presence of physiological glucose concentrations, elevated fa should be readily oxidized in the mitochondrion
and should not harm the ␤-cell. under circumstances in
which both fa and glucose are elevated, accumulation of
metabolites derived from fa esterification would inhibit glucose-induction insulin secretion and insulin gene expression.
thus, glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity are closely interrelated,
in the sense that lipotoxicity does not exist without chronic
hyperglycemia. furthermore, the effects of glucose on lipid
metabolism are so intense that according to poitout and
robertson (64), lipotoxicity can be viewed as one mechanism
of glucotoxicity. hence, generation of ros may be an alternative mechanism of both gluco- and lipotoxicity. in effect,
exposure of islets to palmitate induces generation of ros (65)
and treatment of islets with metformin, which has antioxidant properties, protecting them from deleterious effects of
fas (66).
c. proinflammatory cytokines and leptin

the chronic increase in inflammatory mediators observed
in dm2 might not only affect insulin-sensitive tissues and
blood vessel walls but could also affect pancreatic ␤-cells. in
addition to genetic factors, development of dm2, with a
central role for the functional ␤-cell mass, is strongly influenced by environmental factors, including decreased physical activity, nutrition, and obesity. this promotes the following factors, which are possible mediators of an
inflammatory process (67).
1. adipocyte-secreted factors. locally produced hormones and
cytokines possess important auto/paracrine properties.
some are also released into circulation and have endocrine
effects. in particular, leptin, tnf-␣, il-6, and il-1 receptor
antagonist are produced and secreted by fat tissue, being
increased in obesity, and have been causally linked to insulin
resistance (18, 68).

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

leptin is expressed primarily in adipose tissue, representing the most obvious exponent of the adipocyte. recently,
leptin has also been considered as a proinflammatory cytokine because of its structural similarity with other cytokines
and its receptor-induced signaling pathways (69). in rodent
islets, leptin induces ␤-cell proliferation and protects from
ffa-induced ␤-cell apoptosis. in contrast, chronic exposure
of human islets to leptin leads to ␤-cell apoptosis via increasing release of il-1␤ and decreasing release of  xxxd2806xxx  in the islets (70). other cytokines released
by adipocytes, including tnf-␣ and il-6, may also modulate
␤-cell survival, although it is unclear whether the amount
released into the circulation is sufficient to affect ␤-cells (70).
furthermore, it may well be that these cytokines are only
effective in the presence of other cytokines.
2. increased cell nutrients. elevated glucose concentrations and
ffas, in addition to their role of cell nutrients, also have a
dual effect on ␤-cell turnover. depending on duration of
exposure to glucose or ffa and on the genetic background
of the islets, glucose and ffas may induce ␤-cell proliferation and have pro- or antiapoptotic effects. according to
maedler et al. (50), elevated glucose concentrations induce
␤-cell production of il-1␤ leading to ␤-cell apoptosis. furthermore, chronic hyperglycemia increases production of
ros, which may cause oxidative damage in ␤-cells, as highlighted previously. both il-1␤ and ros activate the transcription of the nf-␬b, which plays a critical role in mediating inflammatory responses. on the other hand, increased
concentrations of ffas, particularly saturated, may affect the
viability of the ␤-cells directly, as discussed earlier, or via
obesity, i.e., adipocyte-secreted cytokines (tnf-␣, il-6, and
leptin) may act directly on the ␤-cells or activate the innate
immune system.
3. innate immune system and autoimmunity. the innate immune system is considered to provide rapid host defenses
until the slower adaptive immune response develops. in
addition to the endocrine activity of the adipocytes, described above, macrophages and endothelium may contribute to increasing serum levels of il-1␤, il-6, and tnf-␣ in
dm2 (71) and may act on the pancreatic islets and impair
␤-cell secretory function or activate the innate immune system (67). similarly, these cytokines induce the liver to produce acute-phase proteins such as  xxxg520xxx , haptoglobin, fibrinogen, plasminogen activator inhibitor, and
serum amyloid a.
as indicated by donath et al. (67), when apoptotic cells are
present in high enough numbers or when apoptosis is the
consequence of exposure to cytokines such as il-1␤ and
tnf-␣, they can provoke an immune response. moreover,
pronounced activation of the acute-phase response is associated with islet cell autoantibodies in patients with dm2
(72). after glucose and ffa-induced ␤-cell apoptosis, it is
conceivable that depending on age and on genetic and/or
environmental factors, some dm2 patients may show mobilization of t cells reactive to ␤-cell antigens, culminating in
autoimmune destruction of ␤-cells similar to that observed
during earlier stages in “classical” type 1 diabetes (21). this
response may be so discrete and desynchronized in time and

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 193

space that it has evaded detection in earlier autopsy studies.
the precise role of the innate and acquired immune system
in the ongoing process of ␤-cell demise in dm2 remains to
be investigated.
d. islet cell amyloid

the relevance of amyloid deposition in the deterioration
of ␤-cell function has been the subject of debate for many
years. as indicated in section i, deposits composed mainly of
islet amyloid polypeptide (iapp), also known as amylin,
have been reported in up to 90% of dm2 individuals, compared with 10 –13% of nondiabetic counterparts (4). iapp is
a 37-amino acid, ␤-cell peptide that is costored and coreleased with insulin in response to ␤-cell secretagogues. the
normally soluble peptide is found in the circulation at 5–15
pmol/liter concentration in man, and like c-peptide (but not
insulin) it is excreted by the kidney; the relationship of circulating insulin-like molecules to iapp would therefore be
more accurate with c-peptide than insulin (73).
several bodies of evidence support a potential role of iapp
in the pathophysiology of ␤-cell loss in dm2. in effect, spontaneous dm2 occurring in humans, monkeys, and cats shares
close homology in iapp sequence, which spontaneously
forms amyloid fibrils in an aqueous environment. nevertheless, proline substitutions in the region iapp 24 –29 that
does not form fibrils in an aqueous solution, as found in rats
and mice, do not spontaneously develop dm2 but instead
require selective genetic manipulation to develop diabetes
(see reference citations in ref. 73). transgenic mice expressing human iapp (hiapp) in ␤-cells when obese, spontaneously develop diabetes characterized by islet amyloid and
decreased ␤-cell mass (74). prospective studies in these mice
support the hypothesis that the mechanism of the decreased
␤-cell mass is increased apoptosis (75). it has been suggested
that fibril size of iapp may determine the capacity of amyloid
to cause cell death and that intermediate-sized oligomeric
material is chiefly responsible for ␤-cell toxicity. exposure of
mouse islets to intermediate-sized aggregates of hiapp
caused disruption and vesiculation of cell membranes after
24 h, and both necrotic and apoptotic cells were evident after
48 h. these particles were more cytotoxic to mouse islet cells
than matured particles containing large aggregates (76). the
findings from the mayo clinic that only a minority (about
10%) of the cases with ifg had islet amyloid (evaluated in
slides stained by congo red and examined under polarized
light for birefringence) present, while already having a deficit in presumptive ␤-cell mass of approximately 40%, is
consistent with the suggestion that small iapp oligomers
(not detectable by light microscopy) are the cause of ␤-cell
loss, whereas the large extracellular amyloid deposits visible
by light microscopy are inert (4). alternatively, it is possible
that iapp formation is secondary to the onset of hyperglycemia and not of primary importance in the pathophysiology
of dm2 (4).
in the recently published review of islet amyloid (73), the
authors concluded that in human dm2, islet amyloidosis
largely results from diabetes-related pathologies (such as
diabetes-associated abnormal  xxxg1193xxx  processing, which
could contribute to destabilization of granular iapp) and is

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

194

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

not an etiological factor for hyperglycemia. however, the
associated progressive ␤-cell destruction leads to severe islet
dysfunction and insulin requirement (fig. 1).
e. linkage of reduced ␤-cell mass and dysfunction

as reported previously (4), before igt becomes apparent
in humans (the earliest manifestation of incipient diabetes),
there may have been loss of as much as approximately 50%
of ␤-cell mass, and as overt diabetes develops, further loss
might be limited to no more than an additional 10%, indicating a parallel impairment in ␤-cell function. in effect,
marked impairment of first-phase insulin secretory responses to iv glucose at a very early stage in the development
of hyperglycemia was shown, and by the time fasting plasma
glucose exceeded 115 mg/dl, first-phase insulin responses
were found mostly to be absent (77). when the first-phase
insulin secretion was plotted as a function of fasting plasma
glucose, in a study of pima indians, with progressive glucose
intolerance from normal to dm2, it was apparent that very
few persons with fasting plasma glucose above 110 mg/dl
were able to mount even a minimal response to the iv glucose
challenge (13). hemi-pancreatectomy led to impaired ␤-cell
function in healthy humans (78), whereas in rats, partial
pancreatectomy results in impaired insulin secretion resembling that encountered in dm2 despite extensive regeneration of the remnant and only a modest increase in glycemia
at the time of the study (79). it may be concluded from these
studies that reduced ␤-cell mass can lead to impaired function, but the mechanism is not yet apparent, nor is it necessarily the sole factor (21).
two possible explanations account for the impaired ␤-cell
function consequent to decreased ␤-cell mass (21): 1) increased
insulin demand on residual ␤-cells per se leading to changes in
function (by er stress or other mechanisms); and 2) hyperglycemia consequent to decreased ␤-cell mass driving the impairment in ␤-cell function. however, the decreasing ␤-cell mass
experimentally more often than not leads to a more or less

fig. 1. proposed model for the interplay between “aggressors” of the
␤-cell in the pathogenesis of dm2. [reproduced with permission from
m. y. donath et al.: j mol med 81:455– 470, 2003 (67).]

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

prolonged period of hyperglycemia (79, 80). moreover, in many
instances there is compensatory regeneration of ␤-cells that
might not be as well-differentiated as older, fully mature cells.
regardless, there are in vitro studies on islet and in vivo studies
by glucose infusion showing that high glucose for prolonged
periods of time leads to impaired ␤-cell mass and/or function.
therefore, accepting that glucose plays a central role among
those factors contributing to ␤-cell demise whereas transient
postprandial hyperglycemic excursions may predominantly induce ␤-cell proliferation in insulin-resistant individuals, this
adaptive mechanism may fail in the long term and be overridden by ␤-cell apoptosis. however, it is unlikely that glucotoxicity acts alone, and the negative contribution of saturated fas,
lipoproteins, leptin, and circulating and locally produced cytokines will burn out the ␤-cells further. these factors will
induce apoptosis and/or necrosis, which in the presence of
proinflammatory cytokines may activate specific immunological phenomena, ultimately resulting in autoimmunity as indicated above (46).
notwithstanding, dm2 in humans progresses over time,
whereas impaired ␤-cell function appears to be reversible at
least to a certain degree in the early stages of the disease. in
effect, the overnight infusion of  xxxg873xxx  (glp-1)
in dm2 improved first- and second-phase insulin responses to
a 2-h hyperglycemic clamp. all responses on glp-1 were not
significantly different from nondiabetic control subjects (81).
besides, a recovery of the first-phase insulin secretion was observed after the addition of rosiglitazone given for 6 months to
failing sulfonylurea and metformin regimen in dm2 with a
duration of diabetes of 7.6 ⫾ 2.1 yr (82). similarly, the iv administration of the incretin mimetic, exenatide, maintained for
30 min, to dm2 patients treated with diet/exercise, with a
duration of the disease of 4 ⫾ 2 yr, restored the first and second
phases of insulin secretion, after glucose challenge, with a pattern similar to that found in healthy paired controls (83). these
results are compatible with the view that the deficient pattern
of insulin secretion is mainly functional in nature and that the
reduction in pancreatic islet mass is moderate in patients with
dm2 (4, 83). however, the recovery of insulin secretion should
be tested in further studies focusing on patients with more
advanced stages of dm2. furthermore, if an individual with
dm2, even with severe hyperglycemia, is rendered euglycemic
by either pharmacological means or changes in lifestyle, ␤-cell
function, in particular glucose responsiveness, can be restored,
and this will be discussed later. this is particularly true in newly
diagnosed dm2 (84, 85) where the limiting threshold for reversibility of decreased ␤-cell mass has probably not been
passed. rendering an individual with dm2 euglycemic interrupts the vicious circle linking decreased ␤-cell function with
hyperglycemia. this might not only restore insulin secretory
patterns but also allow for some restoration of ␤-cell mass.
although there are many reasons to believe that this may occur
in humans as it does in animal models of reduced ␤-cell mass,
this has never been documented by virtue of the fact that ␤-cell
mass cannot be measured noninvasively at the time of writing.
understanding the mechanisms of ␤-cell death and thus
the decreased ␤-cell mass and impaired function has provided the basis for a new therapeutic target, ␤-cell preservation, particularly when one considers the reversibility of
impaired ␤-cell function and possibly ␤-cell mass as dis-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

cussed above. in this context, it should be noted that longacting incretin mimetics, which besides enhancing glucosesensing and insulin secretory capacity of the endocrine
pancreas have also been shown in preclinical studies in rodents, have additional effects on ␤-cell mass by stimulating
proliferation and inhibiting apoptosis (86).
other examples include the thiazolidinediones (tzds),
which have been linked to not only improving insulin secretory capacity but also preventing the loss of ␤-cell mass by
reducing apoptosis with maintenance of ␤-cell neogenesis in
zdf rats (87) as well as in other murine models of dm2 (88).
in human beings, tzds were able to preserve and recover
␤-cell function (82, 89) besides improving insulin sensitivity.
summary/conclusions. numbered among the factors for
progressive loss of ␤-cell function and mass are glucotoxicity
and lipotoxicity, which are closely interrelated in the sense
that lipotoxicity does not exist without chronic hyperglycemia and, depending on duration of exposure to glucose or
ffas and on genetic background of the islets, may induce
␤-cell proliferation and have pro- or antiapoptotic effects.
proinflammatory cytokines and leptin, produced by fat
tissue, could also affect ␤-cells. in particular, leptin, tnf-␣,
il-6, and  xxxd2806xxx  are a linkage of obesity to
dm2. leptin in islets leads to ␤-cell apoptosis, whereas
tnf-␣ and il-6 may also modulate ␤-cell survival. apoptotic
cells can provoke mobilization of t cells reactive to ␤-cell
antigens, culminating in autoimmune destruction of ␤-cells
similar to that observed at earlier stages of type l diabetes.
regarding the iapp, several factors support its role in the
pathophysiology of ␤-cell loss in dm2. alternatively, it is
possible that iapp formation is secondary to the onset of
hyperglycemia and not of primary importance in the pathophysiology of dm2.
the link of reduced ␤-cell mass to impaired function may be
due to an increased demand on residual ␤-cells per se leading
to changes in function (er stress or other mechanisms) or related to the hyperglycemia consequent to decreased ␤-cell mass,
driving the impairment in ␤-cell function. in vitro and in vivo
studies suggested that persistently elevated glucose levels play
a central role among those factors (ffas, lipoproteins, leptin,
and cytokines) contributing to ␤-cell demise.
understanding the mechanisms of ␤-cell death and thus
decreased ␤-cell mass and impaired function has provided
the basis to ␤-cell preservation, particularly when one considers that the impaired ␤-cell function and possibly ␤-cell
mass appear to be reversible, particularly at early stages of
the disease where the limiting threshold for reversibility of
decreased ␤-cell mass has probably not been passed.
iv. clinical intervention to preserve or “rejuvenate”
␤-cells
a. short-term intensive insulin therapy of newly diagnosed
dm2

optimal metabolic control, especially early intensive glycemic control, plays a role in the prevention of progressive
␤-cell dysfunction and possibly destruction of the ␤-cells
with worsening of diabetes. many reports have shown that
induction of normoglycemia in dm2 results in both im-

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 195

proved ␤-cell function and insulin resistance (90, 91). rarely,
however, has a prolonged benefit been demonstrated with
virtually all patients becoming hyperglycemic again after a
few weeks (92, 93). until recently, it was unknown whether
such outcomes pertained to new-onset dm2, although patients having failed diet therapy may show a good response
to a short period of intensive insulin therapy by continuous
sc insulin infusion (csii) (94). ryan et al. (84) recently reported that, in 16 severe (mean fasting plasma glucose of 239
mg/dl) newly diagnosed dm2 patients, a 2- to 3-wk course
of intensive insulin therapy by multiple daily insulin injection (nph plus regular) was able to maintain good glycemic
control at 1 yr in seven of the subjects on diet therapy alone,
whereas eight required oral hypoglycemic agent and one
required insulin therapy. the distinguishing features of
those who did not require oral agents or insulin treatment
were that they required less insulin during the active insulin
therapy phase (0.37 ⫾ 0.05 vs. 0.73 ⫾ 0.07 u/kg䡠d) and were
able to attain a lower fasting serum glucose level at the end
of the period of insulin therapy (106 ⫾ 5 vs. 139 ⫾ 7 mg/dl).
it is interesting to highlight that the majority of the study
patients (15 of 16) had an evident recovery of the area under
the curve (auc) insulin (oral glucose tolerance test) after the
end of insulin therapy, being dramatically higher than study
entry values associated with a significant reduction in auc
glucose by year end, probably related to the correction of
gluco- and lipotoxicity (significant reduction in triglycerides
and ffas). thus, the potential benefits of early, aggressive
intervention with insulin therapy to counter both ␤-cell dysfunction (and insulin resistance) must be considered: effects
of insulin therapy against chronic hyperglycemia and lipotoxicity-induced apoptosis of the ␤-cells.
in a similar study (85), 138 newly diagnosed dm2 patients
with fasting glucose greater than 200 mg/dl were hospitalized and treated with csii for 2 wk. after csii, the patients
were followed longitudinally on diet alone. optimal glucose
control was achieved within 6.3 ⫾ 3.9 d in 126 patients. the
remission rates (percentage of individuals maintaining near
euglycemia) at the third, sixth, 12th, and 24th months were
72.6, 67.0, 47.1, and 42.3%, respectively. patients who maintained glycemic control for more than 12 months (remission
group) had greater recovery of ␤-cell function than those
who did not (nonremission group) when assessed immediately after csii. homa of ␤-cell function (homa-␤) and
auc insulin during iv glucose tolerance test, as well as
change in air, were significantly higher in the remission
group. furthermore,  xxxg1193xxx  decreased highly significantly; thus the  xxxg1193xxx /insulin ratio was also reduced highly
significantly (indication of an improvement in the quality of
insulin secretion) as well as the homa of insulin resistance
(homa-ir; surrogate for evaluation of the degree of insulin
resistance) in the remission group. li et al. (85) concluded that
the improvement of ␤-cell function, particularly the restoration of the first-phase insulin secretion, could be responsible for the remission.
summary/conclusions. among the clinical interventions to
preserve or “rejuvenate” ␤-cells, short-term intensive insulin
therapy of newly diagnosed dm2 has been proposed: 2- to
3-wk intensive therapy with multiple daily insulin injections
of nph plus regular or csii. the improvement of ␤-cell

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

196

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

function, especially the restoration of the first-phase insulin
secretion, would lead to remission at least for a period of
time. furthermore,  xxxg1193xxx  decreased highly significantly
as did pi/iri ratio, indicating an improvement in the quality
of insulin secretion.
b. modulation of the ␤-cell atp-sensitive k⫹ (katp)
channel

it has been well demonstrated that insulin release by the
␤-cell is initiated by an increase in the intracellular ca2⫹
concentration that is mediated by ca2⫹ influx through voltage-gated ca2⫹ channels in the plasma membrane. the opening and closing (gating) of these ca2⫹ channels is determined
by ␤-cell membrane potential, which is in turn regulated by
the activity of the  xxxg1253xxx . in the unstimulated ␤-cell,
katp channels are open and the outward movement of k⫹
ions through these channels holds the membrane potential at
a hyperpolarized level at which voltage-gated ca2⫹ channels
are closed. when plasma glucose concentration rises, glucose
uptake and metabolism by the pancreatic ␤-cell are enhanced
and, possibly through changes in intracellular adenine nucleotide concentrations, induce  xxxg1253xxx  closure. this
leads to membrane depolarization, opening voltage-gated
ca2⫹ channels, and an increase in cytosolic ca2⫹ that triggers
the exocytosis of insulin. drugs like the sulfonylureas act by
inhibiting the  xxxg1253xxx  directly, and thereby through
depolarizing the ␤-cell and stimulating ca2⫹ influx they enhance insulin secretion. another class of drugs is the kchannel openers. these comprise a structurally unrelated
group of compounds that have the common property of
opening katp channels, which hyperpolarizes the ␤-cells and
prevents insulin release, even in the presence of glucose. the
most potent  xxxg1253xxx  opener in the ␤-cell used in clinical
medicine is  xxxd1868xxx  (95).
the concept of deficient insulin stores as a contributing
factor to ␤-cell dysfunction in dm2 was recognized 30 yr ago
when  xxxd1868xxx  was used to inhibit insulin secretion (and
induce ␤-cell “rest”) in patients with dm2 receiving insulin,
leading to restoration of the insulin response to a combined
stimulation of ␤-cells with glucagon plus  xxxd3394xxx , not
observed in control diabetics receiving placebo with insulin
(96).  xxxd1868xxx  has successfully been used to improve ␤-cell
function in animal studies, such as the recovery of ␤-cell
responsiveness in 90% pancreatectomized diabetic rats (97),
and to prevent the progress of deranged ␤-cell function in
rats with  xxxd3249xxx -induced diabetes (98). besides, in
vitro studies of human islets have demonstrated that chronic
hyperglycemia desensitizes ␤-cells to glucose being accompanied by three major ca2⫹ abnormalities: elevated basal
ca2⫹, loss of glucose-induced rise in ca2⫹, and oscillatory
activity disturbance with a decrease in glucose-induced slow
oscillations. relieving overstimulation with coculture with
 xxxd1868xxx  (and 486 mg/dl glucose) significantly restored
postculture insulin responses to glucose, lowered basal ca2⫹,
and normalized glucose-induced oscillatory activity, but
failed to restore ca2⫹ during postculture glucose stimulation
(99). therefore, the induction of ␤-cell rest by selective activation of ␤-cell katp channels preserving insulin stores and
pulsatile insulin secretion may provide a strategy to protect

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

␤-cells from chronic overstimulation and to improve islet
function. in effect, short-term  xxxd1868xxx  treatment of obese
dm2 patients with poor metabolic control exerted moderate
but beneficial effects on important parameters of insulin
secretion: absent insulin response to an iv glucose challenge
and glucose potentiation of arginine-induced insulin secretion after insulin treatment, whereas a response to both tests,
albeit moderate, could be demonstrated after insulin plus
 xxxd1868xxx  treatment. these effects could be dissociated from
confounding effects of changes of glycemia because insulin
infusion was used to achieve close to identical degrees of
glycemia during the two treatment periods. consequently,
the results of this study indicate the beneficial effects of ␤-cell
rest. besides, a significant reduction of the molar ratio of
 xxxg1193xxx  to insulin was observed only after  xxxd1868xxx  plus
insulin (100). the response to glucose and glucose potentiation of arginine-induced insulin secretion has been shown
to correlate to the functioning islet mass as demonstrated
after islet autotransplantation in humans (101).
it was also observed that, in adults with autoimmune
diabetes,  xxxd1868xxx  treatment at onset preserved some residual insulin secretion for up to 18 months, when compared
with a placebo group, when both groups were also receiving
multiple insulin injection therapy (102). a similar study was
performed in childhood type 1 diabetes, demonstrating that
partial inhibition of insulin secretion for 3 months with  xxxd1868xxx  at onset of the disease, in addition to multiple daily
insulin injections, extended the period of remission and temporarily preserved residual insulin production compared
with placebo (maximum at 6 months, followed by a progressive decline) (103).
although the beneficial effect of  xxxd1868xxx  may be due to
induction of ␤-cell “rest,” it could also reflect in part the
antiapoptotic effect of this type of drug because it was demonstrated that incubation of murine pancreatic islets and
␤-cells with glucose induced apoptosis of ␤-cells that is ca2⫹
dependent, because introduction to the culture medium of
 xxxd1868xxx , which blocked glucose-induced ca2⫹ increase,
inhibited apoptosis (45). it is interesting to point out that the
closure of katp channels by the sulfonylureas  xxxd3394xxx 
and  xxxd2215xxx  may also induce ca2⫹-dependent ␤-cell
apoptosis in rodent and human islets (45, 104, 105), but this
effect has only been observed in vitro and not consistently
(106). the induction of ␤-cell rest by a new selective katpchannel opener (nn414) preserved insulin stores and pulsatile insulin secretion without restoring the orderliness of
insulin secretion in human islets, isolated from cadaveric
organ donors, cultured at high glucose concentrations (198
mg/dl) (107). according to ritzel et al. (107), the concept of
␤-cell rest may provide a strategy to protect ␤-cells from
chronic overstimulation and improve islet function. the authors also provide evidence that impaired glucose-regulated
insulin secretion in dm2 partially involves mechanisms distinct. afrom insulin stores and insulin secretion rates (isrs).
in line with findings indicated in section iv.a related to
insulin therapy of newly diagnosed dm2, a clinical study by
alvarsson et al. (108), comparing insulin and sulfonylurea
(giibenclamide) treatment of recently (⬍2 yr) diagnosed
dm2, showed that treatment with insulin given twice daily
as premixed insulin (30% soluble and 70% nph) preserved

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

␤-cell function (glucagon-stimulated c-peptide response)
more effectively than  xxxd2215xxx  for the duration of the
study (2 yr). on the other hand, the nonsulfonylurea secretagogues (meglitinides)  xxxd3098xxx  and natiglinide, which
work similarly to sulfonylurea agents but have a more rapid
onset and shorter duration of action, when applied for their
respective circulating half-lives (less than 2 h) in vitro, appear
not to have any apoptotic effect on cultured human islets.
thus, short-acting insulin secretagogues may be preferred to
long-acting ones, such as  xxxd2215xxx , due to the fact that
patients will be less exposed to proapoptotic stimuli during
prolonged treatment with short-acting agents. this was according to in vitro studies of human islets, but in vivo confirmation is necessary because several additional factors including ␤-cell proliferation and regeneration may
compensate for  xxxd2215xxx -induced apoptosis (105).
summary/conclusions. the induction of ␤-cell “rest” by selective activation of ␤-cell katp channels, using drugs such
as  xxxd1868xxx  and the  xxxg1253xxx  opener nn414, that hyperpolarize ␤-cells, preserves insulin stores and pulsatile
insulin secretion, thus protecting ␤-cells from chronic overstimulation and improving islet function besides reducing
the pi/iri ratio. although the beneficial effect of those selective  xxxg1253xxx  openers may be due to inducing ␤-cell
“rest,” it could also reflect in part the antiapoptotic effect of
these drugs by blocking the glucose-induced cytosolic ca2⫹
increase, secondary to the ␤-cell katp channels closure associated with the rise in plasma glucose, as shown in in vitro
studies which have demonstrated that glucose-induced apoptosis of ␤-cells is ca2⫹ dependent. the closure of katp
channels by sulfonylureas,  xxxd3394xxx  and  xxxd2215xxx ,
may also induce ca2⫹-dependent ␤-cell apoptosis also in in
vitro studies in rodent and human islets. if these findings
translate to patients with dm2, at least some long-acting
sulfonylureas may have adverse effects on ␤-cells, whereas
short-acting ones will be preferred due to the fact that patients will be less exposed to proapoptotic stimuli during
protracted treatment with these agents.
c. antiapoptotic drugs

1. leptin. as indicated earlier, leptin in zdf rat islet protects
the ␤-cell from ffa-induced apoptosis (109). however, it
induces ␤-cell apoptosis in human islets by the mechanism
previously discussed (70).
2.  xxxd2951xxx .  xxxd2951xxx  acts as an antioxidant in
vivo in diabetic animal models, preventing ros formation
and lipid peroxidation in cells and tissues, while also preventing oxidant-induced apoptosis (110). moreover, at
higher doses this inhibits  xxxg1578xxx  with
reduction in  xxxd2738xxx , which has been shown to mediate
il-1␤-induced impairment of ␤-cell function and ultimately
cause ␤-cell apoptosis as reported in cultured prediabetic
zdf islets (59, 111). because ros are known to increase
intracellular advanced glycation end-products (ages) and
antioxidants are known to inhibit age formation (110), presumably the time required for formation of immunodetectable intracellular ages is much longer than the time-course
for oxidant-induced apoptosis, suggesting that intracellular

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 197

age formation does not play a causal role in this process of
oxidant-induced apoptosis. furthermore, diabetic models
using  xxxd2951xxx  have also shown a reduction in diabetes-related complications such as retinopathy, neuropathy,
and nephropathy. specifically, reduction in retinal microvessel formation, albuminuria, and the prevention or decrease
in motor and sensory nerve conduction velocity have been
reported (see references cited in ref. 112). in line with previously indicated considerations (47), the prescription of antioxidants as adjunct therapy in dm2 is warranted to determine whether this approach would prevent continued
deterioration in ␤-cell function, particularly when glycemic
control is not satisfactory (47). unfortunately, studies with
antioxidant vitamins to date have not improved glycemic
control. additionally,  xxxd2951xxx  has not been used in
humans because of its side effect profile in many organs.
summary/conclusions.  xxxd2951xxx  acts as an antioxidant in vivo, in diabetic animal models, preventing ros
formation and lipid peroxidation and oxidant-induced apoptosis and at higher doses inhibits inducible  xxxd2738xxx 
synthase with reduction in  xxxd2738xxx , which was shown to
ultimately cause ␤-cell apoptosis in cultured prediabetic zdf
rat islets.  xxxd2951xxx  has not been used in humans
because of its side effect profile in many organs.
3. effect of tzds on ␤-cells. the tzds are agonists of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ␥ (ppar␥), a nuclear
receptor that regulates transcription of genes involved in
lipid and glucose metabolism. although predominantly expressed in adipose tissue, ppar␥ is present in other insulinsensitive tissues, including the pancreatic islet cells (113).
fully 10% of genes transcribed in adipose tissue are differentially expressed with the use of a ppar␥ agonist, as well
as 2% of all genes expressed in liver and 1% of those expressed in skeletal muscle (114). in adipose tissue, stimulation of ppar␥ increases adipocyte differentiation, resulting
in an increased number of small, insulin-sensitive adipocytes
(115). the development of these insulin-sensitive cells enhances glucose uptake, improving glycemic control. improved insulin sensitivity, reported for tzds, both in monotherapy and combination in dm2, has the potential to protect
␤-cells because they may reduce the demand on the pancreas
(see references cited in ref. 116). lowering plasma glucose
may reduce the risk of glucotoxicity. in addition, by increasing adipose-tissue mass, tzds promote fa uptake and storage in adipose tissue, thus reducing levels of circulating ffas
where this has the potential to alleviate lipotoxicity. hence,
tzds retain fat where it belongs, according to the “fa steal”
hypothesis (115). reductions in ffas may be mediated by
suppression of tnf-␣ expression, which has been demonstrated by in vitro studies such as those of arner (117), who
has reported that rosiglitazone suppresses tnf-␣ to almost
undetectable levels in human preadipocytes. thus, according to arner (117), tzds reduce the release of ffas from the
adipocytes by two mechanisms: 1) increasing the insulin
sensitivity of the cell, and thereby improving the antilipolytic
effect of insulin; and 2) reducing levels of tnf-␣, known to
suppress the antilipolytic properties of insulin by inhibiting
the insulin-signaling cascade.
although rosiglitazone seems to be a pure ppar␥ agonist,

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

198

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

the other tzd approved for the medical therapy is pioglitazone, which seems to also act like a partial ppar␣ agonist
(118). in general, ppar␣ regulates genes involved in fa
uptake and oxidation (liver, kidney, heart, and skeletal muscle), inflammation, and vascular function, whereas ppar␥,
as shown, regulates genes involved in fa uptake and storage, inflammation, and glucose homeostasis (119).
a. animal data. in obese zdf rats, the overaccumulation of
fat in the pancreatic islets induces ␤-cell dysfunction, reflecting a mutation of the  xxxg1320xxx  that blocks the normal
triglyceride-lowering action of leptin on islets, as discussed
previously, leading to lipotoxicity through exaggerated production of  xxxd2738xxx  (111). in isolated islets from obese zdf
rats, addition of troglitazone halved the triglyceride content,
doubled insulin secretion stimulated by arginine, and produced a greater than 30-fold increase to that stimulated by
glucose (120). this is consistent with the ability of tzds to
prevent tnf-␣-induced inhibition of insulin signaling by
islets. in the same animal model, rosiglitazone treatment was
shown to maintain ␤-cell proliferation and to produce a
5-fold attenuation in the net rise in ␤-cell death, preventing
the loss of ␤-cell mass indicated previously (87). because
excessive ␤-cell apoptosis is associated with excessive accumulation of intracellular triglycerides, as reported earlier
(59), staining of islet cells for insulin in diabetic db/db mice
has shown evidence of regranulation when the islet cell triglyceride content had been reduced with rosiglitazone (121).
furthermore, pioglitazone given to three murine models of
dm2 improved insulin secretory capacity and prevented the
loss of ␤-cell mass by reduction of oxidative stress with 1.5to 15-fold higher levels of pancreatic insulin (122). the decrease of tnf-␣ expression by pioglitazone in adipose tissue
in db/db mice (123) might be associated, as indicated above,
with an improvement in ␤-cell dysfunction and survival.
treatment with rosiglitazone has also been shown to prevent
islet amyloidosis in nondiabetic hiapp transgenic mice (124).
in conclusion, the most relevant data in rodents indicated
that the tzds decrease ␤-cell apoptosis, maintaining its neogenesis and preventing islet amyloidosis.
b. in vitro data in human ␤-cells. ppar␥ mrna is expressed
in isolated human pancreatic islets to a greater extent than
ppar␣ mrna, with predominance of ppar␥2. this could
be interpreted as a condition favoring lipid accumulation
and, hence, lipid-induced damage (125). the expression of
ppar␥2 was markedly and time-dependently reduced by
exposure to progressively higher concentrations of ffas.
this effect was not affected by the concomitant presence of
high glucose. the presence of ffas also produced deleterious cytostatic effect, inhibiting glucose-stimulated insulin
release by 80%, as well as reducing islet insulin content by
75% and reducing insulin mrna expression (125). however,
incubation with rosiglitazone, a well-known ppar␥ agonist,
prevented ffa-induced down-regulation of ppar␥ and insulin mrna expression along with glucose-stimulation insulin release (125). in the same model, high concentrations of
ffas produced an almost 3-fold increase in rates of islet cell
death, in association with significant increases in activity of
the protease enzymes  xxxg341xxx  ( xxxg341xxx ) and caspase 9, key

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

mediators of apoptosis (104). incubation with rosiglitazone at
a concentration of 15 mg/ml attenuated islet cell death and
normalized caspase activity levels (126).
zeender et al. (127) were able to protect cultured human
islets using pioglitazone (and  xxxd3219xxx ) against apoptosis and impaired function induced by il-1␤ and high
glucose by blocking nf-␬b activation.
lin et al. (128), noting the association of dm2 with increased ␤-cell apoptosis and the presence of islet amyloid
derived from iapp, showed that iapp induces apoptosis in
cultured human pancreatic islets and that the addition of
rosiglitazone to the incubation prevented the iapp-induced
apoptosis.
c. mechanism of action of tzds on the ␤-cell
1) indirect effects by amelioration of insulin sensitivity. tzds
consistently lower fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations in clinical studies as well as plasma ffas in type 2
diabetics, with a reduction of gluco- and lipotoxicity. furthermore, as mentioned above, tzds may directly protect
the ␤-cell from lipotoxic insult (125). besides, insulin concentrations also decrease in the majority of trials, mirroring
a decreased secretory demand on ␤-cells. such changes indicate that tzds act as insulin sensitizers, which has been
confirmed by direct measurements in in vivo studies in humans. although the insulin-sensitizing effect of tzds is well
established, less is known about their influence on insulin
secretion. it now appears that tzds normalize the asynchronous insulin secretion that characterizes ␤-cell failure. in a
placebo-controlled study in patients with dm2, 13-wk treatment with rosiglitazone was shown to increase the ability of
an oscillatory glucose infusion to program high-frequency
pulsatile insulin secretion, despite the absence of any direct
action on ␤-cell secretory capacity. it was postulated that the
improvement in ␤-cell function could be related to a reduction in glucotoxicity due to the improved glycemic control
and/or improved insulin sensitivity seen with tzds (129).
this could suggest an increased ability of the ␤-cell to sense
and respond to glucose changes within the physiological
range after tzd treatment.
2) direct effects via ppar␥ activation in pancreatic islets. as
a class effect, tzds consistently improve basal ␤-cell function, as measured by the homa model and as observed
during tzd monotherapy and combination therapy (89,
130 –134). further evidence that tzds exert beneficial effects
on ␤-cells derive from a study in which 2-month treatment
with pioglitazone restored the first-phase insulin response to
an iv glucose tolerance test in patients with igt and with
frank dm2 (135). similar results were reported in a randomized 6-month study comparing the addition of rosiglitazone
vs. insulin in patients with dm2 who were inadequately
controlled on  xxxd2203xxx  and metformin, using a frequently
sampled iv glucose tolerance test (fsivgtt) (82). at study
end, the airg was significantly increased with rosiglitazone,
with no effect of exogenous insulin apparent. ␤-cell function
determined by the disposition index, calculated as the product of airg and the insulin sensitivity index (si ⫽ 1/homair) also increased greatly. it should be noted that the resto-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

ration of the first-phase insulin response to glucose was
independent of the correction of glucose toxicity.
furthermore, extension studies with tzds indicate that
improvements in ␤-cell function are sustained in some individuals over time. four 52-wk clinical trials involving more
than 3,700 patients with dm2, reviewed by campbell (136),
showed that pioglitazone was an effective long-term treatment, both as monotherapy and in combination with metformin or sulfonylurea. as well as maintaining glycemic
control over the long term, pioglitazone also yielded benefits
in terms of improvements in fasting insulin (which was reduced as  xxxg1193xxx  and c-peptide), lipid parameters, and
hypoglycemia compared with other monotherapies or combination treatments. the longest follow-up study was that by
bell and ovalle (137, 138) of type 2 diabetics on sulfonylurea,
metformin, and rosiglitazone for 60 months; 22 (68%) patients in the study who were put on the triple therapy remained relatively well controlled. the predictor of failure
and the need for insulin after a mean duration of 30 months
was the nonsignificant or lacking increase in the meal- or
glucagon-stimulated c-peptide. at 60 months, a frequent
finding was also a reduction in fasting c-peptide in the
failure group.
tzds may also improve insulin processing, as demonstrated by a reduction in the pi/iri ratio, an important indicator of ␤-cell dysfunction outlined earlier (23). rosiglitazone produced a decrease in the pi/iri ratio in comparison
with both placebo and sulfonylureas (139, 140), and similar
results have also been reported for pioglitazone vs. placebo
(141). figure 2 summarizes the effects of tzds on the ␤-cell
(142).
d. further clinical evidence of tzd effects on human ␤-cell
function. table 1 shows the clinical studies using rosiglitazone and pioglitazones, besides those presented above, previously published or in abstract form, that have demonstrated a beneficial effect of both agents in improving insulin
sensitivity and recovery or improvement of ␤-cell function
(141, 143–149). these results could suggest that the improvement in ␤-cell function could be, at least in part, secondary
to the increase in insulin sensitivity (indirect effect on the
␤-cells). further support for the beneficial effects of tzds on
␤-cell function is provided by a study in which troglitazone

fig. 2. mechanism of action of tzds on the pancreatic ␤-cell. [reproduced with permission from h. walter and g. lübben: drugs
65:1–13, 2005 (142).]

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 199

improved ␤-cell function (150), as evaluated by meal-stimulated c-peptide levels or expressed by c-peptide/glucose
ratio, when given to dm2 patients failing on metformin plus
sulfonylurea (n ⫽ 28). in contrast, there was no effect on
␤-cell function when metformin was given to patients failing
on sulfonylurea monotherapy (n ⫽ 28). these observations
were particularly striking because the troglitazone-treated
patients had a longer duration of diabetes (mean of 16 yr)
than the metformin plus sulfonylurea-treated subjects (8 yr)
(150). these researchers have previously reported (82) that
addition of rosiglitazone restored the first-phase insulin response to glucose in poorly controlled patients previously
treated with maximum doses of sulfonylurea plus metformin. however, the addition of insulin had no effect on
␤-cell function. in both studies, the beneficial effect of tzds
on ␤-cell function was independent of glycemic control (because with a similar reduction in hba1c, no improvement in
␤-cell function was found in the insulin-treated group), indicating that tzds can promote recovery of ␤-cell function
independently of the amelioration of insulin sensitivity.
e. tzds in the prevention of diabetes
1) troglitazone in prevention of diabetes (tripod). in this
study (151), 266 hispanic women with previous gestational
diabetes mellitus who were at high risk for dm2 were randomized into placebo (n ⫽ 133) or troglitazone (n ⫽ 133)
groups. troglitazone, approved in the united states in 1997,
was the first tzd for treatment of dm2, and it was withdrawn from the market in 2000 because of hepatotoxicity.
during a median follow-up of 30 months, average annual
diabetes incidence rates were 12.1 and 5.4 in women assigned
to placebo and troglitazone, respectively (p ⬍ 0.01). eight
months after troglitazone was withdrawn, 15% of the placebo
subjects and 2.3% of the troglitazone group developed diabetes during a mean follow-up of 4.3 yr. the protective effect
of the tzd was most prominent in women with a large
reduction in insulin output during the fsivgtt. reducing
the high secretory demands placed on ␤-cells through amelioration of chronic insulin resistance could preserve ␤-cell
function and prevent dm2 for at least 4 –5 yr.
2) pioglitazone in prevention of diabetes (pipod). eightynine hispanic women with prior gestational diabetes mellitus who had completed participation in the tripod study
and were not diabetic (two thirds had igt) participated in the
pipod study for a planned 3 yr of drug treatment and 6
months of postdrug washout (152), with the annual diabetes
incidence rate being 4.6%. the similarity of findings between
the pipod and tripod studies supports a class effect of
tzds reducing insulin secretory demands through a decrease in insulin resistance and preserving pancreatic ␤-cell
function. the risk of diabetes proved lowest in the third of
the women with the largest reduction in total fsivgtt insulin auc after 1 yr of treatment and highest in the third of
women with the smallest reduction after l yr, thus indicating
a “stabilization of ␤-cell function.”
3) diabetes prevention program (dpp). the dpp was a randomized clinical trial of prevention of dm2 in people at high
risk of diabetes (153). from 1996 to 1998, 3,324 adults with

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

200

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

table 1. clinical trials evidencing tzd effects on insulin sensitivity and ␤-cell function
first author, year (ref.)

publications
fonseca, 2000 (143)

randomization

study length
(wk)

insulin sensitivity

␤-cell function

26

1 homa-s

1 homa-␤

26

1 insulin sensitivity

12

1 homa-s
1 stimulated insulin
sensitivity (euglycemic
clamp)

1 insulinogenic
index
1 homa-␤
no change airg

pio vs. su ( xxxd2203xxx ) (n ⫽ 87)

36

rasouli, 2004 (146)
vinik, 2004 (147)

pio vs. met (igt) (n ⫽ 10)
rosi ⫹ su ( xxxd2204xxx ) (n ⫽ 115)
vs. su ⫹ placebo (n ⫽ 110)

10
24

2 homa score (insulin
resistance marker)
1 si (fsivgtt)
1 homa-s
or (2 homa-ir)

hamdy, 2005 (148)

pio vs. placebo/su (n ⫽ 30),
pio vs. placebo (igt) (n ⫽ 8)
pio vs. met vs. su ( xxxd2202xxx )
(n ⫽ 2406)

16

1 si (fsivgtt)

1 airg
1 homa-␤
1 insulinogenic
index/homair
1 airg

48

1 homa-s

1 homa-␤

miyasaki, 2003 (144)
wallace, 2004 (141)

abstracts
pfützner, 2004 (145)

de winter, 2005 (149)

met ⫹ rosi vs. met ⫹ placebo
(n ⫽ 348)
dose response to pio vs. placebo
(n ⫽ 58)
pio vs. placebo (n ⫽ 19)

1 insulin

 xxxg1193xxx /
insulin

2

2

su, sulfonylurea; met, metformin; rosi, rosiglitazone; pio, pioglitazone; insulinogenic index, ⌬auc insulin/⌬auc glucose [oral glucose
tolerance test (ogtt)].

igt and fasting plasma glucose from 100 to 140 mg/dl before
june 1997 and from 95 to 125 mg/dl after this date were
randomized to receive placebo (n ⫽ 582), metformin (n ⫽
587), troglitazone (n ⫽ 585), or intensive lifestyle intervention
(n ⫽ 589). the incidence of diabetes during an average follow-up of 2.8 yr (after which the study was interrupted)
stood at 11.0, 7.8, and 4.8 cases per 100 person-years in the
placebo, metformin, and lifestyle change groups, respectively. the incidence of diabetes was reduced by 58% in the
lifestyle group and by 31% in the metformin group relative
to standard lifestyle intervention (placebo). over concern
regarding its liver toxicity, the troglitazone arm was discontinued in june 1998 after 0.5–1.5 yr (mean, 0.9 yr) and then
compared with other dpp interventions, considering both
the short-term “in-trial” results and the longer term results
after troglitazone was discontinued. during the mean 0.9 yr
of troglitazone treatment, the diabetes incidence rate was 3.0
cases per 100 person-years, compared with 12.0, 6.7, and 5.1
cases per 100 person-years in the placebo, metformin, and
intensive lifestyle participants (p ⬍ 0.001, troglitazone vs.
placebo; p ⬍ 0.02, troglitazone vs. metformin; p ⫽ 0.18, troglitazone vs. intensive lifestyle). indirect measures of insulin
secretion and sensitivity, estimated from the oral glucose
tolerance test, suggested that the effect of the tzd was, at
least in part, due to improved insulin sensitivity with maintenance of insulin secretion. during the 3 yr after troglitazone
withdrawal, the diabetes incidence rate was almost identical
to that of the placebo group. troglitazone, therefore, markedly reduced the incidence of diabetes during its limited
period of use, but this action did not persist (154).
4) tzd therapy in the prevention/delay of dm2 in patients with
ifg⫹igt. a total of 101 patients with ifg⫹igt received
troglitazone for an average of 10 months (after which the
drug was withdrawn from the u.s. market), then randomly
switched to rosiglitazone (n ⫽ 39) or pioglitazone (n ⫽ 62) for

a mean of 36 months (155). patients with ifg⫹igt who
received no antidiabetic medication served as a control
group (n ⫽ 71). mean hba1c and c-peptide levels measured
at 2 yr and study end-point (3 yr) decreased from baseline
(after troglitazone) for both tzds at the 2-yr assessment, and
reductions remained at that level at the end of the study. the
cumulative incidence rate of diabetes after 3 yr was 2.97%
after tzds vs. 26.8% in the control group (p ⬍ 0.001). an
estimated 4.2 patients would have to be treated with the
tzds, rosiglitazone or pioglitazone, for every one prevented
case of diabetes in the 3-yr study period (134). according to
the authors, the study provided support for the notion that
early detection through routine screening and the proper
preventative measures, including tzd treatment, can prevent or postpone the progression of high-risk patients with
ifg⫹igt of developing dm2.
5) the diabetes reduction assessment with ramipril and rosiglitazone medication (dream) trial. a total of 5269 adults
aged 30 yr or more, with ifg and/or igt and with no
previous cardiovascular disease, received rosiglitazone (n ⫽
2365) or placebo (n ⫽ 2634) and followed for a median of 3
yr (156). the primary outcome was a composite of incident
diabetes or death. at the end of the study, taking into consideration the few individuals who dropped out from each
group, 11.6% of the subjects given rosiglitazone and 26.0%
receiving placebo developed the composite primary outcome
(1.1% death and 10.6% dm2 in the rosiglitazone group vs.
1.3% death and 24.7% dm2 in the placebo group, p ⬍ 0.0001).
a total of 50.5% of the individuals on rosiglitazone and 30.3%
on placebo became normoglycemic (p ⬍ 0.0001).
summary/conclusions. tzds are agonists of ppar␥, a nuclear receptor that regulates transcription of genes involved
in lipid and glucose metabolism. regarding the effect of
tzds on ␤-cells, in murine models of dm2 and in isolated
human pancreatic islets, there is an improvement of insulin

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

secretory capacity and decrease in ␤-cell apoptosis, maintaining its neogenesis and a reduction of islet amyloid.
in relation to the mechanism of action of tzds on the
␤-cell, there are indirect and direct effects. the indirect effects
are related to tzd action as insulin sensitizers, with a reduction in gluco- and lipotoxicity. besides, it appears that
tzds normalize the asynchronous insulin secretion that
characterizes ␤-cell failure. the direct effects are via ppar␥
activation in pancreatic islet tzds consistently improving
basal ␤-cell function with significant improvement in airg
and increased disposition index (airg ⫻ 1/homa-ir), the
restoration of the first-phase insulin response to glucose being independent of the correction of glucose toxicity. clinical
studies using rosiglitazone or pioglitazone have demonstrated a beneficial effect of both agents in improving insulin
sensitivity and recovery or improvement of ␤-cell function,
which are sustained in some individuals over time. the addition of rosiglitazone improved the first-phase insulin response to glucose in poorly controlled patients previously
treated with maximum doses of sulfonylurea plus metformin. however, the addition of insulin had no effect on
␤-cell function, despite a similar reduction in hba1c.
the several trials on prevention of diabetes with tzds
include the following. in the tripod and pipod, troglitazone (withdrawn in 2000, because of hepatotoxicity) and
subsequently pioglitazone delayed or prevented the onset of
diabetes. the class effect of tzds on reducing insulin secretory demands (decrease in insulin output during fsivgtt)
through a decrease in insulin resistance preserved ␤-cell
function and prevented dm2. the dpp was a clinical trial of
dm2 prevention, conducted from 1996 to 1998 in individuals
at high risk of diabetes and involving adults with igt who
were randomized to placebo, metformin, troglitazone, or
intensive lifestyle intervention. the diabetes incidence rate
was 3.0 cases per 100 person-years in the troglitazone group
(mean, 0.9 yr), compared with 12.0, 6.7, and 5.1 cases per 100
person-years in placebo, metformin, and intensive lifestyle
participants. in the trial of tzd therapy in the prevention/
delay of dm2 in patients with ifg⫹igt, 101 subjects received troglitazone for an average of 10 months (at which
point the drug was withdrawn), then randomly switched to
rosiglitazone or pioglitazone for a mean of 36 months. the
cumulative incidence rate of diabetes after the 3 yr was 2.97%
after tzds vs.26.8% in the control group: ifg⫹igt (p ⬍
0.001). the study provided support for the idea that early
detection and proper preventive measures, including tzd
treatment, can prevent or postpone the progression of highrisk patients with igf⫹igt from developing dm2. finally,
the dream trial, showed that rosiglitazone for 3 yr reduced
significantly incident dm2 (10.6% vs. 24.7% on placebo) and
increased the likelihood of regression to normoglycemia in
adults with ifg and/or igt.
4. effect of incretin (glp-1), incretin mimetics, and enhancers in
␤-cells. incretin hormones are peptides released by the gastrointestinal tract in response to nutrient ingestion that enhance insulin secretion and aid in the overall maintenance of
glucose homeostasis through slowing of gastric emptying,
inhibition of glucagon secretion, and control of body weight

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 201

(157). the two major incretins are glp-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (gip).
glp-1 and gip are small peptides, having 30 and 42 amino
acids and released by the enteroendocrine l cells located in
the distal ileum and colon and by the k cells in the duodenum, respectively. both rapidly stimulate the release of insulin only when blood glucose levels are elevated, thereby
enhancing the glucose-sensing and insulin secretory capacity
of the endocrine pancreas during postprandial hyperglycemia (157). although glp-1 controls blood glucose via other
actions besides stimulating glucose-dependent insulin release by inhibiting glucagon secretion and suppression of
hepatic glucose output as well as decreasing the rate of
gastric emptying, gip decreases gastric emptying to a much
lesser degree and does not inhibit glucagon secretion (157,
158). glp-1 also activates regions in the central nervous
system important for control of satiety (159). however,
glp-1 and gip have also been shown in preclinical studies
to exert significant cytoprotective and proliferative effects on
the islets of langerhans (157, 160, 161). the incretin hormones elicit their actions through direct activation of distinct
g protein-coupled receptors expressed on islet ␤-cells (161,
162).
native glp-1 and gip are rapidly inactivated by the ubiquitously expressed proteolytic enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase
(dpp)-iv, which cleaves two n-terminal amino acids from
both peptides to produce inactive metabolites (163). regarding glp-1,  xxxg651xxx  activation results in the inactivation of
glp-1 (7-36) amide and the generation of the metabolite
glp-1 (9-36) amide, which did not activate the  xxxg899xxx , thus not enhancing the insulin secretion and not
blocking glp-1 (7-36) amide enhancement of insulin secretion during an iv glucose tolerance test in healthy subjects
(164). recently, the suppression of hepatic glucose production by glp-1 (9-36) amide not mediated by inhibition of
glucagon secretion or through interaction with the known
 xxxg899xxx  has been shown in subjects with normal oral
glucose tolerance tests (165). thus, glp-1 (9-36) amide may
reduce postprandial glucose levels independent of insulin.
the short circulating half-life of bioactive intact glp-1 and
gip initially limited enthusiasm for the potential use of incretin hormones in the treatment of diabetes. however, incretin analogs have been developed with significantly increased half-lives due to modification of the  xxxg651xxx  cleavage
site and/or conjugation to large circulating proteins, such as
albumin (i.e.,  xxxd2495xxx ). furthermore, other  xxxg899xxx 
agonists are being tested in the treatment of dm2; presently
available is synthetic  xxxd2076xxx , structurally identical to native  xxxd2076xxx  and originally isolated from the venom of a
lizard, heloderma suspectum (exenatide; amylin pharmaceuticals, inc., san diego, ca; and eli lilly and co., indianapolis,
in) (166 –168).
although both glp-1 and gip act as incretin hormones in
normal subjects, only glp-1 can be used to treat dm2 because diabetes is often associated with a blunted or absent
response to gip. it has been shown that whereas glp-1 levels
are significantly decreased in dm2, gip values are normal,
suggesting that dm2 patients are resistant to the biological
effects of gip, rendering it relatively ineffective (169). the
mechanisms underlying the diminished gip responsiveness

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

202

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

in experimental and clinical diabetes are not fully understood (170) but may involve down-regulation of gip receptor
expression (171) or receptor desensitization (172). recent
data have suggested that desensitization is not a major contributor to defective gip action in diabetic patients (173).
a possible explanation for the decreased glp-1 secretion
in dm2 may be a decrease in gastric emptying rate, which
hypothetically might increase the absorption in the proximal
intestine, resulting in less food reaching the distal intestine
where l cells are more numerous (169). indeed, the opposite
situation, increased exposure of carbohydrates to the distal
intestinal mucosa by ␣-glucosidase inhibitors or accelerated
gastric emptying, increases glp-1 secretion (174, 175). however, the gastric emptying rate does not seem to exhibit
consistent changes in dm2 and obesity but is more often
reported as delayed (see references cited in ref. 169). in the
study reported by toft-nielsen et al. (169), the decreased
glp-1 secretion in dm2 was considered most likely a consequence of the disease.
unequivocal hypoglycemic action of glp-1 in type 1 diabetes was demonstrated in studies of iv infusion of the
peptide in subjects with type 1 diabetes in the hyperglycemic
postabsorptive state. under these conditions, without the
administration of insulin, parenteral infusion of glp-1 was
able to reduce plasma glucose significantly; this was associated with inhibition of glucagon secretion, and stimulation
of residual insulin secretion, although statistically significant, was only marginal (176). however, three of the 11
patients examined were c-peptide-negative in the basal state
and demonstrated no clear increment under the influence of
glp-1 (176). it was hypothesized that a major component of
the glycemic effect is attributable to the known action of
glp-1 to inhibit gastric emptying and glucagon secretion
(177). studies of the effects of the  xxxg899xxx  ( xxxg899xxx )
agonist,  xxxd2076xxx , given together with established doses of
insulin before a meal, supported the hypothesis. the more
prolonged actions of  xxxd2076xxx  were accompanied by greater
and more prolonged reduction of meal ingestion glycemic
effects in volunteers with c-peptide-negative type 1 diabetes
receiving continuing intensive insulin therapy, demonstrating the capacity of the combination therapy to normalize
blood glucose levels after ingestion of meals consistent with
the dietary program of the volunteers, without apparent
increased risk of hypoglycemia within a normal betweenmeals interval (178).
similar findings were observed with an enhancer of glp-1
(ddp-iv inhibitor,  xxxd3510xxx ) in insulin-pump-treated
type 1 diabetic patients, inducing a significant reduction in
the postprandial glucagon in comparison with placebo. this
finding provides further evidence that the glucagonostatic
effect of glp-1 and incretin mimetics is mediated via an
endocrine effect on the ␣-cell rather than by a paracrine effect
dependent on endogenous insulin release thought to tonically restrain glucagon secretion through a local endocrine/
paracrine effect (179).
a. animal data. regarding the effect of glp-1 on ␤-cells, it
has been demonstrated that the acute effect is, as indicated
earlier, potentiation of glucose-dependent insulin secretion
(157), as also observed in healthy human subjects (170, 180),

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

subjects with igt (181), and patients with dm2 (81, 170, 180).
its subacute effect is to enhance insulin biosynthesis and
stimulation of insulin gene transcription and to increase expression of mrna for glucose transporter-2 and glucokinase, as shown in in vitro studies in rodent models. the
chronic glp-1 action is stimulation of ␤-cell proliferation and
induction of islet neogenesis from precursor ductal cells,
which are associated with an expansion of ␤-cell mass. finally, an inhibitory effect of glp-1 was found in ␤-cell apoptosis. these effects were observed in rodent models of
diabetes as well as in cultured ␤-cells (37, 182–184). similar
findings were obtained using the  xxxg899xxx  agonist  xxxd2076xxx 
in rats rendered diabetic by partial pancreatectomy (185). in
wistar rats, the age-dependent decline in ␤-cell function and
the subsequent impairment of glucose tolerance were reversed by glp-1 administration (186). it should be mentioned that the antiapoptotic effect of glp-1 is independent
from its glucose-lowering activity, as demonstrated by in
vitro experiments in which glp-1 was capable of inhibiting
h2o2-dependent apoptosis in cultured mouse insulinoma
cell lines. glp-1 reduced dna fragmentation and improved
cell survival (184).
in vivo studies have demonstrated that glp-1 and  xxxd2076xxx  may improve glucose tolerance in animal diabetic
models as well as in diabetic subjects (see references cited in
ref. 187). these beneficial effects were maintained long after
the termination of glp-1 or  xxxd2076xxx  infusion. this finding
indicates that glp-1 induces long-term changes that cannot
be due simply to the modulation of preformed insulin secretion but must involve more substantial modifications in
the functional activity of ␤-cells. recent findings from in vivo
studies have shown that the beneficial long-lasting effects of
glp-1 can be partly attributed to changes in ␤-cell mass due
to ␤-cell growth and differentiation (182). however, the ability to stimulate ␤-cell neogenesis was not associated with the
promotion of proliferative lesions in a 2-yr rodent safety
study (188) (fig. 3).
the glp-1-dependent regulation of glucose homeostasis
appears to be based on biological mechanisms far more complex than the simple modulation of insulin secretion. indeed,
glp-1 also affects the expression of insulin and other ␤-cellspecific genes whose products are involved in the regulation
of glucose utilization. the mechanism by which glp-1 modulates ␤-cell-specific gene expression is unknown, but recent
studies strongly suggest involvement of the homeodomain
transcription factor pdx-1. the capability of glp-1 to regulate the expression of pdx-1, a major determinant in pancreatic organogenesis, has led investigators to propose that
glp-1 may be involved in the regulation of the mechanism(s)
that governs endocrine phenotype specification during ␤-cell
differentiation and growth (187).
therapy with  xxxg899xxx  agonists has also been associated
with expansion of ␤-cell mass via stimulation of ␤-cell proliferation, promotion of islet cell neogenesis, and inhibition
of ␤-cell apoptosis (185, 190). because  xxxg899xxx  is widely
expressed and the observation that activation of  xxxg899xxx 
signaling is coupled to stimulation of cell proliferation and
enhanced cell survival, it is viewed as a positive aspect of
glp-1 action in the context of promoting expansion and
survival of functioning ␤-cells (86) and has generated great

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 203

fig. 3. glp-1 stimulated ␤-cell regeneration and mass in animal
models. [reproduced with permission from a. bahnsali: international
investigator’s meeting of the clinical study  xxxd2495xxx -1697 ( xxxd2495xxx ) zurich, switzerland, april, 2006 (189).]

interest in the development of  xxxg899xxx  agonists for treatment
of dm2. however, the proliferative and antiapoptotic action
of these agents may have theoretical consequences on tumor
formation in either the endocrine or exocrine pancreas, considering that  xxxg899xxx  may also be expressed in the pancreatic
ductal epithelium, a potential precursor site for the development of pancreatic cancer. recently it was shown that
although human pancreatic cancer cell lines may express a
functional  xxxg899xxx , activation of  xxxg899xxx  signaling by synthetic  xxxd2076xxx  was not coupled to stimulation of cell proliferation or resistance to cell death in short-term studies
(191). the levels and duration of  xxxd2076xxx  exposure in the
study in question were considerably different from levels of
exposure to  xxxd2076xxx , recently introduced in the treatment
of dm2, that might be expected in human subjects.
furthermore, it was shown that human and nonhuman
primate islet culture with excendin-4 and daily  xxxd2076xxx 
administration to transplant recipients (nondiabetic or diabetic mice) increase both the survival and function of islets
transplanted into the liver (192).
in table 2 are presented the animal data relative to the
effects of glp-1 and incretin mimetics ( xxxd2076xxx  and  xxxd2495xxx ) on ␤-cells.
b. in vitro data in human ␤-cells. farilla et al. (195) found that
glp-1 delayed the morphological changes that occurred in
human islets in culture, indicated by a longer-lasting preservation of their three-dimensional structure, along with
maintenance of the noncellular membrane that surrounds
healthy human islets. glp-1 promoted a time-dependent
increase in the expression of the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2
and a down-regulation of the intracellular levels of the active
form of caspase-3. a similar effect was observed at the

mrna level for bcl-2 and caspase-3. it was also shown that
by improving cell viability, farilla et al. (195) were able to
show a significant amelioration of islet cell function. indeed,
glp-1-treated human islets contained more insulin and were
capable of greater glucose-dependent insulin secretion.
however, because of the short-term nature of the experiment
(the islets were cultured up to 5 d), an increase in the size or
number of islets was not observed in response to glp-1.
furthermore, it was demonstrated by buteau et al. (196)
that glp-1 prevented glucose- and palmitate-induced apoptosis, singly or combined, in overnight cultured human islet
cells isolated from healthy organ donors, between 50 and 65
yr old. the antiapoptotic action was mediated via activation
of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/protein kinase b signaling pathway, enhanced downstream target nf-␬b dna
binding activity, and possibly stimulating the expression of
iap-2 and bcl-2, two antiapoptotic genes under the control
of nf-␬b. the same antiapoptotic mechanism was observed
earlier by hui et al. (184) in cultured mouse insulinoma cell
line and, as stated above, in human islets (195). inhibition of
nf-␬b abolished the prevention of glucolipotoxicity by
glp-1. the antiapoptotic action of glp-1 and incretin mimetics, in addition to their incretin effect, are of great interest
as therapeutic agents in the treatment of dm2, particularly
in the presence of glucolipotoxicity, which is an important
factor for ␤-cell decompensation in the development of obesity-associated dm2 (196). it would be interesting to mention
that glp-1-induced ␤-cell proliferation has not yet been reported in human islets, only in rodent.
microarray analysis performed on cultured human islet
preparations by hui et al. (197) showed that the long-acting
glp-1 analog  xxxd2495xxx  modulated the expression of multiple members of the tgf-␤ pathway.
c. clinical evidence of incretin mimetic effects on human ␤-cell
function
1)  xxxg899xxx  agonists. in dm2 individuals, like native
glp-1,  xxxg899xxx  ( xxxg873xxx -r) agonists enhance insulin
release and inhibit glucagon secretion, in addition to delaying gastric emptying, improving insulin sensitivity and activating regions in the central nervous system that control
satiety and reduces body weight (198). more recently, studies
with animal models suggest that  xxxg899xxx  agonists may also
enhance insulin-independent glucose disposal in peripheral
tissues, potentially via stimulation of glucose sensors located
in the portal vein and subsequent activation of neuronal
pathways that modify glucose clearance (199). in addition to
glucoregulatory actions,  xxxg899xxx  agonists exhibit protective

table 2. effects of incretin (glp-1) and incretin mimetics ( xxxd2076xxx  and  xxxd2495xxx ) on ␤-cells: animal studies
experimental model

rodent diabetes or
cultured ␤-cells
partially
pancreatectomized
rats
aging wistar rats

glp-1/incretin
mimetic

replication

proliferation

neogenesis

differentiation

37, 86, 184,
187, 190
185, 193, 194

glp-1/ xxxd2076xxx 

1

1

1

1

 xxxd2076xxx ,
 xxxd2495xxx 

1

186, 190

glp-1

ref.

apoptosis mass

1
1

1

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

2

1

2

1

2

1

204

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

effects in the cardiovascular and nervous systems after experimental injury (see references cited in ref. 198).
exenatide. in clinical studies, exenatide (synthetic  xxxd2076xxx ) exhibited actions that are similar to those of glp-1,
as outlined above: stimulation of insulin secretion only when
glucose concentrations are elevated, suppression of postprandial glucagon secretion, slowing of gastric emptying,
and promoting of satiety (157). the significant attenuation of
postmeal plasma glucose elevation after exenatide infusion
was related to a reduction in the rate of oral glucose appearance in the systemic circulation and enhancement of the
suppression of endogenous glucose production; half of the
decrease in endogenous glucose production results from the
inhibition of glucagon secretion and half from increased insulin secretion, as observed in a study of six dm2 patients
taking metformin plus sulfonylurea, with hba1c approximately 8.5% (200).
three similarly designed 6-month placebo-controlled trials form the basis of the approval of exenatide for use in
patients with dm2 who exhibit unacceptable glycemic control while on metformin and/or a sulfonylurea, testing the
addition of exenatide to metformin alone, sulfonylurea
alone, or metformin and a sulfonylurea together (166 –168).
the placebo-adjusted decline of hba1c from baseline levels
of 8.2– 8.6% was approximately 1.0% in each trial. a mean
placebo-adjusted weight loss of 2.5 kg occurred when exenatide was added to metformin, 1.0 kg when the drug was
added to a sulfonylurea, and 0.9 kg when it was added to
metformin plus a sulfonylurea. all patients began the treatment with 5 ␮g injected twice daily sc, before the morning
and evening meals, for the first month, followed by 10 ␮g
twice daily thereafter (166 –168.) after 30 wk, a majority of
the patients continued in an open-labeled extension for 82
wk.
a subset of 73 subjects from the exenatide plus metformin
and exenatide plus metformin plus sulfonylurea groups had
postprandial ␤-cell function evaluated at baseline and after
6 months (201). glucose excursions after meal tolerance tests
were significantly reduced after exenatide but not after placebo. to assess ␤-cell function independent of confounding
effects from postprandial plasma glucose differences, mathematical modeling was performed incorporating three main
components of ␤-cell function: rate sensitivity (early isr),
dose-response relating isr to plasma glucose concentration
(glucose sensitivity), and a potentiation factor, which is a
function of time and may reflect the actions of nonglucose
secretagogues along with other factors (202). the mathematical model indicated a greater insulin response for any glucose concentration. also, exenatide increased potentiation at
2 h after a meal compared with placebo, presumably due to
its incretin effect because it is only partially affected, whereas
the ␤-cell function is inherently impaired in dm2 (203). in
summary, exenatide enhanced postprandial ␤-cell function
in patients with dm2 treated with metformin or metformin
and sulfonylurea.
it was demonstrated that iv exenatide enhanced first- and
second-phase insulin secretion in response to an iv glucose
bolus in subjects with dm2 treated with diet/exercise, metformin, or acarbose and compared with healthy subjects with
normal oral glucose tolerance test not receiving exenatide.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

exenatide-treated patients with dm2 had a similar secretory
pattern (first- and second-phase insulin secretion) but higher
insulin levels than healthy subjects, in contrast to patients
with dm2 treated with placebo who had blunted first-phase
insulin secretion compared with healthy controls. this effect
is consistent with the ability of exenatide to improve ␤-cell
function acutely (83).
 xxxd2495xxx .  xxxd2495xxx  has 97% homology with glp-1 and
resists  xxxg651xxx  degradation by fa acylation and albumin
binding (204). single-dose kinetic studies in dm2 subjects
revealed a half-life of 10.0 ⫾ 3.5 h, allowing for single dailydose administration (205), whereas native glp-1 with a very
short half-life of 1.5 ⫾ 0.35 min has limited clinical value
(206). it was demonstrated that bedtime administration of a
single dose of  xxxd2495xxx  in well-controlled dm2 (compared
with placebo) resulted in a significant reduction in fasting
glucose while restoring ␤-cell responsiveness to physiological hyperglycemia, although ␤-cell function was grossly impaired in the absence of  xxxd2495xxx  (207). once-daily dosing
of 6 ␮g/kg sc for 1 wk significantly reduced overall glycemia
while improving first-phase insulin response to glucose and
almost doubling the disposition index, with a fall in pi/iri
ratio along with diminishing glucagon levels and glycogenolysis, whereas gluconeogenesis was unaltered (208). at this
dose, no effect on gastric emptying and no nausea were noted
(184).
a phase ii 14-wk study was performed to assess the efficacy and safety of  xxxd2495xxx  once-daily in 165 dm2 patients (hba1c at randomization, 8.1– 8.5%), drug-naive or on
single oral antidiabetic agent (washout for 4 wk) randomized
to one of three doses of  xxxd2495xxx  (0.65, 1.25, or 1.9 mg) as
monotherapy or placebo. significant improvement in hba1c
was achieved in all actively treated groups vs. placebo, with
an estimated difference vs. placebo of 1.74% at the highest
dose. dose-dependent weight reduction was achieved in the
highest dose with the estimated change in body weight being
⫺2.99 kg from baseline (209).
to characterize ␤-cell function improvement by  xxxd2495xxx , 24-h triple-meal tests were performed in 13 dm2
subjects, with  xxxd2495xxx  being administered for 7 d before
tests. isr was calculated from c-peptide deconvolution, and
␤-cell function was assessed using the mathematical model
with three main components of ␤-cell function: 1) early (firstphase) isr (rate sensitivity); 2) glucose sensitivity ⫽ doseresponse curve; and 3) a potentiation factor (function of time,
expressing relative isr increase), as outlined previously
(202). modeling analysis indicated that rate sensitivity did
not change significantly, but there was a marked effect on
␤-cell dose-response, which was shifted upward and became
steeper (increase in glucose sensitivity). in addition,  xxxd2495xxx  stimulated potentiation during the first meal (210). in
conclusion,  xxxd2495xxx  enhanced several ␤-cell function parameters, and the enhancement was correlated with the improvement in glycemic control. the mechanisms of  xxxd2495xxx  action, as expected, appear to be analogous to those
exerted by endogenous incretins and incretin mimetics (201).
rodent studies have indicated that  xxxd2495xxx  can increase
␤-cell mass in rat models of ␤-cell deficiency (male zdf rats and
in 60% pancreatectomized rats), but it may in part depend on
the metabolic state of the animals, those with higher blood

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 205

glucose levels presenting greater ␤-cell mass (193). furthermore, using primary neonatal rat islets, it was shown that native
glp-1 and  xxxd2495xxx  inhibited both cytokine- and ffa-induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner, thus playing a
role in the maintenance of ␤-cell mass in diabetes (194).
to identify genes involved in the antiapoptotic activity of
 xxxd2495xxx , human islets freshly isolated from three cadaveric donors were treated with  xxxd2495xxx  for 22 h while the
same number of untreated islets from the same donors
served as a control. microarray analysis, indicated that the
expression of 96 genes was up-regulated, whereas the expression of 257 genes was down-regulated in the islets exposed to  xxxd2495xxx . of the genes with significant change in
response to  xxxd2495xxx , five were involved with cell proliferation; cell survival mechanisms and resistance to apoptosis
were found to be increased 2-fold or more. the expression of
four proapoptotic genes was also suppressed, and two genes
related to inhibition of caspase were also down-regulated. it
was concluded that  xxxd2495xxx  inhibits cell death in human
isolated islets by regulating the expression profile of apoptosis-related genes (211).
in summary,  xxxd2495xxx , can control diabetes by multiple
actions through increasing insulin and lowering glucagon,
yet it has a rapid and sustained glycemic effect and is associated with weight reduction. all actions are predictably
strictly glucose-dependent, with low hypoglycemia risk and
counterregulatory response to hypoglycemia not being impaired.  xxxd2495xxx  may potentially delay disease progression, considering the ␤-cell function improvement in dm2
and ␤-cell mass shown to increase in animal models. finally,
it is well tolerated, with mild and transient gastrointestinal
symptoms.
table 3 indicates the overlapping and distinct properties
of the two  xxxg899xxx  agonists exenatide and  xxxd2495xxx , the
former presently available and the latter in phase iii evaluation, for the treatment of dm2 (212).
table 4 shows the clinical evidence of incretin (glp-1) and
incretin mimetics ( xxxd2076xxx  and  xxxd2495xxx ) effects on ␤-cell
function in humans.
summary/conclusions. incretin hormones are peptides released from the gastrointestinal tract in response to nutrient
ingestion to enhance glucose-dependent insulin secretion
from the pancreas and aid in the overall maintenance of
table 3. incretin mimetics: exenatide vs.  xxxd2495xxx 

administration
half-life (h)
frequency of injection
dose per injection
 xxxg651xxx  substrate?
insulin secretiona
glucagon secretiona
fasting glucose
weight reduction
gastric empting
antibody production

exenatide

 xxxd2495xxx 

injection
⬇2– 4
twice daily
5–10 ␮g
no
1
2
2
yes
2
yes (⬇ 45%)

injection
⬇12–14
once daily
up to 2 mg
no
1
2
222
yes
(2)
no

reproduced with permission from m. a. nauck: proc of the 66th
scientific sessions, american diabetes association, june 11, 2006
(212).
a
glucose-dependent.

glucose homeostasis through slowing of gastric emptying,
inhibition of glucagon secretion, and control of body weight.
the two major incretins are glp-1 and gip. gip decreases
gastric emptying to a much lesser degree and does not inhibit
glucagon secretion, although it does exert a potent stimulatory effect in normal rodents and human ␤-cells, the diabetic
␤-cell being resistant to gip action. thus, the majority of
efforts to develop incretin-based therapies are focused on
glp-1. the major component of the glycemic effect of glp-1
or  xxxg899xxx  agonists,  xxxd2076xxx  and the glp-1 conjugated to
albumin ( xxxd2495xxx ), is attributable to the inhibition of gastric emptying and glucagon secretion, with the glucagonostatic effect of glp-1 and incretin mimetics being mediated
via an endocrine effect on the ␣-cell.
the acute effect of glp-1 and  xxxg899xxx  agonists on ␤-cells
in rodent models of diabetes and in cultured ␤-cells is stimulation of glucose-dependent insulin release, whereas the
subacute effect is enhancing insulin biosynthesis and stimulation of insulin gene transcription. their chronic action is
stimulation of ␤-cell proliferation, induction of islet neogenesis from precursor ductal cells, and inhibition of ␤-cell apoptosis, thus promoting an expansion of ␤-cell mass.
the  xxxg899xxx  agonist, exenatide (synthetic  xxxd2076xxx ), exhibited similar actions to those of native glp-1. the addition
of exenatide to dm2 patients with unacceptable glycemic
control while on metformin alone, sulfonylurea alone, or
metformin plus sulfonylurea in 6-month placebo controlled
trials demonstrated a placebo-adjusted decline of hba1c and
a placebo-adjusted weight loss.
postprandial ␤-cell function evaluated in a subset of 73
subjects from exenatide plus metformin and exenatide plus
metformin plus sulfonylurea groups, at baseline and after 6
months, using a mathematical model incorporating the three
main components of ␤-cell function (rate sensitivity, glucose
sensitivity, and potentiation factor), indicated that exenatide
enhanced postprandial ␤-cell function, presumably due to its
incretin effect in dm2. furthermore, iv exenatide enhanced
first- and second-phase insulin secretion in response to an iv
glucose bolus in dm2 treated with diet/exercise, metformin,
or acarbose.
 xxxd2495xxx  has 97% homology with glp-1 and resists
 xxxg651xxx  degradation by fa acylation and albumin binding,
with a half-life of 10 ⫾ 3.5 h, allowing for a single daily-dose
administration, whereas native glp-1 with a very short halflife of 1.5 ⫾ 0.35 min has limited clinical value. to characterize ␤-cell function improvement by  xxxd2495xxx , 24-h triple
meal tests were performed in dm2 after 1-wk  xxxd2495xxx 
treatment, where insulin secretion was assessed by the mathematical model with three components of ␤-cell function
showing an enhancement of several ␤-cell function parameters that correlated with improvement in glycemic control,
analogous to the mechanisms exerted by endogenous incretins and incretin mimetics.
rodent studies have indicated that  xxxd2495xxx  can increase
␤-cell mass in rat models of ␤-cell deficiency. this was demonstrated in human islets freshly isolated from three cadaveric donors treated with  xxxd2495xxx , where microarray analysis indicated that  xxxd2495xxx  inhibited cell death by
regulating the expression profile of apoptosis-related genes.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

206

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

table 4. clinical evidence of incretin (glp-1) and incretin mimetics ( xxxd2076xxx  and  xxxd2495xxx ) effects on ␤-cell function in humans
peptide

glp-1

administration

overnight ⫹ 2 h iv
extended (12 h) iv
extended (5 h) iv

 xxxd2076xxx 

extended (5 h) iv

 xxxd2495xxx 

6 months sc exanetide ⫹
oral metformin or oral
metformin ⫹
sulfonylurea
1 dose sc

a

ref.

subject

81 dm2
181 igt,
dm2
180 normal,
dm2
83 normal,
dm2
201 dm2

207 dm2

1 wk sc (1 dose/d)

208 dm2

1 wk sc (1 dose/d)

210 dm2

findings

1 first and second phase insulin secretion
1 ability of the ␤-cell to sense and respond to subtle changes in plasma
glucose (igt ⬎ dm2)
1 first and second phase insulin secretion
1 first and second phase insulin secretion (greater than normal)
postprandial ␤-cell function
1 insulin response/any glucose level
1 potentiation at 2 h after meal (incretin effect)
1 ␤-cell sensitivity (graded glucose infusion)
2  xxxg1193xxx /insulin ratio
1 insulin secretion area (isr) and slope of isr vs. plasma glucose
(⬇ nondiabetic controls)
unchanged 24-h isrs at lower plasma glucose
1 first phase insulin response
1 disposition indexa
2  xxxg1193xxx /insulin ratio
postprandial ␤-cell function (24 h triple meal tests)
1 ␤-cell dose response curve (1 glucose sensitivity)
1 potentiation (relative isr with time)–incretin effect

si ⫻ airg.

2)  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors (“incretin enhancers”). the major therapeutic drawback of using native glp-1 is its very short
half-life of less than 2 min after exogenous administration, as
previously indicated, due in part to the protease ddp-iv
(157). a result, preventing the degradation of native glp-1
by inhibiting the activity of the ddp-iv enzyme, has
emerged as a therapeutic strategy for enhancing endogenous
glp-1 action in vivo.
 xxxg651xxx  is a ubiquitously expressed  xxxg745xxx  that
exhibits postproline or alanine peptidase activity (213). the
requisite for cleavage is that an alanine or a proline must be
present as the second amino acid from the n-terminal end,
in which case the two n-terminal amino acids are cleaved
from the rest of the peptide. when this cleavage results in a
loss of activity, such as with glp-1 and gip,  xxxg651xxx  acts as
an inactivation enzyme. however, because exogenous gip is
comparatively less effective than glp-1 at stimulating insulin secretion in dm2, whereas the insulinotropic action of
gp-1 is well preserved, as shown earlier, much of the current
research has focused on enhancing glp-1 action for the treatment of dm2. however, it is possible that the effects of
 xxxg651xxx  inhibition in diabetes are mediated by inhibition of
bioactive peptides other than glp-1. one puzzling finding
might support this, as indicated by ahrén (214): in patients
with dm2, concentrations of active glp-1 after meal ingestion are doubled by  xxxg651xxx  inhibition (compared with placebo), whereas glucose control improves (215). in contrast,
when similar increases in glp-1 levels are produced by
exogenous infusion, there is little or no effect on insulin
secretion or glucose levels (216). this suggests that mediators
other than glp-1 may contribute to the therapeutic effect of
 xxxg651xxx  inhibition. alternatively, recent findings indicate
that glp-1 may work indirectly through activation of the
autonomic nervous system (217), an effect possibly mediated
by local activation of afferent nerve terminals. if this proves
to be an important mechanism, comparison of circulating
levels of glp-1 under different conditions becomes less rel-

evant because the key factor would be the local concentration
of active glp-1 in the vicinity of nerve terminals rather than
the concentration in the circulation (218).
concerning the potential mediators of the therapeutic effects of  xxxg651xxx  inhibition, nauck and el-ouaghlidi (218)
presented five arguments suggesting that glp-1 is not the
only, or at least not the major, mediator of the glucoselowering actions of  xxxg651xxx  inhibition observed in clinical
studies (215, 219, 220); i.e.,  xxxg651xxx  inhibition: 1) causes little
increase in circulating endogenous glp; 2) has little effect on
gastric emptying; 3) does not cause nausea/vomiting as do
glp-1 and incretin mimetics; 4) meal-stimulated glp-1 fall;
and 5) has delayed effects on glucose homeostasis (218). in
the same issue of diabetologia, holst and deacon (221) acknowledge these arguments but maintain that current evidence nonetheless supports the dominant role of glp-1.
table 5 summarizes the overlapping and distinct properties of  xxxg899xxx  agonists vs.  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors for the treatment of dm2 (222).
ahrén (214) has suggested that neuropeptides, biologically active peptides localized to islet nerve terminals and
functioning as neurotransmitters, may be substrates for
 xxxg651xxx  (213), thus contributing to the actions of  xxxg651xxx 
inhibitors in diabetes. neuropeptides that are stored in islet
nerve terminals and affect islet function would be of particular relevance in this regard, and the islet autonomic nervous
system could be an important regulator of islet function
(223). one neuropeptide of potential importance is pituitary
adenylate cyclase-activating peptide ( xxxg70xxx ), which is localized to islet nerves and has several actions relevant to
glucose homeostasis (224). because  xxxg70xxx  is also a substrate for  xxxg651xxx , it could contribute to the therapeutic benefits of  xxxg651xxx  inhibition recently shown in mice whereby
 xxxg70xxx -induced insulin secretion increased after inhibition
of  xxxg651xxx  by valine pyrrolidide (225).
the potential risks associated with  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors include the prolongation of the action of other peptide hor-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 207

table 5.  xxxg899xxx  agonists vs.  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors

administration
glp-1 concentrations
mechanism of actions
activation of portal glucose sensor
1 insulin secretion
2 glucagon secretion
gastric emptying
weight loss
expansion of ␤-cell mass in preclinical studies
nausea and vomiting
potential immunogenicity

 xxxg899xxx 

 xxxg651xxx  inhibitors

injection
pharmacological
glp-1
no
⫹⫹⫹
⫹⫹
inhibited
yes
yes
yes
yes

orally available
physiological
glp-1 ⫹ gip
yes
⫹
⫹⫹
⫹/⫺
no
yes
no
no

reproduced with permission from d. j. druker: mechanisms in medicine inc., 2006 (222).

mones, neuropeptides, growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines cleaved by the protease (213) along with their
interaction with  xxxg651xxx -related proteases. moreover,
 xxxg651xxx  has effects beyond its proteolytic action, including t
cell activation and proliferation. however, to date, side effects resulting from the prolongation of the action of messengers such as those related to inflammation, blood pressure, and allergic reactions from  xxxg651xxx  inhibition have not
been observed in preclinical animal and clinical human studies (226).
in preclinical studies with normal and diabetic animals,
several orally active  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors have been shown to
increase plasma levels of intact, biologically active glp-1 and
gip, resulting in stimulation of insulin and inhibition of
glucagon secretion in a glucose-dependent manner as well as
promotion of ␤-cell proliferation, neogenesis, and inhibition
of apoptosis (198).
several studies examining the efficacy of the two  xxxg651xxx 
inhibitors sitagliptin (januvia, merck & co., whitehouse station, nj) and  xxxd3510xxx  (galvus, novartis, east hanover,
nj) in the treatment of dm2 are now on phase iii trials and
will be reviewed below.
sitagliptin (mk-0431). a preclinical study has demonstrated that 8 –12 wk of treatment of diabetic mice with an
analog of sitagliptin (des-fluoro-sitagliptin) produced restoration of ␤-cell mass and morphology, increased islet insulin
content, and improved glucose-stimulated insulin secretion
in isolated islets, similar to that observed in preclinical studies after administration of glp-1 or  xxxg899xxx  analogs (227).
single doses of 100 mg or higher, with an apparent half-life
of 8 –14 h, resulted in inhibition of plasma  xxxg651xxx  activity
over 24 h by at least 80%. sitagliptin increased the mealassociated rise in active plasma glp-1 concentration by approximately 2-fold without causing hypoglycemia (228).
therefore, sitagliptin possesses pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics that support a once-daily dosing regimen, stimulating insulin secretion, inhibiting glucagon secretion, and reducing glycemic excursions after an oral
glucose load in mild dm2 (229).
there are recent reports from the ongoing phase iii program with sitagliptin involving three large studies. in one
study, sitagliptin monotherapy reduced significantly hba1c
and improved glycemic control in the fasting and postprandial state after 24 wk in 741 patients with dm2, randomized
to placebo or sitagliptin. postmeal insulin and c-peptide
auc, ratio of insulin auc/glucose auc, and homa-␤,

which are all measures of ␤-cell function, were significantly
increased with sitagliptin relative to placebo. moreover, pi/
iri ratio was significantly reduced with sitagliptin compared
with placebo (230). in another study, when sitagliptin was
added to ongoing metformin therapy administered to 701
patients with dm2 and inadequate glycemic control on metformin who were randomized to receive either placebo or
sitagliptin, a significant reduction in hba1c, fasting plasma
glucose, and 2-h postmeal plasma glucose was observed after
24 wk .the same indices of ␤-cell function, evaluated as in the
above indicated report, were also significantly increased, and
the pi/iri ratio was significantly decreased with sitagliptin
relative to placebo (231).
the effect of sitagliptin on ␤-cell function in dm2 was
assessed using frequently sampled (9 points) meal tolerance
tests in substudies from three phase iii trials (two monotherapy studies and an add-on to metformin study) using the
c-peptide minimal model, which allowed for the estimation
of the isr and the characterization of the insulin secretion
response into basal (␤-cell responsiveness to basal glucose
concentrations), static (␤-cell responsiveness to above-basal
glucose concentrations after a meal), and dynamic (␤-cell
responsiveness to the rate of increase in above-basal glucose
concentrations after a meal) components. insulin sensitivity
was assessed with a validated composite index. the disposition indices were also assessed. when used as monotherapy or added to ongoing metformin therapy, sitagliptin
produced improvements in basal and static components and
overall responsiveness to the ␤-cell to glucose. the dynamic
component showed numerical, but not statistically significant, improvements with sitagliptin. disposition indices
were also broadly improved with the  xxxg651xxx  inhibitor relative to placebo. despite enhanced ␤-cell sensitivity to glucose, the low rate of hypoglycemia observed in clinical trials
with sitagliptin indicated, according to the authors, that the
increase in ␤-cell function remained glucose-dependent
(232).
finally, the addition of sitagliptin to 353 dm2 patients who
were not well-controlled with pioglitazone monotherapy
and were randomized to placebo or sitagliptin (100 mg/d) to
ongoing pioglitazone produced a significant placebo-subtracted reduction in hba1c over 24 wk, maintaining the
glycemic control over the study period.  xxxg1193xxx  levels and
pi/iri ratio were significantly reduced with sitagliptin compared with placebo, suggesting improvement in ␤-cell function without additional weight gain (233).

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

208

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

 xxxd3510xxx  ( xxxd3510xxx ). in preclinical studies, the ability of
 xxxd3510xxx  to augment ␤-cell mass by enhancing endogenous incretin action was assessed in neonatal rats, a model
for rapid ␤-cell turnover and growth. neonatal rats were
treated once daily with  xxxd3510xxx  or vehicle (control) for
21 d.  xxxd3510xxx  increased the number of replicating islet
cells significantly and reduced the number of apoptotic islet
cells. additionally, there was a significant increase in pancreatic insulin content and ␤-cell mass even 1 wk after discontinuation of treatment (234). the head-to-head comparison of  xxxd3510xxx  with injectable exenatide on in vivo ␤-cell
regulation in  xxxd3249xxx -induced ␤-cell injury in mice
demonstrated that both drugs are equally effective in reducing the  xxxd3249xxx -induced proliferative response, a protective effect against ␤-cell injury as well as in promoting
early differentiation of pancreatic progenitor cells, in increasing formation of ductal ␤-cell and improving glucose tolerance to a similar extent in  xxxd3249xxx -diabetic mice. furthermore, the effect was maintained after the treatment
washout (235).
in clinical studies with  xxxd3510xxx , postmeal glucose levels were significantly decreased, but postmeal insulin levels
were unchanged (220). although such findings might be
interpreted to suggest that  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors do not improve
insulin secretion in patients with dm2, it should be recognized that circulating insulin levels are not a direct measure
of insulin secretion and that insulin secretion must be considered in the context of ambient glucose levels. accordingly,
␤-cell function can be improved without appreciable changes
in circulating insulin levels, particularly if glucose values are
reduced (236). the effect of 4-wk treatment with  xxxd3510xxx 
(100 mg, twice daily) on meal-related ␤-cell function was
examined in drug-naive patients with dm2, using the mathematical model previously presented, which derives multiple parameters of ␤-cell function relating isrs and glucose
levels (␤-cell dose response), change in glucose with time
(derivative component), and a potentiating factor (201).
 xxxd3510xxx  was found to improve ␤-cell function by increasing insulin secretion at any given glucose level (secretory tone), whereas the slope of the ␤-cell dose response, the
derivative component, and the potentiation factor were not
affected. this would suggest that insulin secretion at a given
glucose concentration is augmented by  xxxd3510xxx  (236).
the same type of study was performed over 52 wk in metformin-treated dm2 subjects (inadequately compensated).
patients were randomized to either metformin and placebo
or metformin and  xxxd3510xxx , 50 mg once daily (237). meal
tests were performed at study commencement and again
after 12, 24, and 52 wk to evaluate meal-related ␤-cell function, calculating several parameters: the insulin secretion;
insulin sensitivity during meal ingestion (238); the adaptation index, which gives a figure for the ability of the ␤-cell to
adapt insulin secretion to the ambient insulin sensitivity
(insulin secretion ⫻ insulin sensitivity) (239). administration
of metformin and  xxxd3510xxx  for 52 wk was associated with
reduced fasting and postprandial plasma glucose (with a
sustained highly significant reduction in hba1c), enhanced
postprandial insulin secretion, increased dynamic insulin
sensitivity in relation to meal intake compared to fasting
(static) insulin sensitivity and adaptation index, and a re-

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

duced pi/iri ratio compared with baseline values. in contrast, for the metformin-placebo-treated groups, fasting
plasma glucose increased (as well as hba1c values), postmeal insulin secretion and adaptation index decreased, but
insulin sensitivity during meal ingestion was not altered, and
no net change was observed for the pi/iri ratio (237).
although  xxxd3510xxx  improves ␤-cell function and reduces fasting and postprandial glucose in patients with dm2,
it did not increase absolute postmeal insulin levels either
during 4 –12 wk of treatment in patients with dm2, as described above, or after a single dose given before a 75-g oral
glucose tolerance test in healthy subjects (240). in diet-treated
dm2 patients, an acute insulinotropic effect of  xxxd3510xxx 
(100 mg) was observed only when an oral glucose load (75
g) provided an intense glucose stimulus for insulin secretion
when compared with a standard breakfast meal test (incremental glucose auc ⬃5-fold greater) (241).
regarding the mechanisms by which a single-dose administration of  xxxd3510xxx  (100 mg) before a mixed evening
meal improves glucose tolerance and reduces fasting plasma
glucose in dm2, it was shown that increasing isr, despite a
significant reduction in plasma glucose (increase in insulinogenic index) and suppressing plasma glucagon, leads to
enhanced suppression of endogenous glucose production.
during the overnight period, endogenous glucose production was significantly reduced, and its decline was positively
correlated with the decrease in fasting plasma glucose (242).
it was demonstrated that 12-wk treatment of drug-naive
dm2 with  xxxd3510xxx  (50 mg twice daily), compared with
placebo, restored the airg and the si determined during
fsivgtt. the disposition index (airg ⫻ si) increased more
than 4-fold where part of this effect remained after a 2- to
4-wk washout, suggesting that  xxxd3510xxx  may exert some
disease-modifying effect (243).
recently, some results from ongoing phase iii programs
with  xxxd3510xxx  have been presented in the same line described in the sitagliptin section. one study comprising 780
patients compared  xxxd3510xxx  monotherapy (50 mg twice
daily) with metformin. after 52 wk, hba1c levels were reduced significantly with both drugs.  xxxd3510xxx  was better
tolerated than metformin. both treatments were weight neutral (244). in a second study comprising 416 patients,  xxxd3510xxx  (50 mg once or twice daily) or placebo was added to
metformin, improving glycemic control when the incretin
enhancer was given in comparison to placebo in a 24-wk
study.  xxxd3510xxx  was well-tolerated and mitigated metformin-induced gastrointestinal side effects whenever
present (245).
a third study comprised 256 patients and compared  xxxd3510xxx  with placebo in inadequately controlled dm2 requiring insulin. after 24 wk,  xxxd3510xxx  100 mg/d plus insulin
reduced insulin requirements and hba1c slightly more in
comparison with the patients treated with placebo plus insulin. the hypoglycemic events were less common and less
severe in the  xxxd3510xxx -treated patients (246).
although sitagliptin is not quite as potent as  xxxd3510xxx ,
the available data from single-dose studies indicate that both
compounds have similar clinical efficiency in reducing glucose excursion after oral glucose administration (247). data
are not yet available to enable comparison of the efficacies of

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 209

both  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors following chronic dosing. preclinical
data suggest that sitagliptin may have a longer duration of
action than  xxxd3510xxx , since its half-life in monkeys is ⬎2fold longer than that of  xxxd3510xxx . thus, in clinical trials
with  xxxd3510xxx  as monotherapy a twice daily dosing has
been used while therapy with sitagliptin an once daily dosing
regimen should be indicated. enzyme inhibitory data released has shown that sitagliptin has more selectivity for
 xxxg651xxx  than  xxxd3510xxx . if sitagliptin is superior to  xxxd3510xxx  in this respect, the biological consequences of inhibiting  xxxg651xxx  related enzymes remains poorly understood.
however, inhibition of dpp viii/ix may be associated with
considerable toxicity in preclinical studies (247, 248). given
the absence of serious side effects in clinical studies either
with sitagliptin or  xxxd3510xxx , any differences in selectivity
between inhibitors is likely to be of more academic, rather
than clinical importance (247).
in table 6 are shown the effects of incretin enhancers on
␤-cells in animal studies. table 7 shows the clinical evidence
of the effects on ␤-cell function in humans with dm2.
summary/conclusions. preventing the degradation of native
glp-1 by inhibiting the activity of the ddp-iv enzyme has
emerged as a therapeutic strategy for enhancing endogenous
glp-1 action in vivo. the effects of  xxxg651xxx  inhibition could
be mediated not only by glp-1 but also by other mediators
of the glucose-lowering actions of  xxxg651xxx  inhibition in clinical studies because it causes little increase in circulating
endogenous glp-1, has little effect on gastric emptying, does
not cause nausea/vomiting like glp-1 and  xxxg899xxx  agonists,
and is not associated with weight loss. in preclinical studies,
oral active ddp-iv inhibitors have been demonstrated to
promote ␤-cell proliferation, neogenesis, and inhibition of
apoptosis in rodents similar to that observed after the administration of glp-1 or  xxxg899xxx  agonists.
in contrast with  xxxg899xxx  agonists, which are administered
via injection, the  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors, sitagliptin and  xxxd3510xxx , accepted for review by the u.s. food and drug administration, are administered orally and are well tolerated.
major adverse effects have not been reported in clinical trials
examining the efficacy of  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors for the treatment
of dm2.
in healthy subjects, a single dose of 100 mg or higher of
sitagliptin resulted in inhibition of plasma ddp-iv activity
over 24 h by at least 80%, increasing a meal-associated rise
in active plasma glp-1 levels 2-fold without hypoglycemia.
phase iii studies with sitagliptin plus ongoing metformin
and sitagliptin plus ongoing pioglitazone have indicated an
improvement in hba1c and glycemic control as well as postmeal indices of ␤-cell function. the effect of sitagliptin on

␤-cell function, assessed by frequently sampled meal tolerance tests in three substudies from phase iii using the cpeptide minimal model, showed improvement in ␤-cell responsiveness to basal and above-basal glucose concentration
components after the meals. the dynamic component (␤-cell
responsiveness to the rate of increase in above-basal glucose
levels after a meal) showed numerical but not significant
improvements with sitagliptin. disposition indices were also
improved.
preclinical studies have demonstrated that  xxxd3510xxx 
increased ␤-cell mass by increasing the number of replicating
islet cells and reducing the number of apoptotic islet cells as
assessed in neonatal rats, a model for rapid ␤-cell turnover
and growth. the head-to-head comparison of  xxxd3510xxx 
with exenatide in a mouse model of  xxxd3249xxx -induced
␤-cell injury showed that both had a protective effect against
␤-cell injury, promoted early differentiation of pancreatic
progenitor cells, and increased formation of ductal ␤-cells,
improving glucose tolerance with the effect being maintained after the treatment washout.
although  xxxd3510xxx  reduced postprandial glucose in
dm2, it did not increase postmeal insulin levels during 4 –12
wk of treatment. in diet-treated dm2, oral glucose load (75
g) provided an intense glucose stimulus for insulin secretion
when compared with a standard breakfast meal test. in drugnaive patients, 4-wk treatment with  xxxd3510xxx  (100 mg
twice daily) improved ␤-cell function by increasing insulin
secretion at any glucose level, whereas the slope of ␤-cell
dose response and the potentiation factor were not affected
using a mathematical model. in a similar study over 52 wk
of  xxxd3510xxx  added to metformin-treated dm2, an improvement was demonstrated in ␤-cell function, with enhanced postprandial insulin secretion and increased insulin
sensitivity and disposition index. twelve-week treatment of
drug-naive dm2 with  xxxd3510xxx  (50 mg twice daily) restored the airg and si determined by fsivgtt. the disposition index (airg ⫻ si) increased ⬎4-fold, and part of its
effect remained after a 2- to 4-wk washout, suggesting that
 xxxd3510xxx  may exert some disease-modifying effect. three
recent studies have been carried out in the same line as for
sitagliptin. one study compared  xxxd3510xxx  (50 mg twice
daily) monotherapy with metformin over 52 wk, with better
sustained control with the  xxxg651xxx  inhibitor. in the second
study,  xxxd3510xxx  (50 mg daily or twice daily) was added to
metformin, with improvement of glycemic control slightly
better with the larger dose. the third study compared  xxxd3510xxx  (100 mg daily) with placebo in insulin-requiring dm2.
after 24 wk, there was a reduction in hba1c and in the mean
insulin doses.

table 6. effects of incretin enhancers (sitagliptin and  xxxd3510xxx ) on ␤-cells: animal studies
ref.

incretin enhancer

␤-cell

diabetic mice

227

des-fluoro-sitagliptin

neonatal rats

234

 xxxd3510xxx 

streptozotocindiabetic mice

235

 xxxd3510xxx 
exenatide

1 ␤-cell mass
1 ratio of insulin positive ␤-cell/total islet area
restoration of ␤/␣-cell distribution
1 replication
2 apoptosis
1 ␤-cell mass
1 glucose tolerance
1 differentiation of progenitor ductal cells 3 1 ductal ␤-cell

experimental model

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

210

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218

table 7. clinical evidence of incretin enhancer (sitagliptin and  xxxd3510xxx ) effects on ␤-cell function in humans with dm2
peptide

sitagliptin

added medication

ref.

monotherapy (24 wk)

230

monotherapy or ⫹
metformin (24 wk)

231

232

 xxxd3510xxx 

a

monotherapy (4 wk)

236

⫹ metformin or
metformin alone
(52 wk)

237

monotherapy (12 wk)

243

findings

postmeal
1 insulin and c-peptide auc
1 ratio insulin auc/glucose auc
1 homa-␤
2 pi/iri ratio
postmeal
1 insulin and c-peptide auc
1 ratio insulin auc/glucose auc
1 homa-␤
2 pi/iri ratio
postprandial ␤-cell function
1 ␤-cell responsiveness to basal glucose
1 ␤-cell responsiveness to above-basal glucose after meal
1 disposition indexa
postmeal ␤-cell function
1 insulin secretion at any given glucose level
no change in slope of ␤-cell dose response and other model parameters
postmeal ␤-cell function
 xxxd3510xxx  ⫹ metformin: 1 postprandial insulin secretion, 1 insulin
sensitivity to meal intake, 1 adaptation index (insulin secretion ⫻ insulin
sensitivity)
placebo ⫹ metformin: 2 postprandial insulin secretion and 2 adaptation
index. no change in insulin sensitivity during meal intake
fsivgtt
1 airg, 1 si
1 disposition indexa

si ⫻ airg.

single-dose studies indicate that sitagliptin and  xxxd3510xxx  have similar clinical efficiency in reducing the glucose
excursion after oral glucose. data are not yet available to
enable comparison of the efficacies of both products in
chronic use.
d. potential effects on preservation and augmentation of ␤-cell
mass. regarding the most important question concerning
both glp-1 analogs,  xxxg899xxx  activators and  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors (incretin enhancers), incretin mimetics, is whether they
will be able to slow or prevent the apparently inevitable
progress of the dm2, considering their trophic effects on
␤-cells (249), not only stimulating their proliferation (185,
250) but also enhancing the differentiation of new ␤-cells
from progenitor cells in the pancreatic duct epithelium (251)
and, perhaps most importantly, being capable of inhibiting
apoptosis of the ␤-cells including human ␤-cells (195). because the normal number of ␤-cells is maintained in a balance
between apoptosis and proliferation, the protective effects of
incretin mimetics could be relevant under conditions in
which ␤-cell apoptosis is increased, such as in dm2 (4).
because, for obvious reasons, it is difficult to estimate the
protective effects of incretin mimetics on ␤-cells in humans,
there is no clinical evidence that these drugs really have
protective effects on ␤-cells (252). furthermore, the rate at
which ␤-cell proliferation occurs in humans is not known.
thus, will incretin mimetics protect ␤-cells or promote their
regeneration in clinical use, as appears to be the case in
animal studies (157)? a question put forward by holst in his
claude bernard lecture 2005 to the european association for
the study of diabetes (252) is how long should one wait for
such effects to unfold? nevertheless, there are two observations addressing this question that were put forward by
holst (252). in the study in which  xxxd3510xxx  was admin-

istered for 52 wk to patients inadequately treated with metformin, subjects showed a sustained improvement in hba1c,
whereas an increase was observed in the control group (215).
similarly, over 82 wk of treatment with exenatide, hba1c
levels remained constant at approximately 7% (253) although, according to the ukpds, an increase would have
been expected over this time span. these sustained effects
could be the first indication that incretin mimetics have ␤-cell
protective effects that persist after the plateau, reached 3 to
4 months after initiation of therapy, suggesting that continued exposure to incretin mimetics is required for further
improvements in metabolic control. at any rate, these observations, according to holst (252), tell us that incretin mimetics should be started as early in the clinical course as
possible, before ␤-cell function has deteriorated to unacceptable levels.
incretin mimetics may exert an indirect effect on ␤-cell
mass by reducing hyperglycemia, which, as indicated before,
can cause ␤-cell dysfunction and apoptosis. another effect on
␤-cell mass could be the result of a nonspecific growth factor
effect of augmented insulin supply itself (254). a direct effect
on ␤-cell mass has been demonstrated, at least in rodents, by
stimulating both ␤-cell replication and neogenesis and inhibiting cell apoptosis, thus increasing ␤-cell mass. because
 xxxg899xxx  is found in pancreatic ducts, a presumed site of
origin of ␤-cell precursors (162), neogenesis is probably derived from these precursors (fig. 4).
regarding glucagon secretion (254), there is abundant evidence that hyperglucagonemia plays a role in the development of hyperglycemia in dm2, contributing to an excessive
glucose production by the liver through its action in association with a reduced insulin secretion. however, the efforts
to understand and correct the abnormal glucagon secretion

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 211

fig. 4. pathways supposedly involved in insulin
secretion and ␤-cell mass increase by the action of
incretin mimetics.

have been overshadowed by the emphasis on insulin secretion and action. the recognition that glp-1 and mimetics
exert opposing effects on glucagon and insulin secretion has
revived interest in glucagon, the neglected partner in the
“bihormonal hypothesis” proposed by unger and orci 30 yr
ago to explain the origin of hyperglycemia in diabetes (255).
the defect in the ␣-cell function that occurs in dm2 reflects
impaired glucose sensing, which contributes to the increased
rate of hepatic glucose output in dm2. another manifestation of impaired glucose sensing by the ␣-cell is the loss of
hyperglycemia-induced suppression of glucagon release. besides, a very important aspect of ␣-cell dysfunction in diabetes is a failure to respond appropriately to hypoglycemia
(256). glp-1 and incretin mimetics inhibit glucagon secretion, and this action may be as important as its insulinotropic
effect in terms of its therapeutic properties. most of the limited available evidence is consistent with the notion that
glp-1 improves ␣-cell glucose sensing in dm2, but the ␣-cell
response to incipient hypoglycemia is not suppressed by
glp-1. furthermore, the ability of glp-1 and mimetics to
suppress glucagon secretion in patients with dm2 appears to
be maintained with chronic treatment (256, 257).
the recent description of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
and nesidioblastosis together with increased circulating levels of glp-1 in a few patients after gastric bypass surgery
emphasizes the importance of understanding the long-term
consequences of prolonged activation of glp-1 receptors in
human subjects (182, 258).

acknowledgments
address all correspondence to: bernardo l. wajchenberg, diabetes
and heart center of the heart institute, hospital das clinicas of the
university of são paulo medical school, av. eneas c. aguiar 44, bloco
ii, ab são paulo, sp 05403-000, brazil. e-mail: bernarwaj@globo.com.

references
1. uk prospective diabetes study (ukpds) group 1998 intensive
blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared
with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients
with type 2 diabetes (ukpds 33). lancet 352:837– 853
2. uk prospective diabetes study (ukpds) group 1998 effect of
intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications
in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (ukpds 34). lancet
352:854 – 865
3. holman rr 1998 assessing the potential for ␣-glucosidase inhibitors in prediabetic states. diabetes res clin pract 40 (suppl):s21–
s25
4. butler ae, janson j, bonner-weir s, ritzel r, rizza ra, butler pc
2003 ␤-cell deficit and increased ␤-cell apoptosis in humans with
type 2 diabetes. diabetes 52:102–110
5. wallace tm, levy jc, matthews dr 2004 use and abuse of homa
modeling. diabetes care 27:1487–1495
6. matthews dr 2001 insulin resistance and ␤-cell function—a clinical perspective. diabetes obes metab 3(suppl 1):s28 –s33
7. uk prospective diabetes study (ukpds) group 1995 overview
of 6 years‘ therapy of type ii diabetes: a progressive disease (ukpds 16). diabetes 44:1249 –1258
8. östgren cj, lindblad u, ranstam j, melander a, rastam l 2002
glycaemic control, disease duration and ␤-cell function in patients
with type 2 diabetes in a swedish community. skaraborg hypertension and diabetes project. diabet med 19:125–129
9. mattthews dr, hosker jp, rudenski as, naylor ba, teacher df,
turner rc 1985 homeostasis model assessment: insulin resistance
and ␤-cell function from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in man. diabetologia 28:412– 419
10. bergman rn 1989 toward physiological understanding of glucose
tolerance. minimal-model approach. lilly lecture. diabetes
38:1512–1527
11. stumvoll m, tataranni a, stefan n, vozarova b, bogardus c 2003
glucose allostasis. diabetes 52:903–909
12. boden g, shulman gi 2002 free  xxxd2154xxx  in obesity and type 2
diabetes: defining their role in the development of insulin resistance and ␤-cell dysfunction. eur j clin invest 32:14 –23
13. pratley re, weyer c 2001 the role of impaired early insulin secretion in the pathogenesis of type ii diabetes mellitus. diabetologia 44:929 –945
14. weyer c, bogardus c, mott dm, pratley re 1999 the natural
history of insulin secretory dysfunction and insulin resistance in

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

212

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

33.
34.

35.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. j clin invest 104:787–
794
gerich je 2003 contributions of insulin resistance and insulinsecretory defects to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
mayo clin proc 78:447– 456
elbein sc, hasstedt sj, wegner k, kahn se 1999 heritability of
pancreatic ␤-cell function among nondiabetic members of caucasian familial type 2 diabetic kindreds. j clin endocrinol metab
84:1398 –1403
elbein sc, wegner k, kahn se 2000 reduced ␤-cell compensation
to the insulin resistance associated with obesity in members of
caucasian familial type 2 diabetic kindreds. diabetes care 23:221–
227
wajchenberg bl 2000 subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue:
their relation to the metabolic syndrome. endocr rev 21:697–738
gerich je 1998 the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes mellitus: impaired insulin secretion versus impaired insulin sensitivity. endocr
rev 19:491–503
gerich je 2000 clinical perspective: insulin resistance is not necessarily an essential component of type 2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol
metab 85:2113–2115
donath my, halban pa 2004 decreased ␤-cell mass in diabetes:
significance, mechanisms and therapeutic implications. diabetologia 47:581–589
kahn se 1996 regulation of ␤-cell function in vivo: from health to
disease. diabetes rev 4:372–389
roder me, porte dj, schwartz rs, kahn se 1998 disproportionately elevated  xxxg1193xxx  levels reflect the degree of impaired ␤-cell
secretory capacity in patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. j clin endocrinol metab 83:604 – 608
gerich je 2002 is reduced first-phase insulin release the earliest
detectable abnormality in individuals destined to develop type 2
diabetes? diabetes 51(suppl 1):s117–s121
mitrakou a, kelley d, mokan m, veneman t, pangburn t, reilly
j, gerich je 1992 role of reduced suppression of glucose production and diminished early insulin release in impaired glucose tolerance. n engl j med 326:22–29
bergstrom rw, wahl pw, leonetti dl, fujimoto wy 1990 association of fasting glucose levels with delayed secretion of insulin
after oral glucose in subjects with glucose intolerance. j clin endocrinol metab 71:1447–1453
polonsky ks, given bd, hirsch lj, tillil h, shapiro et, beebe
c, frank bh, galloway ja, van cauter e 1988 abnormal patterns
of insulin secretion in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
n engl j med 318:1231–1239
sturis j, polonsky ks, shapiro et, blackman jd, o‘meara nm,
van cauter e 1992 abnormalities in the ultradian oscillations of
insulin secretion and glucose levels in type ii (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic patients. diabetologia 35:681– 689
o‘meara nm, sturis j, van cauter e, polonsky ks 1993 lack of
control by glucose of ultradian insulin secretory oscillations in
impaired glucose tolerance and non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. j clin invest 92:262–271
lang da, matthews dr, burnett m, turner rc 1981 brief, irregular oscillations of basal plasma insulin and glucose concentrations
in diabetic man. diabetes 30:435– 439
o‘rahilly s, turner rc, matthews dr 1988 impaired pulsatile
secretion of insulin in relatives of patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes. n engl j med 318:1225–1230
ritzel r, schulte m, porksen n, nauck ms, holst jj, juhl c, märz
w, schmitz o, schmiegel wh, nauck ma 2001 glucagon-like
peptide 1 increases secretory burst mass of pulsatile insulin secretion in patients with type 2 diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance. diabetes 50:776 –784
porksen n 2002 the in vivo regulation of pulsatile insulin secretion. diabetologia 45:3–20
pick a, clark j, kubstrup c, levisetti mpugh w, bonner-weir s,
polonsky ks 1998 role of apoptosis in failure of ␤-cell mass compensation for insulin resistance and ␤-cell defects in the male
zucker diabetic fatty rat. diabetes 47:358 –364
sakuraba b, mizukami h, yagihashi n, wada r, hanyu c, yagihashi s 2002 reduced ␤-cell mass and expression of oxidative

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

51.
52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

stress-related dna damage in the islet of japanese type ii diabetes
mellitus. diabetologia 45:85–96
yoon kh, ko sh, cho jh, lee jm, ahn yb, song kh, yoo sj,
kang mi, cha by, lee kw, son hy, hang sk, kim hs, lee ik,
bonner-weir s 2003 selective ␤-cell loss and ␣-cell expansion in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in korea. j clin endocrinol
metab 88:2300 –2308
trautmann m, ␤-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. continued
medical education program, eli lilly. salvador, bahia, brazil, november 10, 2005
klöppel g, löhr m, habich k, oberholzer m, heitz pu 1985 islet
pathology and the pathogenesis of type 1 and type 2 diabetes
mellitus revisited. surg synth pathol res 4:110 –125
clark a, wells ca, buley id, cruickshank jk, vanhegan ri,
matthews dr, cooper gj, holman rr, turner rc 1988 islet
amyloid, increased a-cells, reduced b-cells and exocrine fibrosis:
quantitative changes in the pancreas in type 2 diabetes. diabetes
res 9:151–159
guiot y, sempoux c, moulin p, rahier j 2001 no decrease of ␤-cell
mass in type 2 diabetic patients. diabetes 50(suppl 1):s188
rorsman p 2005 insulin secretion: function and therapy of pancreatic ␤-cells in diabetes. br j diabetes vasc dis 5:187–191
kaiser n, leibovitz g, nesher r 2003 glucotoxicity and ␤-cell
failure in type 2 diabetes mellitus. j pediatr endocrinol metab
16:5–22
donath my, gross dj, cerasi e, kaiser n 1999 hyperglycemiainduced ␤-cell apoptosis in pancreatic islets of psammomys obesus
during development of diabetes. diabetes 48:738 –744
maedler k, spinas ga, lehmann r, sergeev p, weber m, fontana
a, kaiser n, donath my 2001 glucose induces ␤-cell apoptosis via
upregulations of the fas-receptor in human islets. diabetes 50:
1683–1690
efanova ib, zaitsev sv, zhivotovsky b, köhler m, efendic s,
orrenius s, berggren p-o 1998 glucose and  xxxd3394xxx  induce
apoptosis in pancreatic ␤-cells. a process dependent on intracellular ca2⫹ concentration. j biol chem 273:33501–33507
donath my, ehses ja, maedler k, schumann dm, ellingsgaard
h, eppler e, reinecke m 2005 mechanisms of ␤-cell death in type
2 diabetes. diabetes 54(suppl 2):s108 –s113
robertson rp, harmon j, tran po, tanaka y, takahashi h 2003
glucose toxicity in ␤-cells: type 2 diabetes, good radicals gone bad,
and the glutathione connection. diabetes 52:581–587
harding hp, ron d 2002 endoplasmic reticulum stress and the
development of diabetes. a review. diabetes 51(suppl 3):s455–
s461
grill v, bjorklund a 2001 overstimulation and ␤-cell function.
diabetes 50(suppl 1):s122–s124
maedler k, sergeev p, ris f, oberholzer j, joller-jemelka hi,
sinas ga, kaiser n, halban pa, donath my 2002 glucose-induced ␤-cell production of il-1␤ contributes to glucotoxicity in
human pancreatic islets. j clin invest 110:851– 860
robertson rp, harmon j, tran po, poitout v 2004 ␤-cell glucose
toxicity, lipotoxicity, and chronic oxidative stress in type 2 diabetes.
diabetes 53(suppl 1):s119 –s124
kaneto h, xu g, song kh, suzuma k, bonner-weir s, sharma a,
weir gc 2001 activation of the hexosamine pathway leads to
deterioration of pancreatic ␤-cell function through the induction of
oxidative stress. j biol chem 276:31099 –31104
del guerra s, lupi r, marselli l, masini m, bugliani m, sbrana
s, torri s, polera m, boggi u, mosca f, del prato s, marchetti p
2005 functional and molecular defects of pancreatic islets in human
type 2 diabetes. diabetes 54:727–735
boden g 1998 free  xxxd2154xxx  (ffa), a link between obesity and
insulin resistance. front biosci 47: xxxd169xxx  –  xxxd175xxx 
kashyap s, belfort r, castaldelli a, pratipanawatr t, berria r,
pratipanawatr w, bajaj m, mandarino l, defronzo r, cusi k
2003 a sustained increase in plasma free  xxxd2154xxx  impairs insulin
secretion in nondiabetic subjects genetically predisposed to develop type 2 diabetes. diabetes 52:2461–2474
santomauro atmg, boden g, silva me, rocha dm, santos rf,
ursich mj, strassmann pg, wajchenberg bl 1999 overnight lowering of free  xxxd2154xxx  with acipimox improves insulin resistance

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

57.

58.
59.
60.

61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.
68.
69.
70.

71.
72.
73.
74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

and glucose tolerance in obese diabetic and nondiabetic subjects.
diabetes 48:1836 –1841
bajaj m, suraamornkul s, romanelli a, cline gw, mandarino
lj, shulman gi, defronzo ra 2005 effect of sustained reduction
in plasma free fatty acid concentration on intramuscular long-chain
fatty acyl-coas and insulin action in type 2 diabetic patients. diabetes 54:3148 –3153
boden g, shulman gi 2002 free  xxxd2154xxx  in obesity and type 2
diabetes: defining their role in the development of insulin resistance and ␤-cell dysfunction. eur j clin invest 32(suppl 3):14 –23
shimabukuro m, zhou yt, levy m, unger rh 1998 fatty acidinduced ␤-cell apoptosis: a link between obesity and diabetes. proc
natl acad sci usa 95:2498 –2502
maedler k, oberholzer j, bucher p, spinas ga, donath my 2003
monounsaturated  xxxd2154xxx  prevent the deleterious effects of
palmitate and high glucose on human pancreatic ␤-cell turnover
and function. diabetes 52:726 –733
roehrich m-e, mooser v, lenain v, herz j, nimpf j, azhar s,
bideau m, capponi a, nicod p, haefliger j-a, waeber g 2003
insulin-secreting ␤-cell dysfunction induced by human lipoproteins. j biol chem 278:18368 –18375
prentki m, corkey be 1996 are the ␤-cell signaling molecules
malonyl-coa and cytosolic long-chain acyl-coa implicated in
multiple tissue defects of obesity and niddm? diabetes 45:273–283
yaney gc, corkey be 2003 fatty acid metabolism and insulin
secretion in pancreatic ␤-cells. diabetologia 46:1297–1312
poitout v, robertson rp 2002 minireview: secondary ␤-cell failure
in type 2 diabetes—a convergence of glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity.
endocrinology 143:339 –342
carlsson c, borg la, welsh n 1999 sodium palmitate induces
partial mitochondrial uncoupling and reactive oxygen species in
rat pancreatic islets in vitro. endocrinology 140:3422–3428
patane g, piro s, rabuazzo am, anello m, vigneri r, purrello
f 2000 metformin restores insulin secretion altered by chronic
exposure to free  xxxd2154xxx  or high glucose: a direct metformin
effect on pancreatic ␤-cells. diabetes 49:735–740
donath my, storling j, maedler k, mandrup-poulsen t 2003
inflammatory mediators and islet ␤-cell failure: a link between type
1 and type 2 diabetes. j mol med 81:455– 470
ronti t, lupattelli g, mannarino e 2006 the endocrine function
of adipose tissue: an update. clin endocrinol (oxf) 64:355–365
otero m, lago r, lago f, casanueva ff, dieguez c, gomez-reino
jj, gualillo o 2005 leptin, from fat to inflammation: old questions
and new insights. febs lett 479:295–301
maedler k, sergeev p, ehses ja, mathe z, bosco d, berney t,
dayer jm, reinecke m, halban pa, donath my 2004 leptin
modulates ␤-cell expression of  xxxd2806xxx  and release
of il-1 ␤ in human islets. proc natl acad sci usa 101:8138 – 8143
pickup jc 2004 inflammation and activated innate immunity in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. diabetologia 27:813– 823
pietropaolo m, barinas-mitchell e, pietropaolo sl, kuller lh,
trucco m 2000 evidence of islet cell autoimmunity in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes 49:32–38
clark a, nilsson mr 2004 islet amyloid: a complication of islet
dysfunction or an aetiological factor in type 2 diabetes ? diabetologia 47:157–169
soeller wc, janson j, hart se, parker jc, carty md, stevenson
rw, kreutter dk, butler pc 1998 islet amyloid-associated diabetes
in obese avy/a mice expressing human islet amyloid polypeptide.
diabetes 47:743–750
butler ae, janson j, ritzel r, sultana c, soeller wc, butler pc
2002 accelerated apoptosis overcomes increased replication to
cause ␤-cell loss in diabetes in mice transgenic for h-iapp. diabetes
51(suppl 2):abstract 7
janson j, ashley rh, harrison d, mcintyre s, butler pc 1999 the
mechanism of islet amyloid polypeptide toxicity is membrane disruption by intermediate-sized toxic amyloid particles. diabetes
48:491– 498
brunzell jd, robertson rp, lerner rl, hazzard wr, ensinck jw,
bierman el, porte jr d 1976 relationships between fasting plasma
glucose levels and insulin secretion during intravenous glucose
tolerance tests. j clin endocrinol metab 42:222–229
kendall dm, sutherland dw, najjarian js, goetz fc, robertson

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 213

79.
80.
81.

82.
83.

84.
85.

86.
87.

88.

89.
90.
91.

92.

93.

94.

95.
96.
97.
98.

99.

rp 1990 effects of hemipancreatectomy on insulin secretion and
glucose tolerance in healthy humans. n engl j med 322:898 –903
bonner-weir s, trent df, weir gc 1983 partial pancreatectomy
in the rat and subsequent defect in glucose-induced insulin release.
j clin invest 71:1544 –1553
weir gc, leahy jl, bonner-weir s 1986 experimental reduction
in b-cell mass: implications for the pathogenesis of diabetes. diabetes metab rev 2:125–161
rachman j, gribble fm, barrow ba, levy jc, buchanan kd,
turner rc 1996 normalization of insulin responses to glucose by
overnight infusion of glucagons-like peptide 1(7-36)amide in patients with niddm. diabetes 45:1524 –1530
ovalle f, bell dsh 2004 effect of rosiglitazone versus insulin on
the pancreatic ␤-cell function of subjects with type 2 diabetes.
diabetes care 27:2585–2589
fehse fc, trautmann me, holst jj, halseth ae, nanayakkra n,
nielsen ll, fineman ms, kim dd, nauck ma 2005 exenatide
augments first and second phase insulin secretion in response to
intravenous glucose in subjects with type 2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol metab 90:5991–5997
ryan ea, imes s, wallace c 2004 short-term intensive insulin
therapy in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 27:
1028 –1032
li y, xu w, liao z, yao b, chen x, huang z, hu g, weng jp 2004
induction of long-term glycemic control in newly diagnosed type
2 diabetic patients is associated with improvement of ␤-cell function. diabetes care 27:2597–2602
drucker dj 2003 glucagon-like peptides: regulators of cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. mol endocrinol 17:161–171
finegod dt, dawn mcarthur m, kojwang d, thomas mj, topp
bg, leonard t, buckingham re 2001 ␤-cell mass dynamics in
zucker diabetic fatty rats. rosiglitazone prevents the rise in net cell
death. diabetes 50:1021–1029
diani ar, sawada g, wyse b, murray t, khan m 2004 pioglitazone preserves pancreatic islet structure and insulin secretory
function in three murine models of type 2 diabetes. am j physiol
endocrinol metab 286:e116 –e122
bell dsh 2004 management of type 2 diabetes with thiazolidinediones. link between ␤-cell preservation and durability of
response. the endocrinologist 14:293–299
garvey wt, olefsky jm, griffin j, hamman rf, kolterman og
1985 the effect of insulin treatment on insulin secretion and insulin
action in type ii diabetes mellitus. diabetes 34:222–234
glaser b, leibovitz g, nesher r, hartling s, binder c, cerasi e
1988 improved ␤-cell function after intensive insulin treatment in
severe non-insulin-dependent diabetes. acta endocrinol 118:365–
373
yki-järvinen h, esko n, eero h, tashkinen m-r 1988 clinical
benefits and mechanisms of a sustained response to intermittent
insulin therapy in type 2 diabetic patients with secondary drug
failure. am j med 84:185–192
gormley mj, hadden dr, woods dr, sheridan b, andrews wj
1986 one month’s insulin treatment of type ii diabetes: the early
and medium-term effects following insulin withdrawal. metabolism 35:1029 –1036
ilkova h, glaser b, tunckale a, bagriacik n, cerasi e 1997 induction of long-term control in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetic
patients by transient intensive insulin treatment. diabetes care
20:1353–1356
ashcroft fm, gribble em 1999 atp-sensitive k⫹ channels and
insulin secretion: their role in health and disease. diabetologia
42:903–919
greenwood rh, mahler rf, hales cn 1976 improvement in insulin secretion in diabetes after  xxxd1868xxx . lancet 1:444 – 447
leahy jl, bumbalo lm, chen c 1994  xxxd1868xxx  causes recovery
of ␤-cell glucose responsiveness in 90% pancreatectomized diabetic
rats. diabetes 43:173–179
matsuda m, kawasaki f, mikami y,takeuchi y, saito m, eto m,
kaku k 2002 rescue of ␤ exhaustion by  xxxd1868xxx  after the development of diabetes mellitus in rats with  xxxd3249xxx -induced
diabetes. eur j pharmacol 453:141–148
björklund a, lansner a, grill ve 2000 glucose-induced [ca2⫹]i

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

214

100.

101.

102.
103.

104.

105.
106.

107.

108.

109.
110.
111.
112.
113.

114.

115.
116.
117.
118.

118.
120.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218
abnormalities in human pancreatic islets. important role of overstimulation. diabetes 49:184 –1848
guldstrand m, grill v, björklund a, lins pe, adamson u 2002
improved ␤-cell function after short-term treatment with  xxxd1868xxx 
in obese subjects with type 2 diabetes. diabetes metab (paris) 28:
448 – 450
teuscher au, kendall dm, smets yfc, leone jp, sutherland
der 1998 successful islet autotransplantation in humans: functional insulin secretory reserve as an estimate of surviving islet cell
mass. diabetes 47:324 –330
bjork e, berne c, kampe o, wibell l, oskarsson p, karlsson fa
1996  xxxd1868xxx  treatment at onset preserved residual insulin secretion in adults with autoimmune diabetes. diabetes 45:1427–1430
örtqvist e, björk e, wallensteen m, ludvigsson j, aman j, johansson c, forsander g, lindgren f, berglund l, bengtsson m,
berne c, persson b, andres karlsson f 2004 temporary preservation of ␤-cell function by  xxxd1868xxx  treatment in childhood type
1 diabetes. diabetes 27:2191–2197
iwakura t, fujimoto s, kagimoto s, inada a, kubota a, someya
y, ihara y, yamada y, seino y 2000 sustained enhancement of
ca(2⫹) influx by  xxxd2215xxx  induces apoptosis in rinm5f cells.
biochem res commun 27: 422– 428
maedler k, carr rd, bosco d, zuellig ra, berney t, donath my
2005 sulfonylurea induced ␤-cell apoptosis in cultured human
islets. j clin endocrinol metab 90: 501–506
del guerra s, marselli l, lupi r, boggi u, mosca f, benzi l, del
prato s, marchetti p 2003 effects on prolonged in vitro exposure
to sulphonylureas on the function and survival of human islets. j
diabetes complications 19:60 – 64
ritzel ra, hansen jb, veldhuis jd, butler pc 2004 induction of
␤-cell rest by a kir 6.2/sur 1 selective k atp-channel opener
preserves ␤-cell insulin stores and insulin secretion in human islets
cultured in high (11 mm) glucose. j clin endocrinol metab 89:795–
805
alvarsson m, sundkvist g, lager i, henricsson m, berntorp k,
fernqvist-forbes e, steen l, westermark g, westermark p, örn
t, grill w 2003 beneficial effects of insulin versus sulphonylurea
on insulin secretion and metabolic control in recently diagnosed
type 2 diabetic patients. diabetes care 26:2231–2237
unger rh 1997 how obesity causes diabetes in zucker diabetic
fatty rats. trends endocrinol metab 8:276 –282
giardino i, fard ak, hatchell dl, brownlee m 1998  xxxd2951xxx  inhibits reactive oxygen species formation, lipid peroxidation, and oxidant-induced apoptosis. diabetes 47:1114 –1120
shimabukuro m, ohneda m, lee y, unger rh 1997 role of nitric
oxide in obesity-induced ␤-cell disease. j clin invest 100:290 –295
sing r, barden a, mori t, beilin l 2001 advanced glycation
end-products: a review. diabetologia 44:129 –146
dubois m, pattou f, carr-conte j, gmyr v, vanderwalle v, desreumaux p, auswers, schoonjans k, lefebvre j 2001 expression
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ␥ (ppar ␥) in normal
human pancreatic islet cells. diabetologia 43:1165–1169
way jm, harrington ww, brown kk, gottschalk wk, sundseth
ss, mansfield ta, ramachandran rk, wilson tm, kliewer sa
2001 comprehensive messenger ribonucleic acid profiling reveals
that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ␥ activation has
coordinate effects on gene expression in multiple insulin-sensitive
tissues. endocrinology 142:1269 –1277
yki-järvinen h 2004 thiazolidinediones. review article. n engl
j med 351:1106 –1118
leiter la 2005 ␤-cell preservation: a potential role for thiazolidinediones to improve clinical care in type 2 diabetes. diabet med
22:963–972
arner p 2001 free  xxxd2154xxx — do they play a central role in type
2 diabetes? diabetes obes metab 3:s11–s19
sakamoto j, kimura h, moriyama s, odaka h, momose y, sugiyama y, sawada h 2000 activation of human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar) subtypes by pioglitazone. biochem biophys res commun 278:704 –711
staels b, fruchart j-c 2005 therapeutic roles of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists. diabetes 54:2460 –2470
shimabukuru m, zhou yt, lee y, unger rh 1998 troglitazone

121.
122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.
131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.
137.
138.

lowers islet fat and restore ␤-cell function of zucker diabetic fat rats.
j biol chem 273:3547–3550
lister ca, boam d, bretherton-watt d 1998 rosiglitazone increases pancreatic islet area, number and insulin content, but not
insulin gene expression. diabetologia 41(suppl 1):a-169 [abstract]
diani ar, sawada g, wyse b, murray ft, khan m 2004 pioglitazone preserved pancreatic islet structure and insulin secretory
function in three murine models of type 2 diabetes. am j physiol
endocrinol metab 286:e116 –e122
maeda n, takahashi m, funahashi t, kihara s, nishizawa h,
kishida k, nagaretani h, matsuda m, komuro r, ouchi n,
kuriyama h, hotta k, nakamura t, shimomura i, matsuzawa y
2001 ppar␥ ligands increase expression and plasma concentrations of adiponectin, an adipose-derived protein. diabetes 50:2094 –
2099
hull rl, shen z-p, watts mr, kodama k, carr db, utzschneider,
zraika s, wang ff, kahn se 2005 long term treatment with
rosiglitazone and metformin reduces the extent of, but does not
prevent, islet amyloid deposition in mice expressing the gene for
human islet amyloid polypeptide. diabetes 54:2235–2244
lupi r, del guerra s, marselli l, bugliani m, boggi u, mosca f,
marchetti p, del prado s 2004 rosiglitazone prevents the impairment of human islet function induced by  xxxd2154xxx : evidence for
a role of ppar␥2 in the modulation of insulin secretion. am j
physiol endocrinol metab 286:e560 –e567
marselli l, bambini mc, lupi r, del guerra s, boggi u, mosca
f, del prado s, marchetti p 2002 rosiglitazone partially prevents
free fatty acid-induced cytotoxicity in human pancreatic islet cell.
diabetologia 45(suppl 2):a161 [abstract 494]
zeender e, maedler k, bosco d, berney t, donath my, halban
pa 2004 pioglitazone and  xxxd3219xxx  protect human ␤-cells
against apoptosis and impaired function induced by glucose and
interleukin-1␤. diabetes 89:5059 –5066
lin c-y, gurlo t, haataja l, hsueh wa, butler pc 2004 peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar-␥) activation protects
human islets from human islet amyloid polypeptide-induced apoptosis. diabetes 53(suppl 2):a32 [abstract 137-or]
juhl cb, hollingdal m, porksen n, prange a, lönnqvist f, smith
o 2003 influence of rosiglitazone treatment on ␤-cell function in
type 2 diabetes: evidence of an increased ability of glucose to
entrain high-frequency insulin pulsatility. j clin endocrinol metab
88:3794 –3800
lebovitz he, dole jf, patwardhan r, rappaport eb, freed mi
2001 rosiglitazone monotherapy is effective in patients with type
2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol metab 86:280 –288
wolffenbuttel bh, gomis r, squatrito s, jones np, patwardhan
rn 2000 addition of low-dose rosiglitazone to sulphonylurea therapy improves glycemic control in type 2 diabetic patients. diabet
med 17:40 – 47
einhorn d, rendell m, rosenzweig j, egan jw, mathisen al,
schneider rl 2000 pioglitazone hydrochloride in combination
with metformin in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a randomized,
placebo-controlled study. the pioglitazone 027 study group. clin
ther 22:1345–1409
jones ta, sautter m, van gaal lf, jones np 2003 addition of
rosiglitazone to metformin is most effective in obese, insulin-resistant patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes obes metab 5:163–
170
rosenblatt s, miskin b, glazer nb, prince mj, robertson ke 2001
the impact of pioglitazone on glycemic control and atherogenic
dyslipidemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. coron artery dis 12:413– 423
li j, tian h, ren y, yu h, wang j, zhang x, zhao g 2003 effect
of pioglitazone on first phase insulin secretion in type 2 diabetes
mellitus and impaired glucose tolerance. diabetes 52(suppl 1):
a281 [abstract 1212-p]
campbell jw 2004 long-term glycemic controls with pioglitazone
in patients with type 2 diabetes. int j clin pract 58:192–200
bell dsh, ovalle f 2002 long-term efficacy of triple oral therapy
for type 2 diabetes mellitus. endocr pract 8:271–275
bell dsh, ovalle f, five-year follow-up of triple oral therapy for
type 2 diabetes mellitus. program of the 85th annual meeting of

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

139.
140.

141.

142.
143.

144.
145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.
151.

152.

153.
154.
155.
156.

the endocrine society, philadelphia, pa, 2003, p 272 [abstract
p1–586]
zinman b 2001 ppar␥ agonists in type 2 diabetes: how far have
we come in “preventing the inevitable”? a review of the metabolic
effects of rosiglitazone. diabetes obes metab 3(suppl 1):s34 –s43
smith sa, porter le, biswas n, freed mi 2005 rosiglitazone, but
not  xxxd2215xxx , reduces circulating  xxxg1193xxx  and the  xxxg1193xxx :
insulin ratio in type 2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol metab 89:6048 –
6053
wallace tm, levy jc, matthews dr 2004 an increase in insulin
sensitivity and basal ␤-cell function in diabetic subjects treated with
pioglitazone in a placebo-controlled randomized study. diabet
med 21:568 –576
walter h, lübben g 2005 potential role of oral thiazolidinedione
therapy in preserving ␤-cell function in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
drugs 65:1–13
fonseca v, rosenstock j, patwardhan r, salzman a 2000 effect of
metformin and rosiglitazone combination therapy in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. a randomized controlled trial. jama
283:1695–1702
miyazaki y, matsuda m, defronzo ra 2002 dose-response effect
of pioglitazone on insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion in type
3 diabetes. diabetes care 25:517–523
pfützner a, langenfeld m, butzer r, hohberg c, lübben g,
konrad t, forst t 2004 influence of pioglitazone on insulin resistance, ␤-cell secretion, and cardiovascular risk markers in comparison to  xxxd2203xxx  in patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes
53(suppl 2):a160 [abstract 669-p]
rasouli n, miles l, raue u, lu t, elbein sc, kern pa 2004
pioglitazone (pio) but not metformin (met) improves lipotoxicity,
insulin sensitivity, and ␤-cell function in subjects with impaired
glucose tolerance (igt). diabetes 53(suppl 2):a359 [abstract
1492-p]
vinik ai, yu d, strow lj, kravitz bg, heise ma, freed mi,
o‘neill mc 2004 long-term effect of rosiglitazone on pancreatic
␤-cell function and insulin resistance in older type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm) patients treated with sulfonylurea. diabetes 53(suppl
2):a162 [abstract 680-p]
hamdy o, soodini g, martens j, verheugt ca, steppel j, caballero ae, bennani t, horton es 2005 pioglitazone preserves
pancreatic ␤-cells in patients with type 2 diabetes and impaired
glucose tolerance. diabetes 54(suppl 2):a146 [abstract 592-p]
de winter w, de jongh j, urquhart r, moules i, eckland d,
danhof m 2005 mechanistic disease progression analysis indicates
that pioglitazone improves ␤-cell function in treatment-naive type
2 diabetics. diabetes 54(suppl 2):a65 [abstract 265-or]
ovalle f, bell dsh 2002 clinical evidence that thiazolidinedione
induced improvement of pancreatic ␤-cell function in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. diabetes obes metab 4:56 –59
buchanan ta, xiang ah, peters rk, kjos sl, marroquin a,
goico j, ochoa c, tan s, berkowitz k, hodis hn, azen sp 2002
preservation of pancreatic ␤-cell function and prevention of type 2
diabetes by pharmacological treatment of insulin resistance in
high-risk hispanic women. diabetes 51:2796 –2803
xiang ah, peters rk, kjos sl, marroquin a, goico j, ochoa c,
kawakubo m, buchanan ta 2006 effect of pioglitazone on pancreatic ␤-cell function and diabetes risk in hispanic women with
prior gestational diabetes. diabetes 55:517–522
the diabetes prevention program research group 2002 reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention
or metformin. n engl j med 346:393– 403
the diabetes prevention program research group 2005 prevention of type 2 diabetes with troglitazone in the diabetes prevention
program. diabetes 54:1150 –1156
durbin rj 2004 thiazolidinedione therapy in the prevention/delay of type 2 diabetes in patients with impaired glucose tolerance
and insulin resistance. diabetes obes metab 6:280 –285
gerstein hc, yusuf s, bosch j, pogue j, sheridan p, dinccag n,
hanefeld m, hoogwerf b, laakso m, mohan v, shaw j, zinman
b, holman rr, on behalf of the dream trial investigators 2006
effect of rosiglitazone on the frequency of diabetes in patients with
impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose: a randomized controlled trial. lancet 368:1096 –1105

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 215
157. drucker dj 2003 enhancing incretin action for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 26:2928 –2940
158. hansen l, holst jj 2005 the two intestinal incretins differentially
regulate glucagons secretion due to differing intraislet paracrine
effects. diabetologia 48(suppl 1):a-163
159. turton md, oⴕshea d, gunn i, beak sa, edwards cmb, meeran
k, choi sj, taylor gm, heath mm, lambert pd, wilding jph,
smith dm, ghatei ma, herbert j, bloom sr 1996 a role of
glucagon-like peptide-1 in the central regulation of feeding. nature
379:69 –72
160. drucker dj 2003 glucagon-like peptide-1 and the islet ␤-cell: augmentation of cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis. endocrinology 144:5145–5148
161. hansotia t, drucker dj 2005 gip and glp-1 as incretin hormones:
lessons from single and double incretion receptor knockout mice.
regul pept 128:125–134
162. brubaker pl, drucker dj 2002 structure-function of the glucagon
receptor family of g protein-coupled receptors: the glucagon, gip,
glp-1 and glp-2 receptors. receptors channels 8:179 –188
163. deacon cf 2004 circulation and degradation of gip and glp-1.
horm metab res 36:761–765
164. vahl tp, paty bw, fuller bd, prigeon rl, d’alessio da 2003
effects of glp-1-(7-36)nh2, glp-1-(7-37), and glp-1-(9-36)nh2
on intravenous glucose tolerance and glucose-induced insulin secretion in healthy humans. j clin endocrinol metab 88:1772–1779
165. elahi d, egan jm, shannon rp, meneilly gs, khatri a, habener
jf, andersen dk 2006 the insulinomimetic actions of glp-1(936)amide, cleavage product of glp-1(7-36)amide. diabetes
55(suppl 1):a85 [abstract 363-or]
166. defronzo r, ratner r, han j, kim dd, fineman ms, baron ad
2005 effects of exenatide ( xxxd2076xxx ) on glycemic control and
weight over 30 weeks in metformin-treated patients with type 2
diabetes. diabetes care 28:1092–1300
167. buse jb, henry rr, han j, kim dd, fineman ms, baron ad,
exenatide-113 clinical study group 2004 effects of exenatide ( xxxd2076xxx ) on glycemic control over 30 weeks in sulfonylurea-treated
patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 27:2628 –2635
168. kendall dm, riddle mc, rosenstock j, zhuang d, kim dd,
fineman ms, baron ad 2005 effects of exenatide( xxxd2076xxx ) on
glycemic control over 30 weeks in patients with type 2 diabetes
treated with metformin and a sulfonylurea. diabetes care 28:1083–
1091
169. toft-nielsen m-b, damholt mb, madsbad s, hilsted lm,
hughes te, michelsen bk, holst jj 2001 determinants of the
impaired secretion of glucagon-like peptide-1 in type 2 diabetic
patients. j clin endocrinol metab 86:3717–3723
170. meyer jj, gallwitz b, kask b, deacon cf, holst jj, schmidt we,
nauck ma 2004 stimulation of insulin secretion by intravenous
bolus injection and continuous infusion of gastric inhibitory
polypeptide in patients with type 2 diabetes and healthy control
subjects. diabetes 33(suppl 3):s220 –s224
171. lynn fc, pamir n, ng eh, mcintosh ch, kieffer tj, pederson ra
2001 defective glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor expression in diabetic fatty zucker rats. diabetes 50:1004 –
1011
172. tseng cc, boylan mo, jarboe la, usdin tb, wolfe mm 1996
chronic desensitization of the glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide receptor in diabetic rats. am j physiol 270:e661–e666
173. el-quaghlidi a, holle h, nauck na 2005 tachyphylaxis is not the
cause for reduced insulinotropic action of gastric inhibitory
polypeptide(gip) in type 2 diabetes. diabetologia 48(suppl 1):a547
174. miholic j, orskov o, holst jj, kotzerke j, meyer hj 1991 emptying of the gastric substitute, glucagon-like peptide-l (glp-1), and
reactive hypoglycemia after total gastrectomy. dig dis sci 36:1361–
1370
175. qualmann c, nauck ma, holst jj, orskov o, creutzfeldt w 1995
 xxxg873xxx (7-36 amide) secretion in response to luminal sucrose from upper and lower gut. a study using ␣-glucosidase inhibition. scand j gastroenterol 30:892– 896
176. creutzfeldt wo, kleine n, willms b, orskov c, holst jj, nauck
ma 1996 glucagonostatic actions and reduction of fasting hyper-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

216

177.
178.
179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.
188.

189.
190.
191.
192.

193.

194.

195.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218
glycemia by exogenous  xxxg873xxx  (7-36) amide in
type 1 diabetic patients. diabetes care 19:580 –586
dupré j 2005 glycaemic effects of incretins in type 1 diabetes
mellitus. a concise review, with emphasis on studies in humans.
regul pept 128:149 –157
dupré j, behme mt, mcdonald tj 2004  xxxd2076xxx  normalized
post cibal glycemic excursions in type 1 diabetes. j clin endocrinol
metab 89:3469 –3473
jones-leone a, yu t, barilla d, he l-y, ho yy, ligueros-saylan
m, foley j, kelly d 2004 evidence for insulin independent suppression of glucagon secretion by  xxxd3510xxx . diabetologia 47(suppl
1):a289
quddusi s, vahl tp, hanson k, prigeon rl, d’alessio da 2003
differential effects of acute and extended infusions of glucagon-like
peptide-1 on first- and second-phase insulin secretion in diabetic
and non-diabetic humans. diabetes care 26:791–798
byrne mm, gliem k, wank u, arnold r, katschinski m, polonsky ks, göeke b 1998  xxxg873xxx  improves the ability
of the ␤-cell to sense and respond to glucose in subjects with
impaired glucose tolerance. diabetes 47:1259 –1265
service gj, thompson gb, service fj, andrews jc, collazoclavell ml, lloyd rv 2005 hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with
nesidioblastosis after gastric bypass surgery. n engl j med 353:
249 –254
farilla l, hui h, bertolloto c, kang e, bulotta a, di mario u,
perfetti r 2002 glucagon-like peptide-1 promotes islet cell growth
and inhibits apoptosis in zucker diabetic rats. endocrinology 143:
4397– 4408
hui h, nourparvar a, zhao x, perfetti r 2003 glucagon-like
peptide-1 inhibits apoptosis of insulin-secreting cells via a cyclic
5⬘- xxxd81xxx -dependent protein-kinase-a and a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathway. endocrinology
144:1444 –1455
xu g, stoffers da, habener jf, bonner-weir s 1999  xxxd2076xxx 
stimulates both ␤-cell replication and neogenesis, resulting in increased ␤-cell mass and improved glucose tolerance in diabetic rats.
diabetes 48:2270 –2276
perfetti r, zhou j, doyle me, egan jm 2000 glp-1 induces cell
proliferation, pdx-1 expression and increases endocrine cell mass
in the pancreas of old, glucose-intolerant rats. endocrinology 141:
4600 – 4605
perfetti r 2004 the role of glp-1 in the regulation of islet cell mass.
medscape diabetes endocrinol 6(2)
hiles r, carpenter t, serota d, schafer k, ross p, nelson d,
rebellato m 2004 exenatide does not cause pancreatic islet cell
proliferative lesions in rats and mice following 2-year exposure.
diabetes 53 (suppl 2):a380 [abstract 1585-p]
bahnsali a, glp-1 overview. proc international investigator’s
meeting of the clinical study  xxxd2495xxx -1697( xxxd2495xxx ), zurich,
switzerland, april 21, 2006
li y, hansotia y, yusta b, ris f, halban pa, drucker dj 2003
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor signaling modulates ␤-cell apoptosis. j biol chem 278:471– 478
koehler ja, drucker dj 2006 activation of glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor signaling does not modify the growth or apoptosis of
human pancreatic cancer cells. diabetes 55:1369 –1379
poffenberger g, chen z, liu e, drucker dj, harlan dm, aramandla r, brissova m, powers ac 2006  xxxd2076xxx  (ex-4) improves
survival and function of intra-hepatic human and non-human primate islet transplants. diabetes 56(suppl 1):a61 [abstract 262-or]
sturis j, gotfredsen cf, romer j, rolin b, ribel u, brand cl,
wilken m, wassermann k, deacon cf, carr rd, knudsen lb
2003 glp-1 derivative  xxxd2495xxx  in rats with ␤-cell deficiencies:
influence of metabolic state on ␤-cell dynamics. br j pharmacol
140:123–132
bregenholt s, moldrup a, blume n, karlsen ae, nissen
friedrichsen b, tornhave d, knudsen lb, petersen js 2005 the
long-acting glucagon-like peptide-1 analogue,  xxxd2495xxx , inhibits
␤-cell apoptosis in vitro. biochem biophys res commun 330:577–
584
farilla l, bulotta a, hirshberg b, calzi sl, khoury n, noushmehr h, bertolotto c, di mario u, harlan dm, perfetti r 2003
 xxxg873xxx  inhibits cell apoptosis and improves glu-

196.
197.

198.
199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.
205.

206.
207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

cose responsiveness of freshly isolated human islets. endocrinology 144:5149 –5158
buteau j, el-assaad w, rhodes cj, rosenberg l, joly e, prentki
m 2004 glucagon-like peptide-1 prevents ␤-cell glucolipotoxicity.
diabetologia 47:806 – 815
hui h, zhao x, khoury n, todorov i, zhong j, lin j, wang c,
perfetti r 2005 the biological action of the glp-1 analogue  xxxd2495xxx  is mediated by the activation of the tgf-␤ pathway in
cultured human islets. diabetologia 48(suppl 1):a-165
baggio ll, drucker dj 2006 incretin hormones in the treatment of
type 2 diabetes: therapeutic applications of  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors.
medscape diabetes endocrinol 8:1–5
burcelin r, da costa a, drucker dj, thorens b 2001 glucose
competence of the hepatoportal vein sensor requires the presence
of an activated glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor. diabetes 50:1720 –
1728
wajcberg e, triplitt c, sriwijitkamol a, defronzo ra, cerosimo
e 2006 contribution of glucagon suppression to improved postprandial hyperglycemia induced by exenatide in patients with
t2mm. diabetes 55 (suppl 1):a28 [abstract 118-or]
mari a, halseth a, nanayakkara n, nielsen l, defronzo r,
ferrannini e 2005 mathematical modeling shows exenatide improved postprandial ␤-cell function in patients with type 2 diabetes
treated with metformin or metformin and sulfonylurea. diabetes
54(suppl 1):a119 [abstract 482-p]
mari a, schmitz o, gastaldelli a, oestergaard t, nyholm b,
ferrannini e 2002 meal and oral glucose tests for assessment of
␤-cell function: modeling analysis in normal subjects. am j physiol
endocrinol metab 283:e1159 –e1166
ferrannini e, gastaldelli a, miyazaki y, matsuda m, mari a,
defronzo ra 2005 ␤-cell function in subjects spanning the range
from normal glucose tolerance to overt diabetes: a new analysis.
j clin endocrinol metab 90:493–500
deacon cf 2004 therapeutic strategies based upon glucagon-like
peptide 1. diabetes 53:2181–2189
juhl cb, hollingdal m, sturis j, jakobsen g, agerso h, veldhuis
j, porksen n, schmitz o 2002 bedtime administration of  xxxd2495xxx ,a
long-acting glp-1 derivative, substantially reduces fasting and
postprandial glycemia in type 2 diabetes. diabetes 51:424 – 429
visboll t, agerso h, krarup t, holst jj 2003 similar elimination
rates of glucagon-like peptide-1 in obese type 2 diabetic patients
and healthy subjects. j clin endocrinol metab 88:220 –224
chang am, jakobsen g, sturis j, smith mj, bloem cj, an b,
galecki a, halter jb 2003 the glp-1 derivative  xxxd2495xxx  restores
␤-cell sensitivity to glucose in type 2 diabetic patients after a single
dose. diabetes 52:1786 –1791
degn kb, juhl cb, sturis j, jakobsen g, brock b, chandramouli
v, rungny j, landau br, schmitz o 2004 one week’s treatment
with long-acting  xxxg873xxx  derivative  xxxd2495xxx 
( xxxd2495xxx ) markedly improves 24-h glycemia and ␣- and ␤-cell
function and reduces endogenous glucose release in patients with
type 2 diabetes. diabetes 53:1187–1194
visboll t, zdravkovic m, le-thi t, krarup t, schmitz o, courreges j, verhoeven r, buganova i, madsbad s 2006  xxxd2495xxx 
significantly improves glycemic control and lowers body weight
without risk of either major or minor hypoglycemic episodes in
subjects with type 2 diabetes. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a27 [abstract
115-or]
mari a, degn k, brock b, rungby j, ferrannini e, schmitz o 2006
characterization of ␤-cell function improvement by  xxxd2495xxx :
modeling analysis of 24-h tests. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a124 [abstract 522p]
hui h, wang c, xu j, hui j, perfetti r 2006  xxxd2495xxx  inhibits cell
death in human isolated islets by regulating the expression of
apoptosis-related genes. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a446 (abstract
133-p)
nauck ma,  xxxg899xxx  as a clinical drug target for diabetes
and obesity treatment. glp-1: the new darling of diabetes treatment. proc of the 66th scientific session of the american diabetes
association, washington, dc, june 11, 2006
mentlein r 1999 dipeptidyl-peptidase iv ( xxxg651xxx ): role in the inactivation of regulatory peptides. regul pept 85:9 –24

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes
214. ahrén b 2005 what mediates the benefits associated with dipeptidyl peptidase-iv inhibition? diabetologia 48:605– 607
215. ahrén b, gomis r, standl e, mills d, schweizer a 2004 twelveand 52-week efficacy of the  xxxg651xxx  inhibitor
 xxxd3510xxx  in metformin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 27:2874 –2880
216. nauck ma, heimesaat mm, orskov c, holst jj, ebnert r,
creutzfeldt w 1993 preserved incretin activity of glucagon-like
peptide 1 [7-36 amide] but not synthetic human inhibitory polypeptide in patients with type 2-diabetes mellitus. j clin invest 91:301–
307
217. ahrén b 2004 sensory nerves contribute to insulin secretion by
glucagon-like peptide-1 (glp-1) in mice. am j physiol regul integr
comp physiol 286:r269 –r272
218. nauck ma, el-ouaghlidi a 2005 the therapeutic actions of
 xxxg651xxx  inhibition are not mediated by glucagon-like peptide-1.
diabetologia 48:608 – 611
219. ahrén b, simonsson e, larsson h, landin-olsson m, torgeirsson
h, jansson pa, sandqvist m, bavenholm p, efendic s, eriksson
jw, dickinson s, holmes d 2002 inhibition of  xxxg651xxx  improves metabolic control over a 4-week study period in
type 2 diabetes. diabetes care 25:869 – 875
220. ahrén b, landin-olsson m, jansson pa, svensson m, holmes d,
schweizer a 2004 inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 reduces
glycemia, sustains insulin levels, and reduces glucagon levels in
type 2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol metab 89:2078 –2084
221. holst jj, deacon cf 2005 glucagon-like peptide-1 mediates the
therapeutic actions of  xxxg651xxx  inhibitors. diabetologia 48:612– 615
222. drucker dj 2006 dpp-4 inhibitors in the management of type 2
diabetes (slide presentation). mechanisms in medicine inc.; 59
223. ahrén b 2000 autonomic regulation of islet hormone secretion:
implications for health and disease. diabetologia 43:393– 410
224. filipsson k, kvist reimer m, ahrén b 2001 the neuropeptide
 xxxg70xxx  and islet function. diabetes 53:1959 –1969
225. ahrén b, hughes te 2005 inhibition of  xxxg651xxx  augments insulin
secretion in response to exogenously administered glucagon-like
peptide-1, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide,  xxxg70xxx , and  xxxg977xxx  in mice. endocrinology 146:2025–2029
226. mest h-j, mentlein r 2005 dipeptidyl peptidase inhibitors as new
drugs for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. diabetologia 48:616 – 620
227. mu j, woods j, zhou y-p, roy rs, li z, zycband e, feng y, zhu
l, li c, howard ad, moller de, thornberry na, zhang bb 2006
chronic inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 with a sitagliptin analog preserves pancreatic ␤-cell mass and function in a rodent
model of type 2 diabetes. diabetes 55:1695–1704
228. herman ga, stevens c, van dyck k, bergman a, yi b, de smet
m, snyder k, hilliard d, tanen m, tanaka w, wang aq, zeng
w, musson d, winchell g, davies mj, ramael s, gottesdiener
km, wagner ja 2005 pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
sitagliptin, an inhibitor of  xxxg651xxx , in healthy subjects: results from two-randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies with single oral doses. clin pharmacol ther 78:675–
688
229. herman ga, zhao p-l, dietrich b, golor g, schrodter a,
keymeulen b, lasseter kc, kipnes ms, hilliard d, tanen m, de
lepeleire i, cilissen c, stevens c, tanaka w, gottesdiener km,
wagner ja 2004 the dp-4 inhibitor mk-0431 enhances active
glp-1 and reduces glucose following an ogtt in type 2 diabetes.
diabetes 53(suppl 2):a82 [abstract 353-or]
230. aschner p, kipnes m, lunceford j, mickel c, davies m, williams-herman d 2006 sitagliptin monotherapy improved glycemic control in the fasting and postprandial states and ␤-cell function after 24 weeks in patients with type 2 diabetes(t2dm).
diabetes 55(suppl 1):a462 [abstract 1995-po]
231. karasik a, charbonnel b, liu j, wu m, meehan a, meininger g
2006 sitagliptin added to ongoing metformin therapy enhanced
glycemic control and ␤-cell function in patients with type 2 diabetes. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a119 [abstract 501-p]
232. xu l, dalla man c, cobelli c, williams-herman d, meininger g,
khatami h, stein p 2006 sitagliptin improved ␤-cell function in

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218 217

233.

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.
239.
240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.
247.
248.

249.
250.

patients with type 2 diabetes (t2dm): a model-based analysis.
diabetes 55(suppl 1):a466 [abstract 2014-po]
rosenstock j, brazg r, andryuk pj, sisk cm, lu k, stein p 2006
addition of sitagliptin to pioglitazone improved glycemic control
with neutral weight effect over 24 weeks in inadequately controlled
type 2 diabetes (t2dm). diabetes 55(suppl 1):a132 [abstract 556-p]
duttaroy a, voelker f, merriam lq, zhang x, ren x, burkey b
2005 the dpp-4 inhibitor  xxxd3510xxx  increases pancreatic ␤-cell
neogenesis and decreases apoptosis. diabetes 54(suppl 1):a141
[abstract 572-p]
duttaroy a, voelker f, ren x, zhang x, merriam lq, chen h,
burkey b 2005 head-to-head comparison of the dpp-4 inhibitor
 xxxd3510xxx  with  xxxd2076xxx  in a model of pancreatic ␤-cell injury.
diabetes 54(suppl 1):a66 [abstract 267-or]
mari a, sallas wm, he yl, watson c, ligueros-saylan m, dunning be, deacon cf, holst jj, foley je 2005  xxxd3510xxx , a dipeptidyl peptidase-iv inhibitor, improves model-assessed ␤-cell function in patients with type 2 diabetes. j clin endocrinol metab
90:4888 – 4894
ahrén b, pacini g, foley je, schweizer a 2005 improved mealrelated ␤-cell function and insulin sensitivity by dipeptidyl peptidase-iv inhibitor  xxxd3510xxx  in metformin-treated patients with
type 2 diabetes over 1 year. diabetes care 28:1936 –1940
mari a, pacini g, murphy e, ludvik b, nolan jj 2001 a modelbased method for assessing insulin sensitivity from oral glucose
tolerance test. diabetes care 24:539 –548
ahrén b, pacini g 1997 impaired adaptation of first-phase insulin
secretion in postmenopausal women with glucose intolerance.
am j physiol 273: xxxd3332xxx –e707
el-quaghlidi a, rehring e, schweizer a, holmes d, nauck m
2003 the  xxxg651xxx  inhibitor iv  xxxd3510xxx  does not
accentuate reactive hypoglycemia caused by the sulfonylurea  xxxd2215xxx  administered before an oral glucose load in healthy
subjects. diabetes 52(suppl 1):a118 [abstract 507-p]
he y-l, holst jj, deacon cf, dunning be, ligueros-saylan m,
foley je 2006 the insulinotropic effect of  xxxd3510xxx  is revealed
when oral glucose tolerance tests (ogtt) impose large glucose
loads. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a115 [abstract 483-p]
balas b, baig m, watson c, dunning be, ligueros-saylan m, he
l-y, wang y, cusi k, foley je, defronzo ra 2006  xxxd3510xxx 
suppresses endogenous glucose production (egp) and increases
the ␤-cell function after single dose administration in type 2 diabetic ( xxxd797xxx ) patients. diabetes 55(suppl 1):a29 [abstract 122-or]
dⴕalessio da, watson ce, he y-l, ligueros-saylan m, wang y,
dunning be, prigeon rl, foley je, pratley re 2006 restoration of
an acute insulin response to glucose (airg) in drug-naive patients
with type 2 diabetes (tm2d) by 3-month treatment with  xxxd3510xxx . diabetes 55(suppl 1):a108 [abstract 454-p]
dejager s, lebeaut a, couturier a, schweizer a 2006 sustained
reduction in hba1c during one-year treatment with  xxxd3510xxx  in
patients with type 2 diabetes (t2dm). diabetes 55(suppl 1):a29
[abstract 120-or]
garber a, camisasca rp, ehrsam e, collober-maugeais c, rochotte e, lebeaut a 2006  xxxd3510xxx  added to metformin improves
glycemic control and may mitigate metformin-induced gi side
effects in patients with type 2 diabetes (t2dm). diabetes 55(suppl
1):a29 [abstract 121-or]
fonseca v, dejager s, albrecht d, shirt l, schweizer a 2006
 xxxd3510xxx  as add-on to insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes
(t2dm). diabetes 55(suppl 1):a111 [abstract 467-p]
deacon cf 2006 mk-431 (merck). curr opin investig drugs 6:419 –
426
lankas gr, leiting b, roy rs, eiermann gj, beconi mg, biftu
t, chan c-c, edmondson s, feeney wp, he h, ippolito de, kim
d, lyons ka, ok ho, patel ra, petrov an, pryor ka, qian x,
reigle l, woods a, wu jk, zaller d, zhang x, zhu l, weber ae,
thornberry na 2005  xxxg651xxx  inhibition for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes. potential importance of selectivity
over dipeptidyl peptidases 8 and 9. diabetes 54:2988 –2994
egan jm, bulotta a, hui h, perfetti r 2003  xxxg899xxx  agonists
are growth and differentiation factors for pancreatic islet ␤-cells.
diabetes metab res rev 19:115–123
stoffers da, kieffer tj, hussain ma, drucker dj, bonner-weir

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

218

251.
252.
253.

254.

wajchenberg • ␤-cell failure in diabetes

endocrine reviews, april 2007, 28(2):187–218
s, habener jf, egan jm 2000 insulinotropic glucagon-like peptide
1 agonists stimulate expression of homeodomain protein idx-1 and
increase islet size in mouse diabetes. diabetes 49:741–748
zhou j, wang s, pineyro ma, egan jm 1999 glucagon-like peptide
1 and  xxxd2076xxx  convert pancreatic ar42j cells into glucagon- and
insulin-producing cells. diabetes 48:2358 –2366
holst jj 2006 glucagon-like peptide-1: from extract to agent. the
claude bernard lecture, 2005. diabetologia 49:233–260
blonde l, klein ej, han j, zhang b, mac sm, poon th, taylor
kl, trautmann me, kim dd, kendall dm 2006 interim analysis
of the effects of exenatide treatment on a1c, weight and cardiovascular risk factors over 82 weeks in 314 overweight patients with
type 2 diabetes. diabetes obes metab 8:436 – 447
nielsen jh, galsgaard ed, moldrup a, friedrichsen bn,
billestrup n, hansen ja, lee yc, carlsson c 2001 regulation of

255.
256.
257.
258.

␤-cell mass by hormones and growth factors. diabetes 50(suppl
1):s25–s29
unger rh, orci l 1975 the essential role of glucagon in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus. lancet 1:14 –16
dunning be, foley je, ahrén b 2005 ␣-cell function in health and
disease: influence of glucagon-like peptide-1. diabetologia
48:1700 –1713
ahrén b, larsson h, holst jj 1997 effects of glucagon-like peptide-1 on islet function and insulin sensitivity in noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. j clin endocrinol metab 82:473– 478
patti me, mcmahon g, mun ec, bitton a, holst jj, goldsmith j,
hanto dw, callery m, arky r, nose v, bonner-weir s, goldfine
ab 2005 severe hypoglycemia post-gastric bypass requiring partial
pancreatectomy: evidence for inappropriate insulin secretion and
pancreatic islet hyperplasia. diabetologia 48:2236 –2240

endocrine reviews is published by the endocrine society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the
endocrine community.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 04 november 2015. at 03:20 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

