british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151, 427–440

& 2007 nature publishing group all rights reserved 0007–1188/07 $30.00
www.brjpharmacol.org

review

cannabinoids as therapeutic agents
in cardiovascular disease: a tale of
passions and illusions
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky
instituto de investigaciones farmacológicas (conicet), buenos aires, argentina

in addition to their classical known effects, such as analgesia, impairment of cognition and learning and appetite
enhancement, cannabinoids have also been related to the regulation of cardiovascular responses and implicated in
cardiovascular pathology. elevated levels of endocannabinoids have been related to the extreme hypotension associated with
various forms of shock as well as to the cardiovascular abnormalities that accompany cirrhosis. in contrast, cannabinoids have
also been associated with beneficial effects on the cardiovascular system, such as a protective role in atherosclerosis progression
and in cerebral and myocardial ischaemia. in addition, it has also been suggested that the pharmacological manipulation of the
endocannabinoid system may offer a novel approach to antihypertensive therapy. during the last decades, the tremendous
increase in the understanding of the molecular basis of cannabinoid activity has encouraged many pharmaceutical companies
to develop more potent synthetic cannabinoid analogues and antagonists, leading to an explosion of basic research and
clinical trials. consequently. not only the synthetic thc  xxxd1943xxx  (marinol) and the synthetic thc analogue nabilone
( xxxd2687xxx ) have been approved in the united states, but also the standardized cannabis extract (sativex) in canada. at least
three strategies can be foreseen in the future clinical use of cannabinoid-based drugs: (a) the use of  xxxg479xxx  antagonists,
such as the recently approved rimonabant (b) the use of cb2-selective agonists, and (c) the use of inhibitors of
endocannabinoid degradation. in this context, the present review examines the effects of cannabinoids and of the
pharmacological manipulation of the endocannabinoid system, in cardiovascular pathophysiology.

british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151, 427–440; doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0707261; published online 23 april 2007
keywords: cannabis; medical use; shock; endocannabinoids; hypertension; rimonabant
abbreviations: thc, d9-tetrahydrocannabinol; cgrp, calcitonin gene-related peptide; 2-ag, 2-arachidonoyl glycerol; trpv1,

transient receptor potential  xxxd428xxx  type 1 receptors; nos,  xxxd2738xxx  synthase; lps, lipopolysaccharides;
shr, spontaneously hypertensive rats;  xxxg753xxx , fatty acid amino hydrolase; edhf, endothelium-derived
hyperpolarizing factor; abn-cbd,  xxxd3410xxx 

introduction
the therapeutic use of cannabinoids has been extensively
examined and reviewed, especially within the last few years
(see di marzo and de petrocellis, 2006; mackie, 2006; pacher
et al., 2006). this is probably a consequence of the significant
increase in the understanding of their pharmacological
actions that has given rise to the view that cannabinoids
might be used in the treatment of a growing number of
pathologies. nevertheless, the medical use of cannabis is still
the focus of contentious debate due mostly to their known
psychotropic effects.

correspondence: dr ve mendizábal, instituto de investigaciones
farmacológicas, ininfa-conicet, junin 956-51 piso, buenos aires 1113,
argentina.
e-mail: victoria.mendizabal@upf.edu
received 21 november 2006; revised 5 february 2007; accepted 23 february
2007; published online 23 april 2007

more and more evidence indicates that cannabinoids play
a major role in the control of physiopathological functions
in the cardiovascular system. in recent years, many authors
have elucidated the complex actions that both synthetic and
endogenous cannabinoids have in the regulation of blood
pressure and heart rate (see hillard, 2000; randall et al.,
2002; pacher et al., 2005a, b). moreover, in an attempt to
resolve the issues raised by apparent contradictions between
in vitro and in vivo studies, some authors have also
illuminated this complexity by a thorough comparison of
the key findings under different experimental conditions
(randall et al., 2004). in addition, the involvement of the
endocannabinoid system in cardiovascular pathology has
also been examined (wagner et al., 1998; lamontagne et al.,
2006; steffens and mach, 2006).
in the context of the recent approval of the standardized
cannabis extract sativex and of the  xxxg479xxx  antagonist

428

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

rimonabant, the aim of the present review is to summarize
the major findings and to analyse the potential of cannabinoid-based drugs as therapeutic agents in cardiovascular
diseases.

from ancient medical uses of cannabinoids to scientific researchbased therapies
evidence of the medical use of cannabis can be found as early
as 5000 years ago in an herbarium published during the reign
of the chinese emperor chen nung and, 2600 years ago, in
an assyrian tablet. in the traditional indian medicine, many
of its uses, such as a sedative, relaxant, anxiolytic, analgesic
and appetite stimulator, were similar to those for which it is
advocated in our own society today (kalant, 2001).
in western medicine, cannabis sativa appeared about 60
ad in the pharmacopoeia of dioscorides, a roman army
physician living in the times of claudius and nero and is
considered as the father of pharmaceutical science. during
the sixteenth century, the herbal of john gerard (1597) in
england recommended cannabis for easing the earache, and
the herbal of nicholas culpeper (1653) recommended its use
to alleviate inflammations and ease the pain of gout and
tumours (house of lords, 1998).
nevertheless, it was not until the 1960s that the pharmacological effects of cannabis-derived compounds began to be
systematically studied, when d9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(thc), the main active compound of marihuana, was first
isolated and identified (mechoulam and gaoni, 1967).
hence, the extensive work by the group of mechoulam in
israel, led to the complete synthesis of the pure compounds,
the establishment of their molecular structures and the study
of their structure–activity relationships. later on, the
chemical synthesis of new potent cannabinoid derivatives
and analogues that do not exist in nature, allowed devane
et al. (1988) to identify specific binding sites in the brain.
this finding finally confirmed that the pharmacological
actions of cannabinoids were mediated through specific
receptors and put aside the long-standing belief that they
were mediated by perturbation of cellular membranes.
definite proof of their existence came from the molecular
cloning of two proteins: cb1 receptors expressed primarily in
the brain (matsuda et al., 1990), but also in various
peripheral tissues including the heart and vasculature
(gebremedhin et al., 1999; liu et al., 2000; bonz et al.,
2003), and cb2 receptors identified in immune cells (munro
et al., 1993). since cannabinoids themselves do not exist in
the brain, the existence of the receptors implied that some
other endogenous substance in the brain normally binds to
them. thus, as occurred in the case of the opioid peptides,
the discovery of cannabinoid receptors soon led to the
identification of endocannabinoids. devane et al. (1992)
isolated and described the structure of the brain constituent,
arachidonoylethanolamide, that was named as anandamide
based on the sanskrit word ananda meaning bringer of inner
bliss. despite their different chemical structures, both
anandamide – formed locally in the brain – and thc bind
to cannabinoid receptors and share several common pharmacological properties. a simliar example of receptor
activation through endogenous as well as through exogenbritish journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

ous compounds arises from the opioid system where
endorphins as well as morphine, although chemically
unrelated, activate the same opioid receptors (terenius,
2000). further support to the view that endocannabinoids
are part of an endogenous cannabinoid system is based on
the presence of specific pathways for the biosynthesis
(bisogno et al., 1997), the enzymatic degradation (deutsch
and chin, 1993) and the facilitated uptake of endocannabinoids (beltramo et al., 1997). this tremendous increase in the
understanding of cannabinoid pharmacology encouraged
some pharmaceutical companies and several research laboratories to develop more potent synthetic cannabinoid
analogues and antagonists, leading to an explosion of basic
research and clinical trials during the last decades.
although limited by their potential for abuse and
dependence, the use of the synthetic thc  xxxd1943xxx 
(marinol) and the synthetic thc analogue nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) was approved in the us for the treatment of nausea and
vomiting associated with chemotherapy as well as an
appetite stimulant in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(aids). moreover, the standardized cannabis extract sativex
(gw pharmaceuticals plc, salisbury, wiltshire, uk) is
licensed in canada and has been submitted for approval
regulation in several european countries as an adjuvant
therapy for the symptomatic relief of neuropathic pain in
multiple sclerosis.
regarding pharmacological intervention strategies on
endocannabinoid system, different molecules have been
developed and are being tested both in preclinical and
clinical studies. for instance, cb2-selective agonists are being
assayed against inflammatory and neuropathic pain and
inhibitors of endocannabinoid degradation are promising
tools in preclinical studies of epilepsy and anxiety. on the
other hand,  xxxg479xxx  antagonists have been approved for
the treatment of morbid obesity and are under evaluation for
tobacco dependence.

the complexity of the effects of cannabinoids
in the cardiovascular system: a need for caution?
cardiovascular effects of cannabinoids were recognized as
early as the 1960s and the great advance in the understanding of cannabinoid biology has elucidated their role in
cardiovascular pathophysiology. however, the extensive
literature published in this area of research within the last
15 years has also revealed the complexity of their effects in
the cardiovascular system (for recent review see randall
et al., 2004; pacher et al., 2005a). for example, preclinical
studies performed in vivo have shown discrepancies according to the state of the experimental animals (anaesthetized
vs conscious), the route of administration (central vs
peripheral) and even the doses of the compound employed.
moreover, the effects of cannabinoids may be influenced by
either the nature of the experiment (in vitro vs in vivo) or the
type of in vitro preparation (isolated vessel vs perfused
vascular bed). further complexity is added by the observation that endogenous cannabinoids, such as anandamide,
may exert effects by interacting not only with classic

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

cannabinoid receptors, but also with  xxxd428xxx  and with
other, not yet identified, cannabinoid receptors.

what have in vivo studies revealed about the cardiovascular
effects of cannabinoids?
in spite of the great variability in the cardiovascular
responses observed under different experimental conditions
as well as among species, hypotension and bradycardia are
the most important features elicited by the systemic
administration of cannabinoids. the in vivo actions of this
group of compounds may involve the modulation of the
autonomic outflow in both central and peripheral nervous
systems as well as direct effects on the myocardium and the
vasculature. however, their peripheral effects appear to
predominate in cardiovascular control, at least upon
systemic administration (randall et al., 2002).
as reported for thc (siqueira et al., 1979), the intravenous
administration of anandamide to anaesthetized rats elicits
bradycardia and a triphasic blood pressure response (varga
et al., 1995), that includes a transient drop, a brief increase and
a third phase of a more prolonged decrease in blood pressure.
as it is abolished by either atropine administration or cervical
vagotomy, the first drop in blood pressure appears to be vagally
mediated (lake et al., 1997). in contrast, the second depressor
effect is believed to be mediated by cb1 receptors inducing
prejunctional inhibition of sympathetic outflow in the
periphery (varga et al., 1995; lake et al., 1997). nevertheless,
evidence that an additional direct vasorelaxant effect on the
blood vessels is also involved is provided by the fact that the
synthetic cannabinoid hu-210 lowers blood pressure even after
sympathetic blockade (vidrio et al., 1996; lake et al., 1997).
unlike the hypotensive phases, the pressor response is not
blocked by  xxxg479xxx  antagonists and even persists in cb1
knockout mice (jarai et al., 1999), as well as in the presence
of a-adrenoceptor blockade (varga et al., 1995). it has been
suggested that this pressor component may be the consequence of vasoconstriction in certain vascular beds, such as
the spleen (wagner et al., 2001a).
as in the case of other drugs with actions on blood pressure,
the acute effects of cannabinoids not only result from
changes in peripheral vascular resistance, but also in cardiac
output. thus, the predominant hypotensive response to
anandamide is associated with a decrease in total peripheral
resistance and with reductions in cardiac contractility (pacher
et al., 2004; bátkai et al., 2004a), effects that can be completely
blocked by the  xxxg479xxx  antagonist  xxxd3125xxx .
perhaps the most significant discrepancy observed in
studies performed in vivo is the very different profile
in haemodynamic responses to systemic cannabinoid administration between anaesthetized and conscious animals. the
prolonged decrease in blood pressure that characterizes the
typical triphasic blood pressure response elicited by intravenous administration of anandamide or thc in anaesthetized
animals is weak or absent in conscious animals. it has been
suggested that this lack of a hypotensive phase under
physiological conditions might reflect differences in sympathetic activity between conscious and anaesthetized states
(randall et al., 2004). on the other hand, the possibility that
anaesthetic agents directly influence the responses has also

429

been proposed based on the observation that anandamide
can inhibit anaesthetic-sensitive potassium channels (maingret et al., 2001). another possibility is that the central effects
of cannabinoids might be more susceptible to inhibition by
general anaesthetics, which could, in its turn, explain the
more pronounced hypotensive phase observed in anaesthetized animals. this is because several findings have provided
evidence that central effects of cannabinoids may oppose
their peripheral effects. for instance, whereas a hypotensive
response mainly mediated by the inhibition of sympathetic
outflow is the most important feature elicited by the
intravenous administration of anandamide, other cannabinoids induced sympathoexcitation and pressor responses
when applied intracisternally in conscious rabbits (niederhoffer and szabo, 2000), and increased sympathetic activity
and hypertension when applied into the rostral ventrolateral
medulla oblongata of anaesthetized rats (padley et al., 2003).
nevertheless, an hypotensive response to intrathecally
administered anandamide has been reported for urethaneanaesthetized rats (garcı́a et al., 2003, 2006)
another inconsistency observed in the literature arises
from comparing the results obtained in experimental
animals with those found in human studies. for instance,
the acute administration of cannabinoids in man is associated with pronounced tachycardia, opposite to the bradycardia reported in animals in both conscious and
anaesthetized states (see dewey, 1986; jones, 2002). these
differences in the patterns of cardiovascular change observed
between humans and animals may be either the consequence of the higher doses used in animal studies or may
reflect differences in the level of arousal between human
volunteers and laboratory animals (jones, 2002). in this line,
the importance of the baseline level of arousal in cardiovascular cannabinoid response was demonstrated in an experiment performed with conscious monkeys tested in an
extremely quiet and predictable environment. under these
conditions, thc induced tachycardia as commonly seen in
humans, whereas in monkeys tested under more typical
laboratory conditions, the same dose of thc induced
bradycardia (fredericks et al., 1981).
moreover, discrepancies are also found in human studies
when acute and chronic administrations are compared. the
acute administration of cannabinoids is associated with
tachycardia and a small pressor effect, whereas its long-term
use is associated with bradycardia and hypotension (benowitz
and jones, 1975; benowitz et al., 1979). in this regard,
tolerance to many of the effects of cannabinoids can be
revealed after a few repeated doses. for instance, tolerance to
increased heart rate and blood pressure changes can be
found after only 1 or 2 days of frequent exposure, but it is
rapidly lost when thc administration is stopped (benowitz
and jones, 1975, 1981). hence, special attention should be
given to checking that experimental and laboratory conditions as well as the doses and the history of drug use, are
similar when comparing and interpreting the cardiovascular
in vivo effects of cannabinoids in human and animal studies.
considering the significant cardiovascular effects of exogenously administered cannabinoids, it is rather surprising
that basal blood pressure and heart rate were normal in cb1
knockout mice (ledent et al., 1999) and that fatty acid amino
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

430

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

hydrolase ( xxxg753xxx )-deficient mice had a normal haemodynamic profile (pacher et al., 2005b). accordingly, pharmacological blockade of cb1 receptors with rimonabant, at doses
reported to abolish the sympathoinhibitory effects of
exogenous cannabinoid receptor agonists, did not affect
sympathetic tone, blood vessel tone or heart rate in pithed
rats (pfitzer et al., 2005). taken together, these results
indicate that endogenous cannabinoids do not exert a tonic
control of cardiovascular responses and therefore do not
seem to play a major role in cardiovascular regulation, at
least under normal conditions. in contrast, little information
is available regarding the possible role of endocannabinergic
tone under physiological situations in which plasma concentrations of catecholamines are increased, such as during
an adrenergic discharge, or under pathological conditions in
which sympathetic activity is enhanced, such as in some
types of human essential hypertension. in this regard, it has
been suggested that, under hypertensive states, an endocannabinoid tone may limit the elevation of blood pressure and
cardiac contractile responses through tonic activation of cb1
receptors (pacher et al., 2006).

what is the contribution of in vitro studies to the understanding
of the cardiovascular actions of cannabinoids?
whereas in vivo studies with cannabinoids have revealed
how the different mechanisms involved in cardiovascular
responses combine to provide an overall physiological effect,
in vitro experiments, although reductionists in nature, have
significantly contributed to the dissection of these mechanisms. thus, in vitro studies have provided evidence that the
cardiovascular actions of cannabinoids are mediated through
the regulation of sympathetic neurotransmission, direct
vasodilating effects and a modulatory role in sensory nerves.
the hypothesis that the hypotensive and bradycardic
effects of cannabinoids result from the inhibition of
sympathetic outflow was put forward many years ago
(hardman et al., 1971; vollmer et al., 1974). nevertheless, it
was not until more recent years that mrna for cb1 receptors
was detected (buckley et al., 1998) and that they were
proposed to mediate the inhibition of peripheral sympathetic neurotransmission (niederhoffer and szabo, 1999).
accordingly, most of the in vitro studies performed in heart
and blood vessels have provided further evidence to support
the view that this mechanism may be responsible for the
hypotensive action of cannabinoids observed in vivo. for
instance, either anandamide or thc inhibit noradrenaline
release in the rat-isolated atria (ishac et al., 1996) and
different chemical classes of cannabinoids inhibit sympathetic neurotransmission in the rat mesenteric arterial
bed (ralevic and kendall, 2002). in addition, experiments
with anandamide and the synthetic cannabinoid hu210
performed in isolated langendorff rat hearts and in isolated,
electrically stimulated human atrial appendages (ford et al.,
2002; bonz et al., 2003) have revealed a negative inotropic
effect of cannabinoids that may underlie the ability of
anandamide and hu-210 to decrease cardiac output
as observed in studies performed in vivo (wagner et al., 2001a).
a second line of investigation has taken up the direct
vasodilating effects of this group of compounds based on the
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

finding that some cannabinoids such as hu-210 lower blood
pressure even after sympathetic blockade. as in the case of
studies performed in vivo, these studies have added further
complexity to the understanding of cannabinoid effects in
the cardiovascular system. although there is consensus
about the direct vasodilation caused by cannabinoids, as
revealed by a great majority of the studies performed in isolated vessels, neither a common mechanism nor a common
site of action is likely to underlie this effect (for detailed
overview of in vitro effects see kunos et al., 2000; högestatt
and zygmunt, 2002; randall et al., 2002). moreover, the
magnitude of their vascular actions was found to vary
widely among species. for instance, anandamide causes
20% maximal relaxation in the rat aorta (o’sullivan et al.,
2004), and 80% in the rabbit aorta (mukhopadhyay et al.,
2002). the mechanisms involved in the direct vasodilating
effects of cannabinoids seem to depend on the vascular bed
and the experimental conditions employed, probably reflecting the involvement of different vascular receptors and
different receptor coupling. this could suggest that each
vascular bed may have a particular local regulation of
vascular tone that could, in its turn, differentially contribute
to the global haemodynamic effects of cannabinoids.
since the first report providing evidence that anandamide
caused indomethacin-sensitive vasodilation in rat cerebral
arterioles (ellis et al., 1995), further studies have revealed
that the generation of  xxxd208xxx  and its subsequent
metabolism by cyclooxygenase is not a major mechanism
involved in the direct vasodilating effects of cannabinoids.
although anandamide can act through the products formed
via epoxygenase and cyclooxygenase pathways, as reported
for bovine and ovine coronary arteries (pratt et al., 1998;
grainger and boachie-ansah, 2001), in most blood vessels
anandamide can act directly, for instance in the rat
mesenteric vasculature (randall et al., 1996).
as in the case of anandamide-induced increase in
prostanoid formation, the participation of vasorelaxant
agents such as  xxxd2738xxx  (no) on anandamide effects do
not seem to be a major mechanism for direct vasodilatory
effects of cannabinoids since it may also depend on the
tissue studied. hence, no has been shown to mediate
responses to anandamide in rat renal arteries (deutsch
et al., 1997) as well as in a range of human vessels (bilfinger
et al., 1998) but not in most of the studies performed in other
vascular beds or other species (harris et al., 2002).
the interest in the direct vasodilating actions of endocannabinoids was further stimulated by the original proposal by
randall et al. (1996) that anandamide might be an
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (edhf). based
on the finding that edhf-mediated responses were sensitive
to the  xxxg479xxx  antagonist sr141716a (randall et al.,
1996), and on the observations that anandamide-induced
relaxations were abolished by raised extracellular k þ
(randall et al., 1996) and decreased by k þ channel blockers
(plane et al., 1997; white and hiley, 1997; mendizábal et al.,
2001), it was suggested that endocannabinoids could play
a physiological role as an edhf. nevertheless, inhibition
of edhf-induced vasorelaxation by  xxxd3125xxx  was confirmed
in some (white and hiley 1997) but not in other studies
(chataigneau et al., 1998; fulton and quilley 1998; pratt

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

et al., 1998; niederhoffer and szabo 1999). moreover, the
observation that only the endothelium-dependent component of anandamide-induced vasodilation is sensitive
to inhibition by the  xxxg479xxx  antagonist  xxxd3125xxx ,
as shown in rabbit (chaytor et al., 1999) and in rat mesenteric
vessels (wagner et al., 1999), argues against anandamide
itself being edhf.
finally, a third mechanism of action of cannabinoids in
the cardiovascular system was revealed by another set of in
vitro experiments. the controversial results involving cb1
receptors in the effects of anandamide on the vasculature,
together with the fact that this endocannabinoid shares
structural similarities with the  xxxd428xxx  agonist olvanil, lead
to assessment of the role of  xxxd428xxx  receptors in the
vascular actions of anandamide. zygmunt et al. (1999)
demonstrated that anandamide, but neither 2-arachidonoyglycerol (2-ag), nor palmitoylethanolamide or synthetic
cannabinoid receptor agonists, could induce relaxation
acting at transient receptor potential  xxxd428xxx  type 1
receptors (trpv1) through the release of the potent vasodilator calcitonin gene-related peptide (cgrp) from sensory
nerves. nevertheless, the findings that the hypotension
caused by anandamide is absent in mice lacking cb1
receptors (ledent et al., 1999) and that mice lacking trpv1
have a normal cardiovascular profile (pacher et al., 2004),
suggest that the interaction with  xxxd428xxx  receptors on
sensory nerves is of minor importance in the haemodynamic
profile induced by systemically administered cannabinoids,
at least under physiological conditions. in contrast, this
mechanism has been proposed to be significant in pathophysiological situations such as septic shock (orliac et al.,
2003) in which high concentrations of cannabinoids are
produced (varga et al., 1998; wang et al., 2001).
moreover, the participation of  xxxd428xxx  receptors could also
be relevant when considering possible sex-linked differences
in the relaxant effects of anandamide. for instance, anandamide-induced relaxations have been reported to be greater in
mesenteric beds isolated from female sprague–dawley rats,
compared to those obtained in males (peroni et al., 2004).
it was recently proposed that the higher relaxation caused by
anandamide in female mesenteries is critically dependent on
the presence of oestrogens and involves the participation of
relaxing factors such as cgrp and prostacyclin (peroni et al.,
2007). whether the greater incidence of hypertension and
coronary artery disease in men and postmenopausal women
compared with that in premenopausal women could be, at
least in part, related to this mechanism remains to be
established. since the experiments providing evidence that
the genetic ablation of trpv1 is unrelated to significant
changes in cardiovascular responses have been performed in
male mice (pacher et al., 2004), it would be of interest to test if
female mice lacking trpv1 also have a normal cardiovascular
profile and a predominant cb1-dependent response to
anandamide, as reported for males.

evidence for novel non-cb1/non-cb2 cannabinoid receptors
involved in cardiovascular responses
several lines of evidence indicate that although the cardiovascular depressor effects of cannabinoids are mediated

431

mainly by peripherally localized cb1 receptors, they may
exert effects by interacting not only with classic cannabinoid
receptors, but also with other, not yet identified, receptor
sites. studies performed with mice lacking cb1 and/or cb2
receptors provide evidence to support the view that, apart
from the cloned cb1 and cb2 receptors, at least two
additional cannabinoid receptors may be regulating vascular
and neuronal functions (for review see begg et al., 2005;
mackie and stella 2006).
the possible existence of cannabinoid receptors distinct
from cb1 or cb2 was first suggested by wagner et al. (1999) on
the basis that neither thc nor synthetic cannabinoid agonists
elicit vasodilation in the rat mesenteric vascular bed, a
preparation in which anandamide and methanandamide
have strong vasodilator activity. when tested on anandamide
responses in the mesenteric vasculature, the  xxxg479xxx 
antagonists were either ineffective, as in the case of am251, or
less potent, as in the case of rimonabant, in comparison with
the concentrations reported to act at classical cb1 receptors.
moreover, the inhibitory activity of  xxxd3125xxx  depended
on intact vascular endothelium and was lost following
endothelial denudation (chaytor et al., 1999; jarai et al.,
1999; wagner et al., 2001a). taken together, these findings
suggest that an endothelial site distinct from cb1 or cb2
receptors, yet somewhat sensitive to inhibition by  xxxd3125xxx ,
is involved in the vasodilator effect of anandamide in the
rat mesenteric circulation. it has been proposed that the
activation of this endothelial receptor may be coupled to the
release of no, culminating in the opening of potassium
channels on vascular smooth muscle and leading to relaxation and vasodilation (begg et al., 2005).
a second line of in vitro experiments supporting the
existence of a novel endothelial receptor is based on
the observation that the cannabidiol analogue, abnormal
cannabidiol (abn-cbd), caused  xxxd3125xxx -sensitive, endothelium-dependent vasodilation in rat-isolated mesenteric beds,
although it did not bind to either cb1 or cb2 receptors (jarai
et al., 1999). in addition, both cannabidiol and o-1918, a
synthetic cannabidiol analogue, blocked the vasodilator
actions of abn-cbd. thus, it appears that whereas abn-cbd
acts as a selective agonist of the endothelial cannabinoid
receptor, cannabidiol and o-1918 may be considered as
specific antagonists acting at this novel receptor (offertáler
et al., 2003). moreover, evidence obtained in rat-isolated
hearts suggests that, in addition to its action at classical cb1
receptors (bonz et al., 2003), this noncb1/noncb2 mechanism is also implicated in the negative inotropy and coronary
vasodilatation caused by anandamide (ford et al., 2002).
in line with in vitro experiments,  xxxd3125xxx -sensitive
effects that persist in cb1 knockout mice have also been
described for in vivo paradigms. for instance, in vivo studies
have shown that abd-cbd causes hypotension in cb1 knockout mice (jarai et al., 1999). furthermore, a similar ability of
 xxxd3125xxx  to prevent endotoxin-induced hypotension was
reported in animal models of septic shock developed in wildtype mice as well as in mice deficient in cb1 or in both cb1
and cb2 receptors (bátkai et al., 2004a). hence, the fact that
this latter effect had been preserved in knockout mice not
only gives further support to the existence of additional non
cb1/non cb2 receptors in the vasculature, but it also opens
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

432

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

the possibility of developing new therapeutic strategies in
the treatment of septic shock.
regarding neuronal function, a non-cb1/non-cb2 site was
also postulated to exist on glutamatergic terminals in the
mouse hippocampus, where its activation by cannabinoids
inhibits glutamatergic transmission and excitatory postsynaptic potentials (hájos et al., 2001). although there are
strong pharmacological parallels between the novel receptors in the vasculature and the hippocampus, there are some
notable differences that seem to support the view that they
represent two different receptor entities. for instance, the
vascular receptor is insensitive to potent synthetic cannabinoids such as win55,212-2 and cp55,940, whereas the
neuronal receptor is insensitive to abd-cbd but sensitive to
win55,212-2 and cp55,940. nevertheless, the possibility
that such differences between these two putative receptors
arise from either the specific cellular context in which the
receptor is expressed or from receptor dimerization, cannot
be ruled out until molecular cloning of these novel receptors
has been achieved.

cannabinoids in cardiovascular pathology: cure
or disease?
in recent years, several studies have provided evidence that
elevated levels of endocannabinoids could play an important
role in pathological conditions associated with extreme
hypotension such as various forms of shock, and also in
the cardiovascular abnormalities that accompany cirrhosis.
on the other hand, cannabinoids have also been associated
with cardiovascular beneficial effects, such as a protective
role in the progression of atherosclerosis and after myocardial ischaemia. in addition, it has been proposed that an
increased endocannabinergic tone in hypertension could
limit increases in blood pressure and cardiac contractile
performance through tonic activation of cardiac and vascular cb1 receptors (pacher et al., 2006). hence, the pharmacological manipulation of the endocannabinoid system may
offer novel therapeutic approaches in a variety of cardiovascular disorders.

possible involvement of cannabinoids in the pathogenesis of
cardiovascular disease
the first evidence of the key role that endocannabinoids
may play in situations of extreme hypotension was found for
a rat model of haemorrhagic shock (wagner et al., 1997),
where macrophage production of anandamide appeared to
be involved in a systemic hypotension that could be
overcome by the selective  xxxg479xxx  antagonist,
sr141716a. in a further study from the same laboratory, it
was found that the pretreatment with the  xxxg479xxx 
antagonist sr141716a also prevented the prolonged hypotension elicited by the administration of lipopolysaccharides
(lps) in the rat (varga et al., 1998).
macrophages are the primary cellular targets of lps, a cell
wall component ubiquitous to gram-negative bacteria that is
involved in the initiation of endotoxic shock. since macrophages produce anandamide (di marzo et al., 1996; schmid
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

et al., 1997), these cells might be the source of the
endocannabinoids, that acting at cb1 receptors induce the
pronounced decrease in blood pressure associated with septic
shock (parrillo, 1993). accordingly, lps stimulated the
production of 2-ag in platelets and induced the production
of anandamide in macrophages when administered in vitro
in cell culture (varga et al., 1998). moreover, an sr141716sensitive hypotensive response similar to that observed in
lps-treated rats was obtained in normotensive rats treated
with macrophages plus platelets isolated from the blood of
an lps-treated donor rat (varga et al., 1998). taken together,
these findings suggested a novel paracrine mechanism of
vasodilation in endotoxic shock, where macrophage-derived
anandamide and platelet-derived 2-ag were likely to be
responsible for the activation of vascular cb1 cannabinoid
receptors.
based on the observation that in the anaesthetized rat lpsinduced vasodilatation was preserved when the sympathetic
tone was removed by  xxxd2914xxx , it was proposed that
hypotension is independent of autonomic innervation and
occurs solely through the activation of vascular cb1
receptors (varga et al., 1998). in contrast, data obtained on
pithed rats suggested that cb1 receptors are located presynaptically on the sympathetic nerve fibres innervating the
resistance vessels (godlewski et al., 2004). the reason for the
discrepancy between both studies may be related to
differences in either the experimental model (pithed vs
anaesthetized rat), or the dose of lps (4 vs 15 mg/kg) or the
different time course of the hypotension (15 vs 120 min).
several studies have provided further evidence of the key
role played by endocannabinoids in endotoxin-induced
hypotension not only in animal experimental models
(bátkai et al., 2004a; godlewski et al., 2004), but also in
patients with endotoxic shock, where significant increases in
anandamide and 2-ag levels have been detected in sera
(wang et al., 2001). moreover, orliac et al. (2003) have
shown that the relaxant effects of the endocannabinoid
anandamide in the mesenteric bed of the rat are potentiated
at early stages after lps treatment, when no changes in blood
pressure are observed. although no conclusions can be
drawn regarding a link between the decrease in blood
pressure in advanced stages of septic shock and the observed
potentiation of anandamide effects at early stages of
endotoxemia, this latter finding suggests that an increased
target organ sensitivity to anandamide through  xxxd428xxx 
receptor overexpression may also play a role in the
haemodynamic effects of lps (orliac et al., 2003). nevertheless, the fact that the effects of lps on blood pressure were
not modified by the trpv1 receptor antagonist capsazepine
in experiments performed in pithed rats, seems to argue
against the possible involvement of  xxxd428xxx  receptors in
endotoxic-induced hypotension (godlewski et al., 2004).
in this regard, it would be of interest to test whether the
genetic ablation of trpv1 receptors reveals similar results to
those observed after their pharmacological blockade.
in addition to their involvement in haemorrhagic and
septic shock, an overproduction of endocannabinoids has
also been described in other pathological conditions associated with extreme hypotension, such as the cardiogenic
shock, developed in a percentage of patients within the first

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

few hours after myocardial infarction, and the cardiomyopathy associated with advanced liver cirrhosis. indeed,
wagner et al. (2001b) found that activated vascular cb1
receptors contribute to severe hypotension after experimental myocardial infarction in rats. in addition, circulating
monocytes and platelets were found to increase the production of anandamide and 2-ag during cardiogenic shock.
regarding cirrhosis, it was found that the decrease in
blood pressure, obtained in an experimental model developed in rats, was acutely reversed by selective  xxxg479xxx 
antagonists (bátkai et al., 2001; ros et al., 2002). in addition,
monocytes isolated from the blood of cirrhotic patients that
were found to contain elevated levels of anandamide, caused
cb1-receptor mediated hypotension when injected into
normal rats (bátkai et al., 2001). dealing with a possible
involvement of endocannabinoids in cirrhotic cardiomyopathy, gaskari et al. (2005) provided the first evidence for the
existence of a  xxxg479xxx -mediated tonic inhibition of
b-adrenergic responsiveness of isolated cardiac ventricular
muscle in a rat model of biliary cirrhosis. on the basis of
these findings, the authors proposed that an increased local
endocannabinoid synthesis in the hearts taken from cirrhotic animals could play an important role in the blunted
contractile responsiveness associated with cirrhotic cardiomyopathy.
the possible involvement of cb1 receptors in the extreme
hypotension associated with different kinds of shock such as
haemorrhagic, septic and cardiogenic shock is supported by
the observation that this effect is sensitive to the cb1
antagonist  xxxd3125xxx . nevertheless, this proposal deserves
further studies. this is because  xxxd3125xxx  can also inhibit a
novel cardiac cannabinoid receptor, that it appears to differ
from cb1 and cb2 (ford et al., 2002). in this regard, bátkai
et al. (2004a) have shown that the hypotension induced by
lps was counteracted by  xxxd3125xxx  not only in wild-type
mice, but also in cb1 and cb1/cb2 knockout mice. moreover,
this potential beneficial effect of  xxxd3125xxx  on blood pressure
contrasts with the fact that this cannabinoid antagonist
causes increases rather than decreases in mortality rates in
animal models of haemorrhagic (wagner et al., 1997) and
cardiogenic shock (wagner et al., 2001b, 2003). these latter
findings seem to indicate that endocannabinoid-mediated
cardiovascular effects appear to have a survival value.
accordingly, pretreatment with cannabinoid agonists, such
as thc or hu-210 improved endothelial dysfunction and
survival both in cardiogenic (wagner et al., 2001b, 2003) and
endotoxic shock (varga et al., 1998), probably as the result of
an improvement of tissue oxygenation. taken together,
these findings could suggest that the dual role of cannabinoids observed in different kinds of shock could be reflecting
the involvement of two  xxxd3125xxx -sensitive receptor subtypes. this is, a non-cb1/non-cb2 mechanism mediating the
extreme hypotensive responses, and a cb1-mediated mechanism involved in improving survival. the pharmacological dissection of these mechanisms could be of potential
interest in developing new therapeutical approaches to treat
different kinds of shock.
in summary, it seems clear that an overproduction of
endocannabinoids such as anandamide and 2-ag may be
implicated in the severe hypotension associated to various

433

kinds of shock and cirrhotic cardiomyopathy. although
there is substantial evidence to support the view that
 xxxd3125xxx -sensitive receptors could represent the main target
for the action of these endocannabinoids, the involvement
of more than one subtype of cannabinoid receptors cannot
be ruled out. moreover, the relative contribution of different
mechanisms of action in each pathological situation is likely
to depend on the experimental conditions employed and
certainly deserves further studies.

involvement of cannabinoids in cardioprotection and
atherosclerosis progression
several stimuli, such as heat stress or lps pretreatment are
known to trigger delayed endogenous protective mechanisms against myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury (bolli,
2000). since lps treatment can induce the production of
endocannabinoids, it has been proposed that these mediators could play a role in the cardioprotection induced by lps
in experimental models of heart ischaemia. in this regard, it
has been reported that the specific  xxxg480xxx  antagonist
sr 144528 abolishes the protective effects of lps against
ischaemia in the rat heart (lagneux and lamontagne, 2001).
moreover, endocannabinoids acting through cb2 receptors
have been involved in the reduction of infarct size conferred
by heat stress preconditioning on isolated rat hearts (joyeux
et al 2002). in another study, thc exerted cardioprotection
in cardiomyocyte cells subjected to hypoxia, via cb2
receptors and no production, suggesting that specific cb2
agonists might be useful for cardioprotection (shmist et al.,
2006). in contrast, other studies have also highlighted that
either cb1 receptors or novel cannabinoid receptors might
also mediate cardioprotection from ischaemia-reperfusion
injury. for instance, 2-ag acting at cb1 receptors reduced
infarct size and mimicked the cardioprotective effects of nomediated preconditioning, when administered 30 min before ischaemia/reperfusion in unpreconditioned hearts
(wagner et al., 2006). thus, it was suggested that no
application can increase the production of the endocannabinoid 2-ag, which in turn, may elicit protective effects
against myocardial infarction via cb1 cannabinoid receptors.
on the other hand, in another study performed in ratisolated hearts, anandamide and methanandamide limit
infarct size induced by ischaemia-reperfusion injury and
the pharmacological profile of this response fails to match
with any of the previously known mechanisms of cannabinoid action (underdown et al., 2005). since the infarctlimiting action of anandamide was blocked by either
rimonabant or the  xxxg480xxx  antagonist sr144528, the
authors of this study suggested that anandamide is acting at
both cb1 and cb2 receptors or that, alternatively, it limits
the cardiac infarction associated with ischaemia-reperfusion
by activation of one or more novel cannabinoid receptors.
however, since neither cb1 nor  xxxg480xxx -selective
agonists used individually or in combination affected infarct
size, the involvement of a novel site seems to be the most
likely explanation (underdown et al., 2005). in further
support of this view is the observation that palmitoylethanolamide, an endocannabinoid supposedly inactive at cb1
and cb2 receptors (lambert et al., 1999) and suggested to act
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

434

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

at novel cannabinoid receptors (mackie and stella, 2006),
also protects the rat-isolated heart against ischaemia
(lepicier et al., 2003). definite proof regarding the involvement of novel receptors in this cardioprotective effect
of endocannabinoids will come from studies performed in
mice lacking cb1 and/or cb2 receptors in which infarct
size-reducing properties of endocannabinoids should be
preserved, sorting out the controversial results involving
either cb2 or cb1 receptors.
as cannabinoids have also been related to immunomodulatory properties, recent research has focused on the
possibility that they could be of therapeutic benefit to the
pharmacological management of atherosclerosis, a process
in which chronic inflammation is a key player (reviewed by
libby and theroux, 2005). for instance, steffens et al. (2005)
found that low doses of thc inhibited the progression of
established atherosclerotic lesions in a murine model
of atherosclerosis. in support of the proposal that the immunomodulatory effects of cannabinoids are mediated by the
 xxxg480xxx  expressed on immune cells (buckley et al.,
2000), it was found that the inhibitory effect of thc on
these lesions was blocked by the specific  xxxg480xxx 
antagonist sr144528 (steffens et al., 2005). regarding the
mechanisms implicated in the anti-atherosclerotic properties
of thc, this latter study also provided evidence that they
may be associated with a reduction of the t-helper type 1
response and an inhibition of monocyte/macrophage migration to the site of inflammation, two features playing a major
role during early atherosclerosis development. further implication of cb2 receptors in these effects of thc is
supported by the in vitro experiments performed after either
the pharmacological blockade or the genetic ablation of
these receptors. for instance, thc-induced inhibition
of macrophage migration was completely blocked by the cb2
antagonist sr144528, and was also absent when peritoneal
macrophages isolated from cb2 knockout mice were used,
demonstrating that effects of thc on chemoattraction are in
fact  xxxg480xxx -dependent (steffens et al., 2005). interestingly, the authors also detected  xxxg480xxx  expression
within human and mouse atherosclerotic lesions, whereas
no cb2 receptors were detected in non-diseased arteries.
these data strongly suggest that cb2 receptors agonists may
offer a new approach in the treatment of atherosclerosis.
nevertheless, additional in vivo studies employing selective
cb1 and  xxxg480xxx  antagonists or cannabinoid receptordeficient mice are warranted to clarify the role of the
endocannabinoid system during atherosclerosis.

role of endocannabinoids under hypertensive states and during
exercise
studies of the hypotensive effects of thc carried out in the
1970s encouraged scientists to propose cannabinoids as new
potential antihypertensive agents (archer, 1974). however,
progress in this direction was hindered not only by the
difficulty in separating cardiovascular and psychotropic
effects but also by the finding that the hypotensive and
bradycardic effects of thc developed rapid tolerance (adams
et al., 1976). thus, it was not until the 1990s that the
resurgent interest in the study of the cardiovascular effects of
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

cannabinoids was combined with the discovery of the
specific receptors and their endogenous ligands.
although the present evidence does not seem to support
the view that endocannabinoids are relevant to cardiovascular regulation under normal conditions, several studies
indicate that the endocannabinoid system could be relevant
in the cardiovascular regulation of hypertensive states. for
instance, the decrease in blood pressure induced by both
thc (kosersky, 1978) and anandamide (lake et al., 1997;
bátkai et al., 2004b) was higher and lasted longer in
spontaneously hypertensive rats (shrs) than in normotensive rats. moreover, in shr, blockade of cb1 receptors
increased blood pressure and cardiac contractility, whereas
the elevation of anandamide levels by interference of either
anandamide degradation or uptake restored these variables
to the values observed in normotensive animals (bátkai et al.,
2004b). taken together, these results suggest the existence of
an endocannabinoid tone in hypertension that, according to
pacher et al. (2006), limits the elevation of blood pressure
and cardiac contractile responses through tonic activation of
cb1 receptors. regarding the possible mechanism involved,
it has been suggested that the upregulation of cardiac and
vascular cb1 receptors observed in shr, compared to their
normotensive controls may account for the increased
sensitivity to the cardiovascular effects of anandamide
(bátkai et al., 2004b). alternatively, a possible upregulation
of trpv1 receptors in hypertension has been proposed on
the basis of the finding that capsazepine partially inhibited
the hypotensive effect of anandamide in hypertensive but
not in normotensive rats (li et al., 2003; wang et al., 2005).
moreover, the potentiation of trpv1-dependent vasodilating
actions of anandamide has been demonstrated in perfused
mesenteric beds isolated from rats made hypertensive by
long-term inhibition of no synthase (nos) when compared
to their normotensive controls (mendizábal et al., 2001).
experiments performed in trpv1 knockout mice have
revealed that except for their involvement in mediating
the cardiogenic sympathetic reflex,  xxxd428xxx  receptors are
not relevant in the regulation of blood pressure under
normal conditions (pacher et al., 2004). nevertheless, it
seems clear that changes in circulating or tissue anandamide
levels under particular pathophysiological conditions may
alter trpv1 function and thereby regulate blood pressure.
the use of knockout mice in both in vivo and in vitro studies
will further clarify the relevance of a putative-increased
endocannabinergic tone in hypertension. for instance, are
mice lacking cb1 receptors more vulnerable to developing
systemic hypertension? does the lack of  xxxg753xxx  enzyme
protect from development of hypertensive states? what are
the consequences of tprv1 ablation in the development and
maintenance of hypertensive states in different models of
hypertension?
physical activity and exercise training have been related to
beneficial effects in clinical disorders such as hypertension,
heart failure, obesity and the decline of cognition associated
with aging. the underlying mechanisms of these effects have
been related to different observations such as a favourable
influence in brain plasticity by facilitating neurogenerative,
neuroadaptive and neuroprotective processes, or the attenuation of neural responses to stress in brain circuits

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

responsible for regulating peripheral sympathetic activity
(for review see dishman et al., 2006). interestingly, it has also
been reported that exercise of moderate intensity increases
serum concentrations of endocannabinoids in trained male
college students running on a treadmill or cycling on a
stationary bike for 50 min (sparling et al., 2003). this result
not only suggests a new possible explanation for exerciseinduced analgesia and sedation, but also for other physiological and psychological adaptations to exercise. in support of
a role for the endocannabinoid system, it has recently been
found that exercise can reduce adipose tissue via cb1
receptors regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-d (yan et al., 2007). further research will be
necessary to characterize the precise nature of this endocannabinoid response to exercise, specifically the relative
importance of factors such as sex and age as well as the
nature of the activity, exercise duration and exercise
intensity (for review relating endocannabinoids and exercise
see dietrich and mcdaniel, 2004).

strategies for cannabinoid intervention: toward
a balance between beneficial and adverse effects
although cannabinoids have been used both recreationally
and for medical purposes for more than 4000 years, they are
still today the focus of strong social, legal and medical
controversy over their therapeutic utility. the fact that most
known cannabimimetics have very broad effects on organ
systems, some of which are still unexplained, together with
dose-limiting psychotropic side effects, are some of the
reasons why the clinical application of these drugs has not
yet reached its full potential.
nevertheless, the use of the synthetic thc  xxxd1943xxx 
(marinol) and the synthetic thc analogue nabilone ( xxxd2687xxx ) has been approved in the us for the treatment of
nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy as well
as an appetite stimulant in aids. in spite of that, the efficacy
of synthetic thc vs the totality of cannabis compounds is
the subject of a contentious debate, mainly owing to
pharmacokinetics (e.g., oral vs inhaled) and to the contribution of additional components of cannabis (e.g.,  xxxd424xxx 
and cannabidiol) to therapeutic efficacy. related to this
question is the recent development of a sublingual
spray, sativex (gw pharmaceuticals), that is a standardized
cannabis extract containing approximately equal quantities
of thc and cannabidiol, along with minor amounts of other
cannabinoids. sativex is licensed in canada and has been
submitted for approval regulation in several european
countries as an adjuvant therapy for the symptom relief of
neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis.
after more than a decade of intensive effort by pharmaceutical companies to develop novel, potent and selective cb1
and  xxxg480xxx  agonists and antagonists to be used as
therapeutic agents, some potentially useful drugs have been
developed. regarding the treatment of cardiovascular disease,
at least three strategies can be foreseen in the future clinical
use of cannabinoid-based drugs (a) the use of  xxxg479xxx 
antagonists, (b) the use of cb2-selective agonists and (c) the
use of inhibitors of endocannabinoid degradation.

435

among the potential drugs affecting the endocannabinoid
system,  xxxg479xxx  antagonists have received the most
attention and are the farthest along in clinical studies.
rimonabant, also known as acomplia, was the first cb1
antagonist reported and has been approved for the treatment
of cardiometabolic risk factors associated with obesity. it is
still under study for other disorders that have a prominent
craving component. primarily based on the observation that
cannabis preparations enhance appetite, an effect that is
known to be mediated by cb1 receptors, cb1 blockers such as
rimonabant were postulated as anti-obesity drugs. although
the proposal that cb1 antagonists might lead to weight loss
was confirmed in both preclinical (ravinet trillou et al.,
2003) and clinical studies (van gaal et al., 2005), the
underlying mechanisms of these observations were found
to be quite different from the simple suppression of appetite.
in contrast, increasing evidence seems to support the view
that the rimonabant-induced decrease in body weight is
rather a consequence of cb1-mediated regulation of energy
homoeostasis (for review osei-hyiaman et al., 2006).
although the endocannabinoid system has been implicated
in the regulation of central and peripheral mechanisms of
energy balance control, preclinical studies suggest that cb1
antagonists will have long-term efficacy for weight loss and
improved lipid metabolism as a consequence of mechanisms
that are primarily peripheral in origin. for instance, high-fat
diet increases hepatic levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide, cb1 density and basal rates of fatty acid synthesis,
which is reduced by cb1 blockade (osei-hyiaman et al.,
2005). moreover, cb1 activation appears to increase  xxxg1337xxx  activity in adipocytes (cota et al., 2003),
suggesting that antagonism of this activation would increase
lipolysis and favour a lean body phenotype. thus, if a major
peripheral site of action for cb1 antagonists in obesity is
definitely demonstrated, the development of a cns-impermeant cb1 antagonist might still be effective, while reducing
the possibility of centrally mediated adverse effects.
clinical studies with the cb1 antagonist rimonabant are
encouraging not only because it produced a significant
weight loss and a reduction in waist circumference but also
because it caused an improvement in lipid profile, insulin
resistance and incidence of metabolic syndrome (reviewed
by cannon, 2005; tonstad, 2006). nevertheless, since the
endocannabinoid system is likely to be involved in several
pathways linked to anxiety and memory extinction, the
possibility that chronic cb1 blockade might be accompanied
by psychiatric issues is a major concern for the therapeutic
use of cb1 antagonists. in this regard, although clinical
studies have shown that anxiety and depression scale scores
were similar between the rimonabant-treated and the
placebo groups, among the patients that gave up treatment
during the first year due to depression there were six subjects
(1.0%) in the rimonabant and one subject (0.3%) in the
placebo group (for review see gelfand and cannon, 2006).
regarding the possible cardiovascular effects of long-term
blockade of cb1 receptors, preclinical studies seem to suggest
that cardiovascular side effects are probably not to be
expected during rimonabant treatment. for instance, the
pharmacological blockade of cb1 receptors did not affect
sympathetic tone, blood vessel tone or heart rate in pithed
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

436

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

rats (pfitzer et al., 2005), whereas the genetic ablation of
these receptors resulted in normal basal blood pressure and
heart rate in mice (ledent et al., 1999). however, since it has
been suggested that an increased endocannabinergic tone
may be present in hypertensive states, the possibility that
chronic blockade of cb1 receptors may increase blood
pressure in hypertensive patients should be taken into
account. in this regard, the results obtained in the rionorth america clinical trial suggest that rimonabant is not
likely to induce significant changes in blood pressure in
hypertensive states. no differences in either systolic or
diastolic blood pressure were detected when the results
obtained with hypertensive patients treated with rimonabant during 2 years were compared to those treated with
placebo (pi-sunyer et al., 2006). moreover, treatment with
rimonabant is also associated with significant increases in
high-density lipoprotein and decreases in  xxxg520xxx 
and triglyceride levels. since these metabolic changes had
been epidemiologically linked to the regression of coronary
atherosclerosis and a reduction in the risk of myocardial
infarction, stroke or cardiovascular death, it has been
proposed that rimonabant may have additional potential
applications apart from reducing body weight. thus, the
stradivarius (strategy to reduce atherosclerosis development involving administration of rimonabant – the
intravascular ultrasound study) trial is designed to test
whether improvements in cardiometabolic syndrome is
accompanied by reductions in atherogenesis after long-term
cb1 blockade. in addition, the crescendo trial (comprehensive rimonabant evaluation study of cardiovascular
endpoints and outcomes) will assess whether rimonabant
reduces the risk of a heart attack, stroke or death resulting
from heart attack or stroke in patients with abdominal
obesity plus other cardiovascular risk factors. nevertheless,
other studies have suggested that  xxxg479xxx  antagonism
may have negative consequences on cardiac remodeling in
an animal model of myocardial infarction (wagner et al.,
2003). furthermore, since rimonabant can either block
cb1-mediated or the not yet identified non-cb1/noncb2-binding sites, the possibility that cardiovascular side
effects may appear during rimonabant treatment cannot be
ruled out.
on the other hand, endocannabinoid-mediated cardiovascular effects appear to have survival value, as indicated
by the increased mortality following blockade of cb1
receptors in haemorrhagic (wagner et al., 1997) and
cardiogenic shock (wagner et al., 2001b, 2003), despite the
increase in blood pressure. in this regard, pretreatment with
cannabinoid agonists, such as thc or hu-210 improved
endothelial dysfunction and survival both in cardiogenic
(wagner et al., 2001b, 2003) and endotoxic shock (varga
et al., 1998), probably as the result of an improvement of
tissue oxygenation. in addition, endocannabinoids may
mediate important protective mechanisms against hypoxic
damage in the heart and the vasculature, and also exert
potent anti-inflammatory effects (for review see hiley and
ford 2004; walter and stella 2004). in the context of septic
shock, where an increased production of no results as
a consequence of nos induction, cannabinoids could play
a controversial role. hence, although ross et al. (2000)
british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

demonstrated that the cannabinoid agonist win 55212-2,
acting via cb2 receptors, actually inhibited lps-induced no
release from macrophages, a recent observation shows that
low concentrations of anandamide, devoid of relaxing
effects, elicit an acute release of no mediated predominantly by the activation of endothelial trpv1 receptors
(poblete et al., 2005). moreover, since the dual role of
cannabinoids observed in different kinds of shock could be
reflecting the involvement of two  xxxd3125xxx -sensitive
receptor subtypes, the proposed introduction of cb1
antagonists as therapeutic agents for the management of
shock needs further evaluation.
another promising strategy in the clinical use of cannabinoid-based drugs is the development of  xxxg480xxx 
agonists, such as am1241, hu308 and jwh133, since they
are devoid of known psychoactivity. multiple animal studies
suggest that agonists at this receptor may be clinically useful
in the treatment of chronic pain, specifically neuropathic
pain (ibrahim et al., 2003), whereas some preliminary studies
suggest beneficial effects of cb2 receptors in the maintenance of bone density and the delay in the progression of
atherosclerotic lesions. the involvement of cb2 receptors in
bone growth derives from the observation that cb2-deficient
mice have markedly decreased bone mass compared to their
littermates expressing the receptor, whereas a cb2-specific
agonist attenuates ovariectomy-induced bone loss in mice
(ofek et al., 2006). moreover, the finding that a particular
silent single-nucleotide polymorphism in cb2 gene correlates strongly with osteoporosis in a cohort of women
(karsak et al., 2005), gives further support to the view that
cb2 agonists might be useful as a new therapeutic approach
to osteoporosis. additionally, the finding that a low oral dose
of thc inhibits atherosclerosis progression in the apoe
knockout mouse through cb2-mediated immunomodulatory effects on lymphoid and myeloid cells (steffens et al.,
2005) may also lead to an entirely new application for cb2
agonists. whether this strategy would be more effective in
reducing atherosclerosis progression than blocking cb1
receptors with rimonabant as a consequence of improving
cardiometabolic parameters remains to be established. we
need not only a better understanding of the physiological
role of cb2 receptors in the immune system, but also a
knowledge of the consequences of long-term cb2 activation.
for instance, human cb2 receptors rapidly desensitize when
expressed in the chinese hamster ovary cell line (bouaboula
et al., 1999), suggesting that they might not maintain their
efficacy if cb2 agonists are chronically administered.
finally, a third kind of approach deals with the possibility
of regulating endocannabinoid levels by the inhibition of
 xxxg753xxx , the major degradative enzyme for anandamide and
related amides. enzymes for both anandamide and 2-ag
degradation,  xxxg753xxx  and the monoacylglycerol lipase, respectively, have been cloned, although truly selective and/or
potent inhibitors have been developed so far only for  xxxg753xxx 
(for review see cravatt and lichtman, 2003). a number of
studies have provided evidence that the enzyme inhibitors
might be therapeutically useful in the treatment of pain
(cravatt and lichtman, 2004) and neuropsychiatric disorders such as anxiety (kathuria et al., 2003). regarding
cardiovascular pathology, their possible use as antihyperten-

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

sive agents is suggested by the observation that the  xxxg753xxx 
inhibitor urb597 decreases arterial pressure to nearnormotensive values in shr, while it has no detectable
haemodynamic effects in normotensive rats (bátkai et al.,
2004b).
decreases in blood pressure similar to that caused by the
 xxxg753xxx  inhibitors in shr were observed after the treatment
with the anandamide transport inhibitors, am404 and
omdm-2 (bátkai et al., 2004b). nevertheless, the facts that
the putative endocannabinoid transporter has not been
cloned up to now and that several of the existing inhibitors,
such as am404, are also known to act at cb1 and trpv1
receptors, make it difficult to interpret the above studies.

437

acknowledgements
work on this topic at the instituto de investigaciones
farmacológicas was supported by grants pict 05-14107 from
foncyt and pip 5695 from conicet, argentina.

conflict of interest
the authors state no conflict of interest.

references
concluding remarks
there has been a significant progress in the understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of cannabinoid action and this
has led to the serious consideration of cannabinoids as
possible therapeutic agents on the basis of scientific
evidence. as in the case of the history of the therapeutic
use of opioids, cannabinoid research is still the focus of legal
and moral controversy, an issue that has powerfully
contributed to the delay in the clinical application of these
drugs. nevertheless, in spite of the problems derived from
their psychotropic side effects, which will probably be
overcome by developing more specific agonists, the fact that
most known cannabimimetics have very broad effects on
organ systems, some of which are still unexplained, certainly
emphasizes the need for caution. moreover, cb1 receptors
are among the most abundant g-protein-coupled receptors
in brain, present at nearly 10-fold higher levels than most
other g-protein-coupled receptors (devane et al., 1988;
herkenham et al., 1991). hence, the consequences of the
long-term inhibition of these receptors need further exploration. regarding cardiovascular pathophysiology, although
the understanding of cannabinoids action has largely
improved, their effects are complex and cannot be explained
by a single mechanism or a single site of action. nevertheless, the endocannabinoid system is a promising target
for the development of therapies for cardiovascular pathologies and this area of research will largely benefit from
further experiments tending to give answers to several major
issues. for instance, what is the role of non-cb1/non-cb2
receptors in cardiovascular pathophysiology? will the identification of these novel receptors reconcile conflicting
evidence in the literature? what are the long-term effects
of cb1 receptors blockade in terms of cardiovascular
pathology? hence, much more multidisciplinary work will
be necessary to assess the exact function of cannabinoids in
cardiovascular disease in order to develop new therapeutical
approaches. this latter possibility will largely depend on the
finding of appropriate strategies that could prevent the
known side effects of cannabinoids as well as the chronic
toxic effects of this novel group of compounds. translating
literature into science, and in words of the hungarian writer
sandor marai: ‘the truth is precisely what i don’t know’
(marai, 2001), there is a promising although controversial
future in the field of endocannabinoid research.

adams md, chait ld, earnhardt jt (1976). tolerance to the
cardiovascular effects of  xxxd1943xxx  in the rat.
br j pharmacol 56: 43–48.
archer ra (1974). the cannabinoids: therapeutic potentials. annu
rep med chem 9: 253–259.
bátkai s, jarai z, wagner ja, goparaju sk, varga k, liu j et al. (2001).
endocannabinoids acting at vascular cb1 receptors mediate the
vasodilated state in advanced liver cirrhosis. nat med 7: 827–832.
bátkai s, pacher p, jarai z, wagner ja, kunos g (2004a). cannabinoid
antagonist  xxxd3125xxx  inhibits endotoxic hypotension by a cardiac
mechanism not involving cb1 or cb2 receptors. am j physiol heart
circ physiol 287: h595–h600.
bátkai s, pacher p, osei-hyiaman d, radaeva s, liu j, harvey-white j
et al. (2004b). endocannabinoids acting at cannabinoid-1 receptors regulate cardiovascular function in hypertension. circulation
110: 1996–2002.
begg m, pacher p, batkai s, osei-hyiaman d, offertaler l, mo fm
et al. (2005). evidence for novel cannabinoid receptors. pharmacol
ther 106: 133–145.
beltramo m, stella n, calignano a, lin sy, makriyannis a, piomelli d
(1997). functional role of high affinity anandamide transport, as
revealed by selective inhibition. science 277: 1094–1097.
benowitz nl, jones rt (1975). cardiovascular effects of prolonged
 xxxd1943xxx  ingestion. clin pharmacol ther 18:
287–297.
benowitz nl, jones rt (1981). cardiovascular and metabolic
considerations in prolonged cannabinoid administration in
man. j clin pharmacol 21: 214s–223s.
benowitz nl, rosenberg j, rogers w, bachman j, jones rt (1979).
cardiovascular effects of intravenous delta-9-tetrahydrocanabinol:
autonomic nervous mechanisms. clin pharmacol ther 25:
440–446.
bilfinger tv, salzet m, fimiani c, deutsch dg, tramu g, stefano gb
(1998). pharmacological evidence for  xxxg753xxx 
in human cardiac and vascular tissues. int j cardiol 64 (suppl 1):
s15–s22.
bisogno t, maurelli s, melck d, de petrocellis l, di marzo v (1997).
biosynthesis, release and degradation of anandamide and palmitoylethanolamide in leukocytes. j biol chem 272: 3315–3323.
bolli r (2000). the late phase of preconditioning. circ res 87:
972–983.
bonz a, laser m, kullmer s, kniesch s, babin-ebell j, popp v et al.
(2003). cannabinoids acting on cb1 receptors decrease contractile
performance in human atrial muscle. j cardiovasc pharmacol 41:
657–664.
bouaboula m, dussossoy d, casellas p (1999). regulation of
peripheral cannabinoid receptor cb2 phosphorylation by the
 xxxd1422xxx  sr 144528. implications for receptor biological
responses. j biol chem 274: 20397–20405.
buckley ne, hansson s, harta g, mezey e (1998). expression of
the cb1 and  xxxg480xxx  messenger rnas during embryonic
development in the rat. neuroscience 82: 1131–1149.
buckley ne, mccoy kl, mezey e, bonner t, zimmer a, felder cc
et al. (2000). immunomodulation by cannabinoids is absent in
mice deficient for the cannabinoid cb(2) receptor. eur j pharmacol
396: 141–149.

british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

438

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

cannon cp (2005). the endocannabinoid system: a new approach to
control cardiovascular disease. clin cornerstone 7: 17–26.
chataigneau t, feletou m, thollon c, villeneuve n, vilaine jp,
duhault j et al. (1998). cannabinoid  xxxg479xxx  and endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization in guinea-pig carotid, rat
mesenteric and porcine coronary arteries. br j pharmacol 123:
968–974.
chaytor at, martin pem, evans wh, randall md, griffith tm
(1999). the endothelial component of cannabinoid-induced
relaxation in rabbit mesenteric artery depends on gap junctional
communication. j physiol 520: 539–550.
cota d, marsicano g, tschop m, grubler y, flachskamm c, schubert
m et al. (2003). the endogenous cannabinoid system affects
energy balance via central orexigenic drive and peripheral
lipogenesis. j clin invest 112: 423–431.
cravatt bf, lichtman ah (2003).  xxxg753xxx :
an emerging therapeutic target in the endocannabinoid system.
curr opin chem biol 7: 469–475.
cravatt bf, lichtman ah (2004). the endogenous cannabinoid
system and its role in nociceptive behavior. j neurobiol 61:
149–160.
crescendo (comprehensive rimonabant evaluation study of
cardiovascular endpoints and outcomes). available at http://
www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/gui/show/nct00263042?order ¼ 2,accessed
november 16, 2006.
deutsch dg, chin sa (1993). enzymatic synthesis and degradation
of anandamide, a cannabinoid receptor agonist. biochem pharmacol 46: 791–796.
deutsch dg, goligorsky ms, schmid pc, krebsbach rj, schmid hh,
das sk et al. (1997). production and physiological actions of
anandamide in the vasculature of the rat kidney. j clin invest 100:
1538–1546.
devane wa, dysarz fa, johnson ls, melvin ls, howlett ac (1988).
determination and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in
rat brain. mol pharmacol 34: 605–613.
devane wa, hanus l, breuer a, pertwee rg, stevenson la, griffin g
et al. (1992). isolation and structure of a brain constituent that
binds to the cannabinoid receptor. science 258: 1946–1949.
dewey wl (1986). cannabinoid pharmacology. pharmacol rev 38:
151–178.
di marzo v, de petrocellis l (2006). plant, synthetic, and endogenous
cannabinoids in medicine. annu rev med 57: 553–574.
di marzo v, de petrocellis l, sepe n, buono a (1996). biosynthesis of
anandamide and related acylethanolamides in mouse j774
macrophages and n18 neuroblastoma cells. biochem j 316:
977–984.
dietrich a, mcdaniel wf (2004). endocannabinoids and exercise. br
j sports med 38: 536–541.
dishman rk, berthoud hr, booth fw, cotman cw, edgerton vr,
fleshner mr et al. (2006). neurobiology of exercise. obesity (silver
spring) 14: 345–356.
ellis ef, moore sf, willoughby ka (1995). anandamide and delta 9thc dilation of cerebral arterioles is blocked by indomethacin. am
j physiol 269: h1859–h1864.
ford wr, honan sa, white r, hiley cr (2002). evidence of a novel
site mediating anandamide-induced negative inotropic and
coronary vasodilator responses in rat isolated hearts. br j
pharmacol 135: 1191–1198.
fredericks ab, benowitz nl, savanapridi cy (1981). the cardiovascular and autonomic effects of repeated administration of delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol to rhesus monkeys. j pharmacol exp ther
216: 247–253.
fulton d, quilley j (1998). evidence against anandamide as the
hyperpolarizing factor mediating the  xxxd2738xxx -independent
coronary vasodilator effect of bradykinin in the rat. j pharmacol
exp ther 286: 1146–1151.
garcı́a mc, adler-graschinsky e, celuch sm (2003). hypotensive
effect of anandamide through the activation of cb1 and  xxxg2335xxx  spinal
receptors in urethane-anesthetized rats. naunyn schmiedebergs arch
pharmacol 368: 270–276.
garcı́a mc, adler-graschinsky e, celuch sm (2006). role of cgrp
and gaba in the hypotensive effect of intrathecally administered anandamide to anesthetized rats. eur j pharmacol 532:
88–98.

british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

gaskari sa, liu h, moezi l, li y, baik sk, lee ss (2005). role of
endocannabinoids in the pathogenesis of cirrhotic cardiomyopathy in bile duct-ligated rats. br j pharmacol 146: 315–323.
gebremedhin d, lange ar, campbell wb, hillard cj, harder dr
(1999). cannabinoid  xxxg479xxx  of cat cerebral arterial muscle
functions to inhibit l-type ca2 þ channel current. am j physiol
276: h2085–h2093.
gelfand ev, cannon cp (2006). rimonabant: a cannabinoid receptor
type 1 blocker for management of multiple cardiometabolic risk
factors. j am coll cardiol 47: 1919–1926.
godlewski g, malinowska b, schlicker e. (2004). presynaptic
cannabinoid cb(1) receptors are involved in the inhibition of
the neurogenic vasopressor response during septic shock in pithed
rats. br j pharmacol 142: 701–708.
grainger j, boachie-ansah g (2001). anandamide-induced relaxation of sheep coronary arteries: the role of the vascular
endothelium,  xxxd208xxx  metabolites and potassium channels. br j pharmacol 134: 1003–1012.
hájos n, ledent c, freund tf (2001). novel cannabinoid-sensitive
receptor mediates inhibition of glutamatergic synaptic transmission in the hippocampus. neuroscience 106: 1–4.
hardman hf, domino ef, seevers mh (1971). general pharmacological actions of some synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol derivatives.
pharmacol rev 23: 295–315.
harris d, mcculloch ai, kendall da, randall md (2002). characterization of vasorelaxant responses to anandamide in the rat
mesenteric arterial bed. j physiol 539: 893–902.
herkenham m, lynn ab, johnson mr, melvin ls, de costa br, rice
kc (1991). characterization and localization of cannabinoid
receptors in rat brain: a quantitative in vitro autoradiographic
study. j. neurosci 11: 563–583.
hiley cr, ford wr (2004). cannabinoid pharmacology in the
cardiovascular system: potential protective mechanisms through
lipid signalling. biol rev  xxxg322xxx  philos soc 79: 187–205.
hillard cj (2000). endocannabinoids and vascular function.
j pharmacol exp ther 294: 27–32.
högestatt ed, zygmunt pm (2002). cardiovascular pharmacology
of anandamide. prostaglandins leukot essent  xxxd2154xxx  66:
343–351.
house of lords (1998). science and technology – ninth report.
science and technology committee publications.
ibrahim mm, deng h, zvonok a, cockayne da, kwan j, mata hp
et al. (2003). activation of cb2 cannabinoid receptors by am1241
inhibits experimental neuropathic pain: pain inhibition by
receptors not present in the cns. proc natl acad sci usa 100:
10529–10533.
ishac ejn, jiang l, lake kd, varga k, abood me, kunos g (1996).
inhibition of exocytotic noradrenaline release by presynaptic
cannabinoid cb1 receptors on peripheral sympathetic nerves.
br j pharmacol 118: 2023–2028.
jarai z, wagner ja, varga k, lake kd, compton dr, martin br et al.
(1999). cannabinoid-induced mesenteric vasodilation through an
endothelial site distinct from cb1 or cb2 receptors. proc natl acad
sci usa 96: 14136–14141.
jones rt (2002). cardiovascular system effects of marijuana. j clin
pharmacol 42: 58s–63s.
joyeux m, arnaud c, godin-ribuot d, demenge p, lamontagne d,
ribuot c (2002). endocannabinoids are implicated in the infarct
size reducing effect conferred by heat stress preconditioning in
isolated rat hearts. cardiovasc res 55: 619–625.
kalant h (2001). medicinal use of cannabis: history and current
status. pain res manag 6: 80–91.
karsak m, cohen-solal m, freudenberg j, ostertag a, morieux c,
kornak u et al. (2005). cannabinoid receptor type 2 gene
is associated with human osteoporosis. hum mol genet 14:
3389–3396.
kathuria s, gaetani s, fegley d,  xxxd3484xxx  f, duranti a, tontini a et al.
(2003). modulation of anxiety through blockade of anandamide
hydrolysis. nat med 9: 76–81.
kosersky ds (1978). antihypertensive effects of  xxxd1943xxx . arch int pharmacodyn ther 233: 76–81.
kunos g., jarai z., batkai s, goparaju sk, ishac ej, liu j et al. (2000).
endocannabinoids as cardiovascular modulators. chem phys lipids
108: 159–168.

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

lagneux c, lamontagne d (2001). involvement of cannabinoids in
the cardioprotection induced by lipopolysaccharide. br j pharmacol 132: 793–796.
lake kd, compton dr, varga k, martin br, kunos g (1997).
cannabinoid-induced hypotension and bradycardia in rats
mediated by cb1-like cannabinoid receptors. j pharmacol exp ther
281: 1030–1037.
lambert dm, dipaolo fg, sonveaux p, kanyonyo m, govaerts sj,
hermans e et al. (1999). analogues and homologues of npalmitoylethanolamide, a putative endogenous cb2 cannabinoid,
as potential ligands for the cannabinoid receptors. biochim biophys
acta 1440: 266–274.
lamontagne d, lepicier p, lagneux c, bouchard jf (2006). the
endogenous cardiac cannabinoid system: a new protective
mechanism against myocardial ischemia. arch mal coeur vaiss
99: 242–246.
ledent c, valverde o, cossu g, petitet f, aubert jf, beslot f et al.
(1999). unresponsiveness to cannabinoids and reduced addictive
effects of opiates in  xxxg479xxx  knockout mice. science 283:
401–404.
lepicier p, bouchard jf, lagneux c, lamontagne d (2003). endocannabinoids protect the rat isolated heart against ischaemia.
br j pharmacol 139: 805–815.
li j, kaminski ne, wang dh (2003). anandamide-induced depressor
effect in spontaneously hypertensive rats: role of the  xxxd428xxx 
receptor. hypertension 41: 757–762.
libby p, theroux p (2005). pathophysiology of coronary artery
disease. circulation 111: 3481–3488.
liu j, gao b, mirshahi f, sanyal aj, khanolkar ad, makriyannis a
et al. (2000). functional cb1 cannabinoid receptors in human
vascular endothelial cells. biochem j 346: 835–840.
mackie k (2006). cannabinoid receptors as therapeutic targets. annu
rev pharmacol toxicol 46: 101–122.
mackie k, stella n (2006). cannabinoid receptors and endocannabinoids: evidence for new players. aaps j 8: e298–e306.
maingret f, patrel aj, lazdunski m, honore e (2001). the endocannabinoid anandamide is a direct and selective blocker of the
background k þ channel  xxxg1257xxx . embo j 20: 47–54.
marai s (2001). embers. penguin: melbourne.
matsuda la, lolait sj, brownstein mj, young ac, bonner ti (1990).
structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of
the cloned cdna. nature 346: 561–564.
mechoulam r, gaoni y (1967). the absolute configuration of delta-1tetrahydrocannabinol, the major active constituent of hashish.
tetrahedron lett 12: 1109–1111.
mendizábal ve, orliac ml, adler-graschinsky e (2001). long-term
inhibition of  xxxd2738xxx  synthase potentiates effects of
anandamide in the rat mesenteric bed. eur j pharmacol 427:
251–262.
mukhopadhyay s, chapnick bm, howlett ac (2002). anandamideinduced vasorelaxation in rabbit aortic rings has two components:
g protein dependent and independent. am j physiol heart circ
physiol 282: h2046–h2054.
munro s, thomas kl, abu-shaar m (1993). molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. nature 365: 61–65.
niederhoffer n, szabo b (1999). effect of the cannabinoid receptor
agonist win55212-2 on sympathetic cardiovascular regulation.
br j pharmacol 126: 457–466.
niederhoffer n, szabo b (2000). cannabinoids cause central
sympathoexcitation and bradycardia in rabbits. j pharmacol exp
ther 294: 707–713.
ofek o, karsak m, leclerc n, fogel m, frenkel b, wright k et al.
(2006). peripheral cannabinoid receptor, cb2, regulates bone mass.
proc natl acad sci usa 103: 696–701.
offertáler l, mo fm, batkai s, liu j, begg m, razdan rk et al. (2003).
selective ligands and cellular effectors of a g protein-coupled
endothelial cannabinoid receptor. mol pharmacol 63: 699–705.
orliac ml, peroni r, celuch sm, adler-graschinsky e (2003).
potentiation of anandamide effects in mesenteric beds isolated
from endotoxemic rats. j pharmacol exp ther 304: 179–184.
osei-hyiaman d, depetrillo m, pacher p, liu j, radaeva s, batkai s
et al. (2005). endocannabinoid activation at hepatic cb1 receptors
stimulates fatty acid synthesis and contributes to diet-induced
obesity. j clin invest 115: 1298–1305.

439

osei-hyiaman d, harvey-white j, batkai s, kunos g. (2006). the role
of the endocannabinoid system in the control of energy homeostasis. int j obes (london) 30: s33–s38.
o’sullivan se, kendall da, randall md (2004). characterisation
of the vasorelaxant properties of the novel endocannabinoid n-arachidonoyl-dopamine (nada). br j pharmacol 141:
803–812.
pacher p, bátkai s, kunos g. (2004). haemodynamic profile and
responsiveness to anandamide of trpv1 receptor knock-out mice.
j physiol 558: 647–657.
pacher p, bátkai s, kunos g (2005a). blood pressure regulation by
endocannabinoids and their receptors. neuropharmacology 48:
1130–1138.
pacher p, bátkai s, kunos g (2006). the endocannabinoid system
as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. pharmacol rev 58:
389–462.
pacher p, batkai s, osei-hyiaman d, offertaler l, liu j, harvey-white
j et al. (2005b). hemodynamic profile, responsiveness to anandamide, and baroreflex sensitivity of mice lacking fatty  xxxd2716xxx 
hydrolase. am j physiol heart circ physiol 289: h533–h541.
padley jr, li q, pilowsky pm, goodchild ak (2003). cannabinoid
receptor activation in the rostral ventrolateral medulla oblongata
evokes cardiorespiratory effects in anaesthetised rats. br j pharmacol 140: 384–394.
parrillo je (1993). pathogenetic mechanisms of septic shock. n engl j
med 328: 1471–1477.
peroni rn, orliac ml, abramoff t, ribeiro ml, franchi am, adlergraschinsky e (2007). participation of cgrp and prostanoids in
the sex-linked differences of anandamide effects in mesenteric
beds isolated from sprague–dawley rats. eur j pharmacol 557:
49–57.
peroni rn, orliac ml, becu-villalobos d, huidobro-toro jp, adlergraschinsky e, celuch sm (2004). sex-linked differences in the
vasorelaxant effects of anandamide in vascular mesenteric beds:
role of oestrogens. eur j pharmacol 493: 151–160.
pfitzer t, niederhoffer n, szabo b (2005). search for an endogenous
cannabinoid-mediated effect in the sympathetic nervous system.
naunyn-schmiedeberg’s arch pharmacol 371: 9–17.
pi-sunyer fx, aronne lj, heshmati hm, devin j, rosenstock j, rionorth america study group (2006). effect of rimonabant, a
cannabinoid-1 receptor blocker, on weight and cardiometabolic
risk factors in overweight or obese patients: rio-north america: a
randomized controlled trial. jama 295: 761–775.
plane f, holland m, waldron gl, garland cj, boyle jp (1997).
evidence that anandamide and edhf act via different
mechanisms in rat isolated mesenteric arteries. br j pharmacol
121: 1509–1512.
poblete im, orliac ml, briones r, adler-graschinsky e, huidobrotoro jp (2005). anandamide elicits an acute release of  xxxd2738xxx 
through endothelial trpv1 receptor activation in the rat arterial
mesenteric bed. j physiol 568: 539–551.
pratt pf, hillard cj, edgemond ws, campbell wb (1998). narachidonylethanolamide relaxation of bovine coronary artery is
not mediated by cb1 cannabinoid receptor. am j physiol 274:
h375–h381.
ralevic v, kendall da (2002). cannabinoids inhibit pre- and
postjunctionally sympathetic neurotransmission in rat mesenteric
arteries. eur j pharmacol 444: 171–181.
randall md, alexander sp, bennett t, boyd ea, fry jr, gardiner sm
et al. (1996). an endogenous cannabinoid as an endotheliumderived vasorelaxant. biochem biophys res commun 229: 114–120.
randall md, harris d, kendall da, ralevic v (2002). cardiovascular
effects of cannabinoids. pharmacol ther 95: 191–202.
randall md, kendall da, o’sullivan s (2004). the complexities of
the cardiovascular actions of cannabinoids. br j pharmacol 142:
20–26.
ravinet trillou c, arnone m, delgorge c, gonalons n, keane p,
maffrand jp et al. (2003). anti-obesity effect of  xxxd3125xxx , a cb1
receptor antagonist, in diet-induced obese mice. am j physiol regul
integr comp physiol 284: r345–r353.
ros j, claria j, to-figueras j, planaguma a, cejudo-martı́n p,
fernández-varo g et al. (2002). endogenous cannabinoids: a new
system involved in the homeostasis of arterial pressure in
experimental cirrhosis in the rat. gastroenterology 122: 85–93.

british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

440

cannabinoid therapy for cardiovascular disease
ve mendizábal and e adler-graschinsky

ross ra, brockie hc, pertwee rg (2000). inhibition of  xxxd2738xxx 
production in raw264.7 macrophages by cannabinoids and
palmitoylethanolamide. eur j pharmacol 401: 121–130.
schmid pc, kuwae t, krebsbach rj, schmid hh (1997). anandamide
and other n-acylethanolamines in mouse peritoneal macrophages. chem phys lipids 87: 103–110.
shmist ya, goncharov i, eichler m, shneyvays v, isaac a, vogel z
et al. (2006).  xxxd1943xxx  protects cardiac cells
from hypoxia via  xxxg480xxx  activation and  xxxd2738xxx 
production. mol cell biochem 283: 75–83.
siqueira sw, lapa ap, ribeiro do valle j (1979). the triple effect
induced by delta  xxxd1943xxx  on the rat blood
pressure. eur j pharmacol 58: 351–357.
sparling pb, giuffrida a, piomelli d, rosskopf l, dietrich a (2003).
exercise activates the endocannabinoid system. neuroreport 14:
2209–2211.
steffens s, mach f (2006). cannabinoid receptors in atherosclerosis.
curr opin lipidol 17: 519–526.
steffens s, veillard nr, arnaud c, pelli g, burger f, staub c et al.
(2005). low dose oral cannabinoid therapy reduces progression of
atherosclerosis in mice. nature 434: 782–786.
stradivarius (strategy to reduce atherosclerosis development
involving administration of rimonabant – the intravascular
ultrasound study). available at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/
gui/show/nct00124332?order ¼ 1,accessed november 16 2006.
terenius l (2000). from opiate pharmacology to opioid peptide
physiology. ups j med sci 105: 1–15.
tonstad s (2006). rimonabant: a cannabinoid receptor blocker for
the treatment of metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors. nutr
metab cardiovasc dis 16: 156–162.
underdown nj, hiley cr, ford wr (2005). anandamide reduces
infarct size in rat isolated hearts subjected to ischaemiareperfusion by a novel cannabinoid mechanism. br j pharmacol
146: 809–816.
van gaal lf, rissanen am, scheen aj, ziegler o, rossner s, rioeurope study group (2005). effects of the cannabinoid-1 receptor
blocker rimonabant on weight reduction and cardiovascular
risk factors in overweight patients: 1-year experience from the
rio-europe study. lancet 365: 1389–1397.
varga k, lake k, martin br, kunos g (1995). novel antagonist
implicates the cb1 cannabinoid receptor in the hypotensive
action of anandamide. eur j pharmacol 278: 279–283.
varga k, wagner ja, bridgen dt, kunos g (1998). platelet- and
macrophage-derived endogenous cannabinoids are involved in
endotoxin-induced hypotension. faseb j 12: 1035–1044.
vidrio h, sanchez-salvatori ma, medina m (1996). cardiovascular
effects of ()-11-oh-delta 8-tetrahydrocannabinol-dimethylheptyl in rats. j cardiovasc pharmacol 28: 332–336.
vollmer rr, cavero i, ertel rj, solomon ta, buckley jp (1974). role
of the central autonomic nervous system in the hypotension and

british journal of pharmacology (2007) 151 427–440

bradycardia induced by ()-delta 9- xxxd1943xxx .
j pharm pharmacol 26: 186–192.
wagner ja, abesser m, harvey-white j, ertl g (2006). 2-arachidonylglycerol acting on cb1 cannabinoid receptors mediates delayed
cardioprotection induced by  xxxd2738xxx  in rat isolated hearts.
j cardiovasc pharmacol 47: 650–655.
wagner ja, hu k, bauersachs j, karcher j, wiesler m, goparaju sk
et al. (2001b). endogenous cannabinoids mediate hypotension
after experimental myocardial infarction. j am coll cardiol 38:
2048–2054.
wagner ja, hu k, karcher j, bauersachs j, schafer a, laser m et al.
(2003). cb(1) cannabinoid receptor antagonism promotes
remodeling and cannabinoid treatment prevents endothelial
dysfunction and hypotension in rats with myocardial infarction.
br j pharmacol 138: 1251–1258.
wagner ja, jarai z, batkai s, kunos g (2001a). hemodynamic
effects of cannabinoids: coronary and cerebral vasodilation
mediated by cannabinoid cb(1) receptors. eur j pharmacol 423:
203–210.
wagner ja, varga k, ellis ef, rzigalinski ba, martin br, kunos g
(1997). activation of peripheral cb1 cannabinoid receptors in
haemorrhagic shock. nature 390: 518–521.
wagner ja, varga k, jarai z, kunos g (1999). mesenteric vasodilation
mediated by endothelial anandamide receptors. hypertension 33:
429–434.
wagner ja, varga k, kunos g (1998). cardiovascular actions of
cannabinoids and their generation during shock. j mol med 76:
824–836.
walter l, stella n (2004). cannabinoids and neuroinflammation.
br j pharmacol 141: 775–785.
wang y, kaminski ne, wang dh (2005).  xxxg2335xxx -mediated depressor
effects during high-salt intake: role of anandamide. hypertension
46: 986–991.
wang y, liu y, ito y, hashiguchi t, kitajima i, yamakuchi m et al.
(2001). simultaneous measurement of anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol by polymyxin b-selective adsorption and subsequent high-performance liquid chromatography analysis: increase
in endogenous cannabinoids in the sera of patients with
endotoxic shock. anal biochem 294: 73–82.
white r, hiley cr (1997). a comparison of edhf-mediated and
anandamide-induced relaxations in the rat isolated mesenteric
artery. br j pharmacol 122: 1573–1584.
yan zc, liu dy, zhang ll, shen cy, ma ql, cao tb et al. (2007).
exercise reduces adipose tissue via cannabinoid receptor type 1
which is regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptordelta. biochem biophys res commun 354: 427–433.
zygmunt pm, petersson j, andersson da, chuang h, sorgard m, di
marzo v et al. (1999).  xxxd428xxx  receptors on sensory nerves
mediate the vasodilator action of anandamide. nature 400:
452–457.

