the p/q‐type voltage‐dependent calcium channel: a therapeutic target in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 - gazulla - 2007 - acta neurologica scandinavica - wiley online library 
 
 abstract 
 
 background –   voltage‐dependent calcium channels (vdccs) are heteromultimeric complexes that mediate calcium influx into cells; the alpha1a subunit is the pore‐forming subunit specific to the neuronal p/q‐type vdccs. spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (sca 6) is caused by an abnormal expansion of a cag repeat in   xxxg302xxx  , which encodes the alpha1a subunit. heterologous expression of mutated alpha1a subunits resulted in increased channel inactivation in electrophysiological tests. gabapentin and pregabalin interact with the alpha2delta subunit of the vdccs and improved ataxia in cases of cortical cerebellar atrophy (cca) and ataxia‐telangiectasia. 
 materials and methods –   a bibliographical review was performed in order to find out if gabapentin and pregabalin coud prove useful in the treatment of sca 6. 
 results –   gabapentin and pregabalin slowed the rate of inactivation in recombinant p/q‐type vdccs. sca 6 shares neuropathological findings with cca. 
 conclusions –   on the basis of the neuropathological identity of sca 6 with cca, and of the effect of gabapentin and pregabalin on recombinant vdccs the authors put forward the hypothesis that these drugs might prove beneficial in sca 6, as the ataxia would be expected to improve. the authors hope that researchers working with this illness will be encouraged to undertake the appropriate clinical and experimental work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 voltage‐dependent calcium channels (vdccs) are important elements in neurons and other excitable cells. disturbances of vdccs cause a number of neurological diseases, such as epilepsy, migraine, muscle weakness, and cerebellar ataxia. spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (sca 6) is a genetic illness that affects the p/q‐type vdccs, and interferes with purkinje cell calcium homeostasis. no treatment is currently available for this disease. 
 the drugs gabapentin and pregabalin interact with the p/q‐type vdccs and have alleviated ataxia in late cortical cerebellar atrophy (cca) and other degenerative ataxias. their mechanism of action seems to be appropriate for counteracting the channel dysregulation found in transgenic models of sca 6. the aim of this work was to put forward that gabapentin and pregabalin could prove beneficial in the treatment of this disease. 
 in order to provide appropriate support for this hypothesis, the authors have reviewed the following subjects: (i) structure, regulation and distribution of p/q‐type vdccs; (ii) the pathophysiology of sca 6; and (iii) the mechanism of action of the drugs gabapentin and pregabalin. 
 
 
  p/q‐type voltage‐dependent calcium channels 
 voltage‐dependent calcium channels are heteromeric complexes with the capacity to mediate calcium influx into cells in response to changes in membrane potential. calcium entering the cell serves as a second messenger of electrical signaling, initiating a multiplicity of cellular functions. vdccs are composed of several subunits, of which  alpha 1 has the property to form the structural ion channel ( 1 ).
          
 p‐type currents were identified in guinea pig purkinje cells and in the squid giant synapse ( 2 ). p‐type currents were activated at a more negative potential than myocite l‐type currents, and showed little inactivation with 1‐s depolarizations ( 1 ,  3 ). they were selectively blocked by  omega ‐agatoxin‐iva ( 4 ), which reduced over 80% of the total calcium current in rat purkinje neurons ( 5 ). p‐type vdccs are predominant in purkinje cells ( 6 ).
          
 q‐type currents were identified in rat cerebellar granule cells. the resemblance between q‐type and the p‐type currents generated by  alpha 1a subunits in oocytes led to the conclusion that  alpha 1a might give rise to both types of currents ( 7 ). this subunit is, therefore, specific to p‐type and q‐type vdccs ( 8 ). alternative splicing of the  alpha 1a transcripts may account for the differing kinetics of the p‐ and q‐type currents.
          
 p/q‐, n‐, and r‐type vdccs are restricted to central and peripheral neurons, whilst l‐ and t‐type vdccs are expressed in neural and other cell types ( 1 ). the p/q‐type vdccs (also referred to as ca v 2.1) contribute to the majority (90%) of depolarization‐induced calcium current in the purkinje cell. it is found extensively in the human nervous system, with the highest presence in the cerebellum and hippocampus ( 9 ). p‐type channel immunoreaction demonstrated intense labeling of secondary and tertiary dendrites and the axon terminals of purkinje cells in the cerebellum of albino rats. intense reaction was also found in neurons of the inferior olive, entorhinal and pyriform areas. a light reaction was present in most regions of the brain ( 3 ).
          
 immunohistochemical localization of the  alpha 1a subunit of the p/q‐type vdcc in the human cerebellum showed strong staining of granule cells, basket cell bodies and apical dendrites and cell bodies of purkinje cells. pyramidal cell bodies of the dentate nuclei stained intensely, surrounded by a band of stippled neuropil representing a purkinje axon terminal field. localization of the  alpha 1b subunit of n‐type vdccs in the human cerebellar cortex followed a similar distribution, albeit with weaker staining. in addition to these, many vdcc types were expressed in human purkinje cells ( 9 ).
          
 p/q‐type vdccs are high threshold calcium channels which control neuronal survival, excitability, plasticity and genetic expression, and mediate fast neurotransmitter release at synapses and neuromuscular junctions ( 10 ). changes in membrane potential activate vdccs and the increase in cytoplasmic calcium causes exocytosis of synaptic vesicles ( 11 ). p/q‐type vdccs have been found to be responsible for the control of acetylcholine release at the mature mammalian neuromuscular junction ( 12 ). inhibitory ( gamma ‐ xxxd2177xxx , gaba) post‐synaptic currents in cerebellar nuclear neurons were suppressed and excitatory (glutamate) post‐synaptic currents in hippocampal neurons were decreased by 60% by  omega ‐agatoxin‐iva in slices of rat brain ( 13 ). these facts underline the importance of the p/q‐type vdcc in neurotransmission.
          
 
 
  structure and regulation of p/q‐type calcium channels 
 the  alpha 1 subunit defines the vdcc type. there are at least 10  alpha 1 subtypes, each one with its own physiologic and pharmacologic properties ( 1 ). the  alpha 1a subunit corresponds to the p/q‐type channel ( 8 ), and is encoded by the   xxxg302xxx   gene ( 6 ). in addition, vdccs comprise  beta ,  alpha 2 delta  and  gamma  subunits, which regulate channel activity ( 1 ).
          
 the  alpha 1a subunit is a 190‐kda protein having over 2000 amino acid residues with four identical domains (i–iv), each containing six helical, membrane‐spanning segments (s1‐s6). the pore‐forming region lies between s5 and s6 and the voltage sensor in s4 ( 1 ). the four domains are linked by three large intracellular loops. the  alpha 1a subunit is sufficient to conduct calcium currents on its own and is responsible for channel gating, permeability and voltage dependence of activation and inactivation.
          
 modulation of  alpha 1a activity is exercised by its auxiliary subunits ( 14 ) and by other intracellular proteins ( 1 ). g protein  beta gamma  subunits inhibit  alpha 1a action, inducing a positive shift in voltage dependence, as well as a slower rate of channel activation. this state is reverted by protein kinase c phosphorylation. g beta gamma  proteins bind to a receptor on the intracellular loop connecting domains i and ii (li‐ii) and to another receptor constituted by the linked c‐ and n‐terminals ( 1 ,  15 ,  16 ).
          
 the  alpha 1a subunit is also subject to feedback regulation by calcium. this effect requires the direct association of calcium/calmodulin with the calmodulin binding domain (cbd), located close to the c‐terminal end of  alpha 1a ( 17 ,  18 ). calcium entering the cell first binds to the c‐terminal of cbd and stimulates calcium currents, whereas further cell calcium inhibits them after binding to the n‐terminal, finishing calcium influx. variations in calcium content induce spatial conformational changes in the cbd ( 19 ).
          
 the synaptic vesicle protein synaptotagmin, a calcium sensor, is physically attached to the synprint site, placed on lii‐iii ( 20 ). the docking membrane proteins syntaxin and snap 25 also attach to the synprint site during synaptic vesicle priming ( 21 ). co‐expression of snap 25 and syntaxin enhances channel function in  xenopus  oocytes ( 22 ,  23 ). the immediate proximity between synaptic vesicle proteins, membrane docking proteins and the synprint site of  alpha 1a therefore seems best to promote a high efficiency of neurotransmitter release.
          
 antibodies directed against  alpha 1a recognized it throughout the whole of the rat nervous system. punctate antibody staining was found to be concentrated in cell bodies of cortical pyramidal cells, temporal lobe mossy fibers, cerebellar parallel fibers, and dendrites of purkinje cells ( 24 ). the distribution of the  alpha 1a subunit in the human cerebellum has been described above.
          
 the intracellular  beta  subunit binds to the alpha interaction domain site, located on li‐ii, close to the g beta gamma  receptor site ( 1 ,  25 ). co‐expression of a  beta  subunit with  alpha 1a modified current amplitude and activation‐inactivation kinetics. whilst  beta 4 induced the greatest increase in current amplitude (19.3 ± 7.8‐fold) in transfected  xenopus  oocytes,  beta 3 exerted a milder (5.48 ± 2.1‐fold) stimulation ( 14 ). a1 subunits may associate with any of the four  beta  subunit types in murine and human nervous systems ( 26 ,  27 ).
          
 every type of  beta  subunit is present in human purkinje and cerebellar granule cells. immunohistochemical methods have demonstrated the presence of  beta 3 in the dendritic arbor, axons, and nerve terminal region of purkinje cells, pointing to an association with gabaergic neurotransmission. in contrast, the presence of  beta 4 in granule cells, parallel fibers, and dentate neurons, favors a connection with glutamatergic pathways ( 27 ). in the human hippocampus, dendrites and cell somata of gabaergic interneurons expressed the  beta 4 subunit, while  beta 3 was expressed in dendrites, neuronal cell bodies and glutamatergic mossy fibers ( 28 ). therefore, both  beta 3 and  beta 4 are associated with excitatory and inhibitory roles, depending mainly on the neuronal type expressing them.
          
 the  alpha 2 delta  family is comprised of four genes. post‐translational cleavage produces heavily glycosylated extracellular  alpha 2 and transmembrane  delta  proteins, held together by disulfide bridges ( 29 ). it seems probable that the  alpha 2 domain provides the structural elements necessary for channel modulation, whilst  delta  anchors  alpha 2 to the  alpha 1a subunit ( 30 ). the 175 kda  alpha 2 delta  subunit stimulates the current density of vdccs in the presence of a  beta  subunit, by promoting allosteric changes in the  alpha 1a subunit and by recruitment and synthesis of functional channels ( 14 ).  xenopus  oocytes co‐expressing complementary rna (crna) of human  alpha 1b and  beta 3 subunits demonstrated a similar increase (7.6‐ to 9‐fold) in current amplitude in the company of either  alpha 2 delta ‐1 or  alpha 2 delta ‐2 rabbit subunits, albeit a slower inactivation rate after pulses of +20 mv in the presence of the  alpha 2 delta ‐2 subunit. the largest stimulatory effect on the  alpha 1b subunit was found to be exerted by the  beta 3/ alpha 2 delta ‐2 combination ( 31 ).
          
 the  alpha 2 delta ‐1 and  alpha 2 delta ‐2 subunits have been identified in the brain, striated muscle, and viscera;  alpha 2 delta ‐3 only in the brain, and  alpha 2 delta ‐4 in the periphery ( 29 ,  32 ). the expression of  alpha 2 delta ‐1 was demonstrated as being strongest in the pyramidal cell layer of the mouse hippocampus ( 32 ), while that of  alpha 2 delta ‐2 was greatest in the purkinje cell layer and weaker in the molecular and granular layers of the cerebellum ( 33 ).
          
 the transmembrane  gamma 2,  gamma 3, and  gamma 4 subtypes form part of the neuronal vdccs expressing either  alpha 1a or  alpha 1b subunits ( 34 ,  35 ). it was found that  gamma 2, co‐expressed with  alpha 1a and  beta 3 in  xenopus  oocytes, decreased current amplitude in the presence of the  alpha 2 delta  subunit ( 34 ). meanwhile, transfection of human embryonic kidney (hek 293) cells with  gamma 2 and  gamma 4, in addition to  alpha 1a,  beta 2, and  alpha 2 delta  subunits, induced an increase in calcium currents ( 35 ). methodological differences might well explain these results.
          
  xxxg842xxx  and  gamma 4 subunit mrna was strongly detected in the cerebellar purkinje cell layer, by  in situ  hybridization in the mouse brain, whilst  gamma 3 mrna was intensely revealed in murine hippocampus and caudate putamen ( 35 ).
          
 the large amount of calcium channel proteins facilitates a great variability in subunit composition. each neuron probably expresses the entire range of vdccs available in the nervous system, including l‐ and t‐type channels. p/q‐type vdccs show diversity in subunit arrangement and exhibit precise topographical, cellular, and subcellular distributions. such differences most likely allow qualitative and quantitative diverse cell responses to calcium influx. 
 few drugs interact with the p/q‐type vdcc, regardless of its potential as a therapeutic target. the  alpha 2 delta  subunit has been implicated as a target for the drugs gabapentin ( 29 ) and pregabalin; otherwise, none of the known drugs modifies  alpha 1a,  beta , or  gamma  subunit function in a clinically favorable manner.
          
 
 
  spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 
 spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 is an autosomal‐dominant cerebellar degeneration associated with the expansion of a trinucleotide cag repeat in the last exon of   xxxg302xxx  ; 4–18 cag repeats are present in healthy individuals. this gene is on chromosome 19p13.1‐p13.2, covers 300 kb, and has 47 exons ( 6 ,  36 - 39 ). transcripts obtained from cdna have about 9.8 kb and undergo variable splicing, producing several isoforms. the inclusion of the nucleotide sequence ggcag before exon 47 is necessary to copy the cag repeat; otherwise, a stop codon blocks transcription before this point ( 6 ,  36 ). isoforms with the ggcag insertion are predominant in sca 6 brains ( 38 ). expanded sequences of cag repeats determine abnormally long tracts of glutamine residues.
          
 spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 is an allelic disorder to episodic ataxia type 2 (ea‐2) and familial hemiplegic migraine (fhm) ( 6 ,  36 ); frame‐shift and splice‐site mutations cause truncated proteins in ea‐2 ( 40 ), and missense mutations cause fhm ( 41 ). ea‐2 and fhm show a significant degree of clinical overlap and may course with progressive ataxia ( 36 ,  40 ).
          
 spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a slow, progressive ‘pure’ cerebellar syndrome, with onset between the third and fifth decade of life. transient unsteadiness may occur before permanent symptoms develop ( 36 ,  37 ). its principal clinical expression is truncal and limb ataxia ( 36 - 38 ). sca 6 appears to be the most common cause of autosomal‐dominant cerebellar ataxia in northern europe ( 41 ). the prevalence of sca 6 among genotyped dominant ataxias was 31% in japan ( 42 ), 23.5% in the netherlands ( 43 ), and 1% in italy ( 44 ) and spain ( 45 ).
          
 pathologic findings in sca 6 include diffuse loss of purkinje cells and empty basket and torpedo structures, predominant in the declive lobule of the cerebellar vermis ( 46 ,  47 ). non‐ubiquitinated  xxxd2212xxx  (polyq) and calcium channel protein aggregates have been detected in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus of purkinje cells ( 48 ). loss of granule cells and olivary neurons has been reported in cases with prolonged duration. it has been noted that sca 6 shares neuropathologic findings with cca and holmes’ cerebello‐olivary degeneration ( 47 ).
          
 
 
  pathophysiology of spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 
  xxxd2212xxx  expansion disorders are diseases caused by the presence of excessively long stretches of glutamine residues in proteins. these may cause alterations in protein function and spatial configuration, intracellular aggregation ( 40 ), and activation of the ubiquitin‐dependent proteasome system ( 49 ).
          
 inmunocytochemical techniques have demonstrated the presence of polyq ( 48 ) and  alpha 1a ( 38 ) protein aggregates in purkinje cells of sca 6 brains, indicating abnormal protein aggregation, transport, and localization in this disease ( 38 ,  50 ,  51 ).
          
 however, polyq tracts are exceptionally short in sca 6 (21–33 glutamine residues) ( 44 ,  50 ,  52 ), making aggregation an improbable single pathogenic cause. sca 6 is one of the few dominant ataxias in which the affected gene product, the  alpha 1a subunit, exerts a recognized function ( 53 ). the polyq tract is located beyond the pore‐forming region of  alpha 1a, close to the cbd and to the c‐terminal g protein interaction domain, indicating that altered channel regulation might play a role in the pathogenesis of sca 6. thus, zhuchenko et al. proposed that hindered association of  alpha 1a with proteins that regulate its activity might induce a loss‐of‐function phenomenon in sca 6 ( 6 ).
          
 this was verified in native  leaner  mouse purkinje cells, in which current densities were reduced. the  leaner  recessive mutation, considered to be the closest animal model to sca 6, causes a single base substitution in a position proximal to the human cag expansion and results in a truncated  alpha 1a c‐terminal end ( 54 ).
          
 matsuyama et al. ( 52 ) studied the effects of polyq expansion on rabbit  alpha 1a subunits, by comparing currents flowing through channels with 4, 24, 30, and 40 glutamine residues, using a whole‐cell voltage clamp technique. auxiliary  alpha 2 and  beta 1a (muscle specific) subunits were steadily expressed by baby hamster kidney cells. the current densities were not modified in cells expressing expanded channels. a1a subunits with 30 and 40 glutamine residues demonstrated a negative shift of 8 mv in the voltage dependence of inactivation, suggesting that the number of active p/q‐type vdccs was halved and calcium influx reduced. thus, lack of adequate calcium ingress was evoked as the cause of neuronal loss in  xxxg302xxx .
          
 toru et al. ( 55 ) studied the properties of rabbit‐human chimeric  alpha 1a subunits with 13, 24, and 28 polyq residues, in hek 293 cells co‐expressing  beta 1a and  alpha 2 delta  subunits, with no difference in current density being found among channels. negative shifts in voltage‐dependent inactivation were recorded, in proportion to the length of the expanded polyq tracts. consequently, functional vdccs near the resting membrane potential should be reduced in mutated cells. the authors proposed that decreased calcium influx might lead to purkinje cell death in sca 6.
          
 restituito et al. ( 51 ) introduced  beta ,  alpha 2 delta , and rabbit‐human chimeric  alpha 1a subunits with 13, 22, 26, and 30 glutamine residues into  xenopus  oocytes. a negative shift in the voltage dependence of activation, a slowing of inactivation and abolition of regulation by g proteins were found in electrophysiological tests of cells expressing expanded polyq tracts. as a consequence, current densities were increased. the first two of these effects were seen only when the chimeric  alpha 1a subunits were co‐expressed with  beta 4, though not with  beta 2 or  beta 3 subunits.
          
 piedras‐rentería et al. ( 56 ) introduced human  alpha 1a cdna in hek 293 cells stably expressing  beta 1c and  alpha 2 delta ‐1 subunits. electrophysiologic testing of cells expressing  alpha 1a subunits with 4, 11, 23, 27, and 72 repeats resulted in increased current density in mutated cells, in spite of similar physical channel properties. an increased mutated protein expression, demonstrated by inmunocytochemical methods, was reported to be the cause.
          
 in contrast, mutations in the pore‐forming region of the   xxxg302xxx   gene, causing progressive ataxia in cases of ea‐2 ( 57 ), fhm ( 58 ), and absence epilepsy ( 59 ) were associated with diminished current densities. electrophysiologic testing of cells expressing abnormal  alpha 1a subunits showed a reduction of mean open times and accelerated inactivation in ea‐2 ( 57 ), delayed channel activation in absence epilepsy and episodic ataxia ( 59 ), and a decrease of maximal current density, caused by low functional membrane channel concentration, in fhm ( 58 ).
          
 accordingly, p/q‐type vdcc dysregulation has a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of sca 6. preserved function of the pore‐forming region has been demonstrated by the normal current densities found in transfected cells. electrophysiologic testing yielded enhanced channel inactivation in some experiments ( 52 ,  54 ), and increased activation in others ( 51 ,  56 ). with respect to the latter, a one‐off utilization of a  beta 4 subunit, or abolition of g protein regulation, may have accounted for this result in one test ( 51 ) and an unrepeated elevation in mutated protein expression in the other ( 56 ). additional diversity in transfected cell type, source of heterologous material, and length of polyq tracts may have added to the inconsistency of the results.
          
 in addition to p/q‐type vdcc dysregulation, abnormal protein aggregation has been revealed in sca 6 ( 38 ,  48 ,  50 ,  53 ,  59 ). the specific relevance of every issue referred to is yet to be established. additional factors, apart from those outlined, must unquestionably play an important part  in vivo .
          
 
 
  therapeutical approach to spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 
 the drug acetazolamide was tried in sca 6 by jen et al. ( 60 ), who reported suppression of transitory ataxia in two families, as well as by yabe et al. ( 61 ), who observed temporary improvement of cerebellar ataxia in six patients.
          
 there is no etiologic treatment for sca 6. nevertheless, the p/q‐type vdcc might represent an accessible, potentially important therapeutic target, especially as the pore‐forming region is preserved in this disease. 
 gabapentin and pregabalin target the  alpha 2 delta  subunit, which mediates their effect on neurotransmission through a presynaptic mechanism ( 62 ). gabapentin has been shown to increase brain gaba concentration in humans ( 63 ). acute treatment with gabapentin has been shown not to diminish peak current amplitude of recombinant p/q‐type vdccs ( alpha 1a/ beta 3/ alpha 2 delta ‐1) expressed in  xenopus  oocytes, while prolonged administration slowed the rate of inactivation in a dose‐dependent manner ( 64 ). gabapentin binds preferentially to the  alpha 2 delta ‐1 subunit, while pregabalin does so to  alpha 2 delta ‐2 ( 65 ); none of them targets  alpha 2 delta ‐3 or  alpha 2 delta ‐4. pregabalin has exhibited more delayed channel inactivation and greater antiepileptic power than gabapentin under experimental conditions ( 62 ,  65 ).
          
 gabapentin inhibited l‐type calcium currents in isolated rat hippocampal neurons ( 66 ), and alpha‐amino‐3‐hydroxy‐methylisoxazole‐4‐ xxxd3029xxx ‐evoked excitatory responses in rat spinal dorsal horn neurons ( 64 ). application of gabapentin on l‐type, not on p/q‐type vdccs, together with a possible anti‐glutamatergic action, probably accounted for this drug's additional effects ( 62 ).
          
 gabapentin has been shown to improve ataxia in cases of cca ( 67 ) and of olivopontocerebellar atrophy (opca) ( 68 ). a reduced cerebellar gaba content was detected in cca and opca ( 69 ); hence, the ability of gabapentin to improve ataxia in these diseases was attributed to its capacity to increase brain gaba concentration. pregabalin was able to ameliorate ataxia in a case of ataxia‐telangiectasia, not benefited by administration of gabapentin. the enhanced efficiency was attributed to the higher affinity of pregabalin toward  alpha 2 delta ‐2, and its delayed channel inactivation ( 70 ).
          
 it has been pointed out that sca 6 shares neuropathologic findings with cca ( 47 ) and that ataxia caused by cca was relieved by the drug gabapentin ( 67 ). the use of gabapentin and pregabalin may well hold promise in sca 6, because stimulation of the ancillary  alpha 2 delta  subunit ( 59 ) might offset the increased inactivation demonstrated by mutated  alpha 1a subunits ( 52 ,  54 ,  55 ). similarly, pregabalin might prove particularly favorable in sca 6, as the expression of  alpha 2 delta ‐2 is maximal in purkinje cells. in this context, precise knowledge about the effects of gabapentin and pregabalin on cells expressing expanded  alpha 1a subunits would be desirable, as they are currently unknown. evaluating the effects of these drugs on purkinje cells with  leaner  and other mutations affecting vdcc subunit genes might also provide valuable information.
          
 ideally, the adjustment in calcium homeostasis achieved with gabapentin and pregabalin would give way to an amelioration of ataxia in sca 6, even though other known cell disturbances were not dealt with. it is clear that this hypothesis should be verified by the appropriate clinical trials. other inherited or acquired calcium channelopathies could also benefit from treatment with gabapentin and pregabalin. single doses of 400 mg of gabapentin and of 75 mg of pregabalin could help single out cerebellar ataxias that could benefit from treatment with these drugs ( 67 ,  70 ).
          
 in conclusion, further studies are needed to demonstrate the hypothesis advanced in this article. 
 
 
  acknowledgements 
 the authors would like to express their gratitude to professors manuel lou and manuel sarasa, from the university of zaragoza and to dr pedro modrego, from hospital universitario miguel servet, zaragoza, for their help in the elaboration of this article. the collaboration of mr stephen j. wilkins and mr david b. jones in preparing the manuscript is also cordially acknowledged. 
 
