0888-8809/07/$15.00/0
printed in u.s.a.

molecular endocrinology 21(8):1791–1806
copyright © 2007 by the endocrine society
doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0095

novel regulatory role for human acf1 in
transcriptional repression of  xxxd1682xxx 
receptor-regulated genes
amy k. ewing, michelle attner, and debabrata chakravarti
department of pharmacology (a.k.e., m.a., d.c.), university of pennsylvania school of medicine,
philadelphia, pennsylvania 19104; and division of reproductive biology research (d.c.), department
of obstetrics and gynecology, robert h. lurie comprehensive cancer center, feinberg school of
medicine, northwestern university, chicago, illinois 60611
hormones and vitamins play integral roles in modulating transcriptional activity of members of the
nuclear  xxxg1603xxx  (nr) superfamily. the
nuclear receptor corepressor protein (n-cor) is
essential for the transcriptional repression by unliganded nrs. in an attempt to isolate novel components of the hormone signaling pathway, we
used a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified human atp-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling factor 1 (hacf1) as an n-cor interacting protein. a previously unrecognized function of hacf1
in the repression of euchromatic genes in mammalian cells was found: hacf1 plays key roles in the
hormone responsiveness and in the transcriptional
repression of specific class ii nr-regulated genes.
first, hormone treatment causes a significant re-

lease of hacf1 from its target gene promoters. second, hacf1 is crucial for stabilizing the endogenous
 xxxg2412xxx -n-cor repression complex and
n-cor itself, in the  xxxd1682xxx -regulated igf binding protein 3 and receptor activator of nuclear factor-␬b ligand gene promoters, respectively. third,
rna interference-mediated reduction of hacf1 or
 xxxd1682xxx  treatment differentially affects the histone modification profile and the histone occupancy in these genes. together, these results establish that hacf1 has a critical role in the
transcriptional repression of specific nr-regulated
genes and indicate that hacf1 release and histone
h3 and h4 eviction are novel mechanisms in hormone-induced gene activation. (molecular endocrinology 21: 1791–1806, 2007)

a

whereas condensed regions of heterochromatin are
silent (2).
chromatin structure can be changed by the posttranslational modification of histone tails, atp-dependent chromatin remodeling, histone loss, and the incorporation of histone variants into chromatin. actively
transcribed regions of chromatin are generally rich in
acetylated histone h3 and h4 and also show methylation of h3 at k4. heterochromatin is, however,
marked by hypoacetylation, trimethylation of lysine 9
of histone h3 (trimeh3k9), and h3k27 monomethylation (3). atp-dependent chromatin remodeling enzymes can alter chromatin structure by using the energy of atp-hydrolysis to disrupt dna-histone
contacts and to change the position of a nucleosome
within chromatin in a process known as remodeling
(4). the disruption of dna-histone contacts causes the
destabilization or the removal of subunits in the histone octamer and can thus allow for transcriptional
activation by rna polymerase ii (pol ii) (5). a physical
separation of dna histone contacts also enables the
deposition of histone variants, such as h3.3, which
leads to transcriptional activation (6).
class ii nuclear receptors (nrs) of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid superfamily [such as the  xxxg2412xxx  (vdr), the thyroid receptor (tr), and the retinoic
acid receptor (rar)] are ligand-induced transcription
factors that are critical for development, tissue growth

critical step in the regulation of gene expression is at the level of transcription, a process that
is tightly controlled in multiple ways. the structure of
chromatin acts as a barrier to this process: dna is
tightly wound around an octamer of core histones
called a nucleosome (1). transcriptional output is a
direct result of alterations in chromatin structure: relaxed euchromatic regions are transcriptionally active,
first published online may 22, 2007
abbreviations: acf, atp-utilizing chromatin assembly and
remodeling factor; ack9h3, acetylation on lysine 9 of histone
h3; chip, chromatin immunoprecipitation; d, drosophila;
fbs, fetal bovine serum; fl, full length; gal4, galactosidase
4;  xxxg861xxx ,  xxxg861xxx ;
gst,  xxxg1073xxx ; h, human; hacf1n, n-terminus of human atp-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling factor 1; hdac, histone deacetylase; mnase, micrococcal nuclease; n-cor, nuclear receptor corepressor; nid,
n-cor interaction domain; nr, nuclear  xxxg1603xxx ;
pol ii, polymerase ii; qpcr, quantitative real-time pcr;
rankl, receptor activator of nuclear factor-␬b ligand; rar,
 xxxd3417xxx  receptor; rd, repressor domain; rnai, rna
interference; smrt, silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid receptor; tr, thyroid receptor; trimek9h3, trimethylation
of lysine 9 of histone h3; tss, transcription start site; vdr,
 xxxg2412xxx ; vdre,  xxxd2019xxx  response element;
wstf, williams syndrome transcription factor.
molecular endocrinology is published monthly by the
endocrine society (http://www.endo-society.org), the
foremost professional society serving the endocrine
community.

1791
the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1792 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

and differentiation, and metabolism (7). the primary
role of nrs is to coordinate the ligand-induced exchange of large coregulatory complexes that have
specific enzymatic activity. this leads to alterations in
chromatin structure and consequently changes in
transcriptional output of their target genes (8, 9).
transcriptional activation of nr-target genes occurs
by sequential recruitment of both histone modification
activity and atp-dependent chromatin remodelers by
ligand-bound receptors. there are several coactivator
complexes containing intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity, including members of the src family,
cbp (camp response element-binding protein)/p300,
 xxxg1512xxx  (activator of thyroid and  xxxd3417xxx  receptor),
and the human mediator complex trap (thyroid
 xxxg1603xxx -associated protein)/drip (vdrinteracting protein) (8, 10, 11). in addition to histone
acetyltransferase activity (believed to be important for
localized disruptions in dna-histone binding), atpdependent enzymes activate the transcription of nrregulated genes by nucleosome remodeling. this process causes large changes to chromatin structure and
so allows the basal transcriptional machinery to access dna (12).
transcriptional repression is mediated by unliganded nrs that preferentially associate with the corepressors nuclear receptor corepressor (n-cor) and
silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid receptor
(smrt) (13, 14). n-cor/smrt acts as a platform to
coordinate the recruitment of histone deacetylases
(hdacs), the histone binding protein tbl1 (transducin
␤-like protein-1), and factors of the basal transcriptional machinery to actively repress transcription (15).
ligand binding alters nr structure, leading to the release of the corepression complex and the subsequent recruitment of the coactivation complex to hormone-responsive genes.
histone modification activity has been extensively
documented in n-cor-mediated transcriptional repression. the role of atp-dependent chromatin remodeling is, however, not well understood. one biochemical purification of n-cor identified components
of the swi (switch)/snf (sucrose nonfermenting) family of atpases [such as  xxxg2173xxx  (brm-related gene 1)],
but their role in n-cor-mediated repression was not
determined (16). the atpase- and hdac-containing
nurd (nucleosome remodeling and hdac) complex
contributes to repression at a tr-regulated gene (17,
18). the atpase  xxxg2174xxx  (sucrose nonfermenting homolog 2), is also required for the repression of a trregulated gene (19). it remains unclear, however, exactly how these enzymes are targeted to specific
genes, and whether or not other nrs (in addition to tr)
require atp-dependent chromatin remodeling for
transcriptional repression.
atp-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling
factor 1 (acf1) is a member of two  xxxg2174xxx -containing
complexes found in both human (h) and drosophila (d):
acf and chrac (chromatin accessibility complex)
(20, 21). acf1 contains wac (wstf/acf1/cbp146),

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

ddt (dna binding homeobox and different transcription factors), wakz (wstf/acf1/kiaa0314/zk783.4),
phd (plant homeodomain) finger, and bromodomain
motifs (22, 23). the  xxxg2174xxx  atpase subunit is a member of the  xxxg2174xxx  (imitation switch) family, which is characterized by a sant (swi3, ada2, n-cor, and tfiib)
domain in the c terminus (24). in these complexes,
 xxxg2174xxx  is the “motor” and the accessory proteins are
needed both to produce maximal activity as well as to
control the direction of nucleosome repositioning (25).
a growing body of evidence suggests that remodeling
factors are recruited to specific nucleosomes by sitespecific dna-binding proteins (26). it is, therefore, proposed that the nonenzymatic subunits of the  xxxg2174xxx 
complex, such as acf1, may act as guides to direct the
enzyme to its target and to contribute a unique functionality to the complex.
most of our understanding of the chromatin assembly and remodeling function of acf1 comes from studies performed in drosophila or in vitro with purified
proteins (24, 27). knockout of acf1 in drosophila decreases the periodicity of nucleosomes, which leads to
a loss of transcriptional silencing in pericentric heterochromatin and polycomb-repressed chromatin (27). in
mouse cells, the acf complex is enriched in heterochromatin and is critical for its replication (28). purified
dacf can assemble chromatin containing histone h1,
a histone subunit involved in the formation of higherorder chromatin structure (29). therefore, acf may be
a key regulator in the assembly and maintenance of
higher-order chromatin architecture; such functions
likely contribute to transcriptional repression of heterochromatic genes.
the endogenous human acf complex has not been
studied extensively. even less is known about any
direct role of acf1 in transcription in the mammalian
system. this study reports a previously unrecognized
role of acf1 in the repression of euchromatic genes in
mammalian cells and shows that hacf1 affects the
hormone responsiveness and the transcriptional repression of specific class ii nr-regulated genes. this
work demonstrates that hacf1 is critical for the stable
occupancy of the n-cor corepression complex at the
target gene promoters. hormone treatment, which
causes a release of hacf1 from the promoter, relieves
the repression of igf binding protein 3 (igfbp3), receptor activator of nuclear factor-␬b ligand (rankl),
and  xxxg1144xxx  genes attributable to a loss of corepressor
recruitment to the gene and to alterations in the local
chromatin architecture.

results
identification of hacf1 as an n-cor-interacting
protein
the role of histone modifying activities in transcriptional repression of nr-regulated genes is clearly established, but the involvement of chromatin remodel-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

ing in this process is not well understood. a proteinprotein interaction screen was, therefore, used to
identify such proteins involved in the repression of
nr-regulated genes. n-cor, an nr corepressor, contains multiple, transferable transcriptional repressor
domains (rds) (fig. 1). a yeast two-hybrid assay was
performed with a galactosidase-4 (gal4) activationdomain fusion human cdna library, using the rd2 of
n-cor as bait. among the positive colonies analyzed,
cdna encoding the n terminus of hacf1 (hacf1n)
(amino acids 1–313) was isolated. reintroduction of
this clone into yeast transformed with either
gal4dbd-rd1 or -rd2 revealed that, although

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1793

hacf1n interacted with both rd2 and rd1 (fig. 1a, b),
it had a higher affinity for the rd1 domain: the colonies
that were cotransformed with this domain were able to
grow even under the selective pressure of 20 mm
3-aminotriazole (fig. 1a, compare b with c). together,
these results suggest that rd1 and rd2 of n-cor
interact with hacf1 with varying affinities. because
n-cor rd1 bound to hacf1 with higher affinity than
did rd2, subsequent studies used rd1 to characterize the interaction.
to determine whether the n terminus of hacf1
(hacf1n) interacts directly with full-length (fl) n-cor,
in vitro binding assays were performed with glutathi-

fig. 1. hacf1 and n-cor interact in vitro and in vivo
a, hacf1 and n-cor rd1 and rd2 interact in yeast cells. top, n-cor schematic indicates known repressor (rd) and receptor
interaction domains (n). bottom, yrg2 cells were cotransformed with a galad-hacf1n (amino acids 1–313) fusion construct and
either galdbd-n-cor-rd1 or galdbd-n-cor-rd2. cotransformed cells were plated on sd-leu-trp (a) and replica plated onto
sd-leu-trp-his (b), sd-leu-trp-his plus 20 mm 3-aminotriazole (c), and sd-leu-trp (d). b, n-cor/smrt and hacf1 interact in
vitro. gst pull-down assays with gst or gst-hacf1n (amino acids 1–313) and [35s]-labeled smrt or n-cor are represented
by phosphorimage. c, the n terminus of hacf1 is required for n-cor rd1 interaction. top, schematic of hacf1 indicates known
interaction domains. bottom, gst pull-down assays with gst or gst-rd1 and [35s]-labeled hacf1 deletion constructs are
represented by phosphorimage, scored by densitometry, and expressed as percentage of input bound. d, n-cor associates with
hacf1 in vivo. coimmunoprecipitation of hek293t cell lysates with hacf1 antibody or igg control, followed by n-cor immunoblot.
ip, immunoprecipitation; wb, western blot.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1794 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

one s-transferase (gst)-tagged hacf1n and [35s]-labeled fl n-cor. as shown in fig. 1b, [35s]-labeled
n-cor (as well as its homolog smrt) was retained by
the gst-hacf1n beads, but not by the gst-bound
beads.
the yeast two-hybrid screen isolated hacf1n as an
n-cor-interacting protein. this region encompasses
the wac motif, which is a dna-binding and putative
heterochromatin association domain (22). to ascertain
whether hacf1n is necessary for its interaction with
n-cor, [35s]-labeled hacf1 deletion constructs were
used in  xxxg1073xxx  (gst) pull-down assays with gst-n-cor rd1. the constructs that
lacked amino acids 1–313 did not interact with gstrd1 to a great extent, whereas those that contained
this region were pulled down specifically by the gstrd1 beads (fig. 1c). these results show that amino
acids 1–313 are both necessary and sufficient for
hacf1 to directly interact with n-cor, and this region
was thus named nid, for n-cor interaction domain.
the endogenous association of hacf1 and n-cor
was next tested in eukaryotic cells. for that purpose,
coimmunoprecipitations were performed in hek293t
cells using the antibody against hacf1 and followed by
an immunoblot for n-cor. anti-hacf1 antibody specifically immunoprecipitated endogenous n-cor in
hek293t cells (fig. 1d). together, these data show
that hacf1 interacts with n-cor/smrt both in vitro
and in living cells.
hacf1 is required for transcriptional repression
of several class ii nr-regulated genes
n-cor is a corepressor for many nrs, including the
unliganded class ii nrs. because hacf1 interacts with
n-cor, it is likely that this protein has a role in ncormediated repression. to test the role of hacf1 in establishing transcriptional repression of endogenous,
nr-regulated genes, it was overexpressed by transient transfection in saos-2 cells in hormone-free medium. the mrna levels of several native nr-regulated
genes in these cells were then measured by quantitative real-time pcr (qpcr). saos-2 osteoblastic cells
were chosen for this study because these cells have a
well-characterized  xxxd1682xxx  (vitd3) signaling pathway. this cell line also responds to thyroid hormone
and  xxxd3417xxx , thereby allowing studies on tr and
rar target genes.
transient expression of hacf1 in transfected cells
led to a small but statistically significant increase in
repression of specific, endogenous, nr-regulated
genes: two vdr-regulated genes, rankl and igfbp3, and the tr-regulated gene  xxxg1144xxx . it did not,
however, affect the repression of the vdr-regulated
24-hydroxylase gene or of the rar-regulated igfbp6
gene (fig. 2a). interestingly, transfection of n-cor did
not significantly enhance repression of these genes
(fig. 2a). this suggests that either hacf1 is a more
potent corepressor or that the endogenous level of
n-cor is sufficient for the maximum repression of

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

these nr-regulated genes. because chromatin is inherently repressive, the overexpression of components of repression pathways generally has a minimal
effect on gene repression.
in fig. 1c, the n terminus of hacf1 (hacf1-nid) was
found to be necessary and sufficient for its interaction
with n-cor. this region was described previously to
be required for the association of hacf1 with dna (22).
protein domains in the c terminus are critical for the
association of hacf1 with both  xxxg2174xxx  and histones
(22, 25). to understand the contribution of hacf1-nid
to the repression of genes that are repressed by fl
hacf1, it was transiently expressed in transfected
saos-2 cells. as in fig. 2a, qpcr was used to measure the mrna levels of endogenous hormone-responsive genes. hacf1-nid expression caused an increase in mrna levels in all tested genes (fig. 2a).
this indicates that the hacf1-nid is not sufficient for
the repression by hacf1 observed in fig. 2a. instead,
this region may be acting as a dominant-negative effector by competing for binding of endogenous hacf1
and thus partially relieving the transcriptional repression of hacf1 target genes. because expression of
hacf1-nid relieved repression of all tested genes, this
region may be functioning in a gene nonspecific manner, by either sequestering n-cor away from its target
gene or interacting with n-cor at its target gene and
inhibiting its repressive properties (i.e. inhibiting the
recruitment of other corepressors). in any case, these
results suggest that hacf1 is involved in repression
and prompted additional analysis of the transcriptional
regulatory role of endogenous hacf1.
if hacf1 is a critical transcriptional corepressor for
rankl, igfbp3, and  xxxg1144xxx  genes, then knocking
down the level of the endogenous protein should partially relieve repression of these genes, even in the
absence of hormone. to test this idea, rna interference (rnai)-based technique was used to knock
down the level of endogenous hacf1 in saos-2 cells
grown in hormone-free medium. forty-eight hours after transfection, protein levels were determined by
western blot (fig. 2b). rnai treatment specifically reduced hacf1 but not its paralog williams syndrome
transcription factor (wstf) or n-cor. qpcr was then
used to measure the mrna levels of the hormoneregulated genes in these cells (fig. 2c). consistent
with the results of fig. 2a, hacf1 knockdown relieved
the transcriptional repression of igfbp3, rankl, and
 xxxg1144xxx  but not the 24-hydroxylase or the igfbp6 gene
compared with control (fig. 2c). together, the results
from the hacf1 overexpression and knockdown studies demonstrate that hacf1 is an important corepressor of specific hormone-regulated genes.
the mrna levels of the rankl, igfbp3, and  xxxg1144xxx 
genes increased 1.5- to 2-fold when hacf1 was decreased by rnai compared with their levels in control
rnai-treated cells (fig. 2c). to determine whether the
relief of repression is physiologically significant, the
increase in mrna attributable to hormone-activated
transcription was measured (fig. 2d). after 24 h of

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1795

fig. 2. hacf1 is a transcriptional corepressor of several class ii nr-regulated genes
a, left, real-time pcr quantification of mrna of endogenous nr-regulated genes in saos-2 cells transfected with pcdna3
vectors encoding fl hacf1, hacf1-nid, or n-cor, normalized to  xxxg861xxx  ( xxxg861xxx ) mrna,
and plotted as fold of control (cells transfected with empty vector) (n ⫽ 7). value of 1 indicates no change (dotted horizontal line).
*, p ⬍ 0.02 vs. control (a, right). transient overexpression of hacf1fl and hacf1-nid was measured by qpcr, whereas expression
of n-cor was determined by western blot. b, saos-2 cells were treated with 10 nm control or hacf1 rnai for 48 h in hormone-free
medium. an equal amount of each sample was subject to sds-page, followed by western blot with anti-hacf1, anti-wstf, and
anti-n-cor antibodies. c, qpcr measurement of endogenous nr-regulated genes in cells treated as in b. values are normalized
to  xxxg861xxx  and plotted as fold of quantity measured in control rnai-treated cells (ri) (n ⫽ 10–15). *, p ⬍ 0.01 vs. control. d, qpcr
of igfbp3, rankl, and 24-hydroxylase mrna in saos-2 cells treated with 10 nm vitd3 and  xxxg1144xxx  mrna during 10 nm t3 treatment
in a 24-h time course, normalized to  xxxg861xxx  mrna. each graph represents an average of three experiments.

hormone treatment, the mrna level of each gene was
elevated about 2- to 3-fold. the increase in mrna
attributable to relief of active transcriptional repression
of these genes achieved by rnai depletion of hacf1 is,
therefore, significant because it is similar to the mrna
increase achieved by hormonal activation of transcription. hacf1 knockdown thus closely mimicked the role
of hormone in the induction of these genes. the 24hydroxylase gene was not derepressed during hacf1
knockdown, despite the fact that it is highly responsive
to vitd3 treatment. in combination, these results suggest that hacf1 contributes to the regulation of
rankl, igfbp3, and  xxxg1144xxx  genes by actively contrib-

uting to their repression in the absence of hormone.
this study also indicates that hacf1 exerts gene-specific regulation: hence, it does not have a generalized
effect on all class ii nr-regulated genes.
hormone treatment or hacf1 knockdown
decreases hacf1 and n-cor association at the
promoter of the igfbp3 and rankl genes
rankl and igfbp3 are vdr-regulated genes that
contain a  xxxd2019xxx  response element (vdre) in their
promoter (fig. 3a). in the absence of vitd3, vdrregulated genes are repressed via the recruitment of

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1796 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

fig. 3. hacf1 knockdown or vitd3 treatment decreases the levels of hacf1 and n-cor in the igfbp3 and rankl genes
a, schematic representation of the rankl and igfbp3 promoter/enhancer. positions of primer sets covering approximately
150 bp used to amplify immunoprecipitated dna by qpcr after chip assays are indicated. arrows represent transcription ⫹1
start site, and diagonal slashes indicate a gap in dna of several kilobases. b and c, chip analyses measured by qpcr from
saos-2 cells transfected with control with or without 1-h 10 nm vitd3 or hacf1 rnai (ri) for 48 h in hormone-free medium with
antibodies to hacf1 (b) and n-cor (c). b and c, top, immunoprecipitated dna from control rnai-treated cells is reported as a
percentage of input from one representative experiment to show promoter occupancy along the rankl gene (left) or the igfbp3
gene (right). b and c, bottom, immunoprecipitated dna from control rnai, vitd3-treated, or hacf1 rnai-treated cells is plotted
as fold of control rnai in hormone-free medium for rankl (left) or igfbp3 (right). *, p ⬍ 0.05 vs. control (n ⫽ 4).

corepressors, such as n-cor and various histone
modification enzymes. knocking down the level of
hacf1 relieved the repression of rankl and igfbp3
genes almost to the same extent as 24 h vitd3 treatment (fig. 2). all subsequent studies were, therefore,
performed on these two genes. to confirm that hacf1
is indeed present at the igfbp3 and rankl promoters and that the rnai treatment of hacf1 leads to a
decrease of hacf1 association with these regions of

dna, chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) assays
were performed. this experiment used the hacf1 antibody on saos-2 cells transfected with rnai against
control or hacf1 for 48 h in hormone-free medium.
control cells treated with 10 nm vitd3 for 1 h were
included in the chip assay so that changes in promoter occupancy attributable to hacf1 rnai (relief of
repression) as well as changes caused by hormone
treatment (active transcription) could be examined.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

the 1-h time point was chosen to capture early
changes caused by hormone binding to receptor
rather than those caused by secondary effects. the
quantity of immunoprecipitated dna measured by real-time pcr was plotted either as a percentage of
input (to look at occupancy levels along the promoter/
enhancer) or as normalized to control rnai-treated
cells (to determine the fold change in occupancy under
the treatment conditions).
hacf1 occupancy was observed in the rankl and
igfbp3 promoters. this protein was, however, enriched in different regions (fig. 3b, top). on the rankl
gene, highest hacf1 occupancy was observed in and
around the transcription start site (tss) (primer sets c
and d), whereas on the igfbp3 promoter, it was concentrated at the vdre (primer set a). the association
of hacf1 on igfbp3 and rankl genes was decreased
compared with control rnai-treated cells, when hacf1
was knocked down (fig. 3b, bottom). importantly,
vitd3 treatment also significantly lowered hacf1 occupancy in these promoters. these data, when taken
together, indicate that hacf1 associates with specific
regions in its target promoter and its binding is influenced by hormone treatment. it is also important to
mention that hacf1 knockdown did not significantly
change promoter occupancy of  xxxg2174xxx , which is a
binding partner for hacf1 (data not shown). this suggests that the recruitment (or association) of  xxxg2174xxx 
with these genes is not dependent on the overall levels
of hacf1. it is possible, however, that minimal levels of
hacf1 are sufficient for the association of  xxxg2174xxx  with
the gene because rnai treatment does not completely
abolish hacf1.
n-cor is necessary for the repression of vitd3responsive genes and is released from promoters during hormone treatment. because hacf1 associates
with n-cor, it may affect n-cor occupancy on these
genes. if hacf1 targets or stabilizes n-cor at the
promoter, then lowering its levels should lead to a
decrease in the amount of n-cor that binds to these
genes, even in the absence of hormone. to test this
hypothesis, chip assays using the n-cor antibody
were performed in saos-2 cells under the same conditions. interestingly, for the rankl gene, a significant
association of n-cor was observed close to the tss
rather than at the putative vdre (fig. 3c, top left). this
region also had a higher level of hacf1 association. for
igfbp3, maximum n-cor occupancy was observed
near the vdre, as expected (fig. 3c, top right); this
was also the region of highest hacf1 occupancy.
hacf1 knockdown decreased n-cor association with
the rankl (fig. 3c, bottom left) and the igfbp3 (fig.
3c, bottom right) genes when compared with control
rnai-treated cells. the observed decrease in n-cor
occupancy is not a result of a decrease in the level of
n-cor protein (fig. 2a). the finding that these two
proteins are enriched at the same regions of each
gene further supports the in vitro and in vivo interaction data. moreover, hacf1 is required for n-cor association near the tss of the rankl promoter and

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1797

near the vdre of the igfbp3 promoter. although 1-h
vitd3 treatment caused a release of hacf1 and n-cor
from the regulatory regions of these two genes, the
knockdown of hacf1 caused a similar level of n-cor
dissociation from these genes as did hormone treatment. these results suggest that hacf1 is a major
target of hormone action and that it is critical for both
n-cor association and hormone-induced n-cor release from these two gene promoters.
n-cor is thought to stabilize an nr at its response
element in the absence of hormone (30). because
knocking down the levels of hacf1 led to decreased
n-cor association at the igfbp3-vdre, it should
also lead to the destabilization of vdr at the vdre. to
test this theory, an anti-vdr chip assay was performed under the same conditions. there was a remarkable decrease in the amount of vdr at the vdre
of the igfbp3 promoter when hacf1 was knocked
down (fig. 4a, right). in agreement with published
results, an increase in vdr association with the igfbp3-vdre during vitd3 treatment for 1 h was observed (31) (fig. 4a, right). this increase in vdr binding could be attributable to the stabilizing effect of the
ligand on the dna-bound receptor or vitd3-promoted
movement of vdr from the cytoplasm to the nucleus
(32). it is important to note that treatments that
changed vdr occupancy did not alter the overall level
of the vdr protein (fig. 4a, bottom).
at the rankl gene, the vdr was not pulled down at
the putative rankl-vdre (data not shown). this result agrees with a previous report in which vdr was
not immunoprecipitated at the murine rankl gene
(33) and further supports the idea that this putative
vdre might not be functional in vivo. a recent study
identified multiple vdres located at significant distances upstream of the tss of the rankl gene (34).
one investigation has also observed a vdr-binding
site near the tss of this gene (35). this could explain
why n-cor is enriched near the tss of the rankl
gene. it is also possible that n-cor is involved in a
vdr-independent repressive mechanism at the
rankl promoter. together, the data show that not
only is hacf1 required for n-cor association near the
tss of the rankl gene but that it is also a critical
component of the repressive vdr-n-cor complex at
the igfbp3 promoter.
hormone treatment or hacf1 knockdown
promotes differential changes in the histone
modification pattern and the histone occupancy
in the rankl and igfbp3 promoters
to better understand the contribution of hacf1 to repression of hormone-responsive genes, the local
chromatin architecture and the histone modification
profile at these promoters were studied by chip assays. the results demonstrate that knockdown of
hacf1 significantly altered both the histone modification pattern and the occupancy of histones h3 and h4
at the igfbp3 and rankl promoters (figs. 4b and 5).

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1798 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

fig. 4. hacf1 knockdown decreases vdr and trimek9h3 levels in the igfbp3 promoter
a–c, chip analyses measured by qpcr in saos-2 cells treated as in fig. 3 with anti-vdr (a), anti-trimek9h3 (b), and
anti-panh3 (c) antibodies. left, immunoprecipitated dna from control rnai (ri)-treated cells is reported as percentage of input
from one representative experiment to show promoter occupancy on the igfbp3 gene. right, immunoprecipitated dna from
control rnai, vitd3-treated, or hacf1 rnai-treated cells is plotted as fold of control rnai in hormone-free medium. *, p ⬍ 0.01
vs. rnai control (n ⫽ 3–4). a, bottom, vdr immunoblot of equal amounts of lysate from saos-2 cells treated with control rnai
with or without 1-h 10 nm vitd3 and hacf1 rnai. wb, western blot.

trimek9h3 is enriched in heterochromatin and in the
promoters of transcriptionally repressed euchromatic
genes (36). if hacf1 contributes to transcriptional repression, then it may recruit histone methyltransferases and its knockdown may decrease the levels of
trimek9h3. the level of trimek9h3 was, therefore,
examined by chip assay under the same treatment
conditions as described above. trimek9h3 was enriched near the tss of the igfbp3 gene at primer sets
c and d (fig. 4b, left). as expected, there was a
significant decrease in the level of trimek9h3 under
treatment conditions that increase transcription: rnai
against hacf1 and 1-h vitd3 treatment (fig. 4b, right).
it should be noted that there was no statistically significant change in the levels of histone h3 itself (fig.

4c) or the acetylation of histone h3 (data not shown)
under these treatment conditions. it seems, therefore,
that one of the important contributions to transcriptional derepression at the igfbp3 promoter is the
decrease of trimek9h3 that occurs when hacf1 is
knocked down or when cells are treated with vitd3.
the histone modification pattern at the rankl promoter (fig. 5) was investigated in parallel with the
igfbp3 promoter. unlike the igfbp3 gene, when the
level of trimek9h3 was examined by chip, there was
no significant difference in this modification during
hacf1 rnai or hormone treatment (data not shown).
levels of acetylation on lysine 9 of histone h3
(ack9h3) decreased, however (fig. 5a, right), under
hacf1 knockdown condition in the regions of highest

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1799

fig. 5. hacf1 knockdown or vitd3 treatment decreases levels of ack9h3, histone h3, and  xxxg1052xxx  at the rankl gene
a and b, chip analyses measured by qpcr in saos-2 cells treated as in fig. 3 with anti-ack9h3 (a), anti-pan histone h3 (b,
top), and anti-pan  xxxg1052xxx  antibodies (b, middle). left, immunoprecipitated dna from control rnai (ri)-treated cells is reported
as percentage of input from one representative experiment to show promoter occupancy on rankl gene. right, immunoprecipitated dna from control rnai, vitd3-treated, or hacf1 rnai-treated cells is plotted as fold of control rnai in hormone-free
medium. *, p ⬍ 0.05 vs. rnai control (n ⫽ 3–5). b, bottom, pan histone h3 and h4 immunoblots of equal amounts of lysate from
saos-2 cells treated with control rnai with or without 1-h 10 nm vitd3 and hacf1 rnai. wb, western blot.

ack9h3 occupancy, primer sets c and d (fig. 5b, left).
there was also a significant decrease in ack9h3 levels
during 1-h vitd3 treatment. this result was surprising,
because this modification usually increases during
transcriptional activation and the knockdown of hacf1
derepressed the gene. the decrease in ack9h3 could
be attributable to a loss of a histone subunit from the
promoter. regions of euchromatin have lowered levels
of certain histone subunits, such as histone h3, during
transcriptional activation and elongation (37, 38).
the level of histone h3 itself was, therefore, examined by chip assay to see whether the decrease in
ack9h3 correlated with a decrease in overall histone

h3 levels at those regions of the rankl gene. there
was indeed a significant decrease in the level of histone h3 near the tss (primer sets c and d) under the
conditions in which ack9h3 decreased (fig. 5b, top
right). chip analyses indicated a concomitant decrease in overall  xxxg1052xxx  levels (fig. 5b, middle
right). these results agree with the belief that histones
h3 and h4 are deposited or replaced together in chromatin as dimers or tetramers (39). surprisingly, vitd3
treatment alone caused significant dissociation of
these histones from the target promoter. the decrease
in the levels of histones h3 and h4 in this gene was not
caused by a loss or degradation of the protein be-

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1800 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

cause the treatment conditions did not alter their overall protein levels (fig. 5b, bottom).
the loss of histones h3 and h4 from the derepressed rankl promoter during vitd3 treatment and
hacf1 knockdown suggests that alterations in repressive chromatin architecture may allow transcription to
occur. to further investigate this, a micrococcal nuclease (mnase) dna accessibility assay was used in
saos-2 cells that were either treated for 5 h with vitd3
or 48 h with rnai against hacf1. if histones h3 and h4
are released from the promoter, then mnase accessibility to the underlying dna at these regions should
increase. as a result, the chromatin isolated from
these cells will be more susceptible to cleavage and
thus less amplified by qpcr compared with control. a
statistically significant increase in mnase accessibility
during hormone treatment or hacf1 knockdown in the
rankl promoter gene region was observed (fig. 6a).
mnase accessibility did not significantly increase at
any region of the igfbp3 gene under these same
conditions (fig. 6b). this is consistent with our chip
assay result: histones h3 and h4 levels remained unchanged on the igfbp3 gene promoter during hormone or hacf1 rnai treatment.
together, the data show that, under the hacf1
knockdown or vitd3 treatment conditions, there are

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

differential changes in the histone modification pattern
and histone occupancy for the rankl and igfbp3
promoters. this suggests that the knockdown of
hacf1 or hormone treatment causes gene-specific
changes that promote alterations in the local chromatin architecture; this then ultimately leads to the derepression of these genes.

discussion
although many studies have established the role of
acf1 and the acf complex in chromatin assembly and
remodeling, very little is known about acf1 in other
chromatin-based processes. this study uncovers a
previously unrecognized role of acf1 in the transcriptional repression of euchromatic genes in a mammalian system. we show that hacf1 is present at specific,
transcriptionally repressed, hormone-responsive genes
and that it is significantly released from the promoters
of these genes during hormone induction. this property is consistent with its proposed role in transcriptional repression. based on these results, we propose
that hacf1 participates in the repression of hormoneinducible genes by stabilizing the repression complex
as well as the nucleosomal architecture (fig. 7). a
hormone-dependent release of hacf1 destabilizes
both the receptor-repression complex and the nucleosomes that lead to the derepression/activation of hormone-responsive genes. hacf1 is, therefore, a major
mediator of hormone action because its knockdown
mimics hormone responsiveness for a number of nrregulated genes.
hacf1 is a transcriptional corepressor of
specific hormone-regulated genes

fig. 6. hacf1 knockdown or vitd3 treatment increases
mnase accessibility in the rankl promoter
a and b, mnase accessibility analyses were measured by
qpcr and plotted as fold of control treated cells to represent
relative mnase sensitivity. saos-2 cells were transfected with
control rnai (ri) with or without 5-h 10 nm vitd3 or hacf1
rnai for 48 h in hormone-free medium. mononucleosomal
dna was generated by mnase digestion of nuclei and amplified by qpcr using primer pairs that generate amplicons
from the rankl (a) or igfbp3 (b) promoter/enhancer with an
average size of 90 bp. *, p ⬍ 0.05 vs. control.

hacf1 was identified as an n-cor-interacting protein
by a yeast two-hybrid assay. we subsequently showed
that it interacts with n-cor/smrt in vitro and with
endogenous n-cor in living cells. this suggests that
hacf1 is a component of the n-cor/smrt corepression complex. previous biochemical purifications of
n-cor/smrt have identified the core subunits of the
complex, which include  xxxg1035xxx , wd-40 (tryptophanaspartic acid-40) repeat proteins tbl1 and tbl1 receptor, and cellular signaling protein g protein suppressor 2 (15). additional components of the n-cor
repression pathway, not isolated in previous n-cor
complexes, were recently identified. accessory proteins such as the methyl cpg-binding protein kaiso
and the dna-dependent protein kinase, also associate
with n-cor to assist in repression (40, 41). together
with this study, these results support the concept that
many regulatory proteins contribute to the function of
the n-cor holocomplex. multiple endogenous n-cor
subcomplexes containing unique subunits bound to
the core complex may exist to provide functional diversity to the n-cor holocomplex.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1801

fig. 7. a general and simplified model highlights the role of hacf1 in repression of igfbp3 and rankl genes
a, in the igfbp3 promoter/enhancer, the unliganded vdr/n-cor complex is stabilized by hacf1 (along with other corepressors
represented as unmarked circles). the corepressor complex contains enzymes that are responsible for certain histone modifications, including the trimek9h3 mark near the tss. vitd3 treatment causes a dissociation of n-cor and hacf1 from the promoter
(without changing  xxxg2174xxx  levels), resulting in the loss of trimek9h3 (and likely loss of repressors that bind to this modification).
the release of these proteins derepresses the gene, leading to a modest increase in transcription. a decrease in corepressor
occupancy may also prepare the promoter for the recruitment of coactivators. b, at the rankl gene, the n-cor-complex is
stabilized near the tss by hacf1. this may involve vdr as well. (the current study did not observe vdr association with this
region, but previous studies suggest that vdr either binds near the rankl tss or that distal vdr is brought to the tss via
extensive chromatin looping.) vitd3 treatment reduces hacf1 and n-cor levels (without changing  xxxg2174xxx  levels), destabilizes the
local chromatin architecture, and leads to a loss of histones h3 and h4 (or even the entire nucleosome) from the tss. rna pol
ii machinery can now access dna and synthesize rna. a differential transcriptional output among hormone-responsive genes
may be then attributable to the extent of hormone-induced corepressor release and coactivator recruitment as well as the unique
local chromatin architecture of a given gene. rxr, retinoid x receptor; ac, acetyl group.

only a few studies have indicated that a link exists
between members of chromatin remodeling complexes and the process of n-cor-mediated repression. the swi/snf family of atpase  xxxg2173xxx  was identified in an n-cor complex, but it role in repression
was not determined (16). the atpase  xxxg2174xxx  is targeted by n-cor to enhance active repression of a
tr-regulated gene (19). immunoprecipitation experiments failed, however, to show an association of
 xxxg2174xxx  and n-cor, suggesting that its interaction with
n-cor is indirect or transient.
this investigation provides extensive evidence that
hacf1 binds directly to and forms an endogenous
complex with n-cor. the interaction is mediated by
the n-terminus of hacf1 (termed hacf1-nid), which is
both necessary and sufficient for binding to n-cor.
this region of hacf1 contains a wac domain, a conserved motif involved in dna binding (22). we propose
that the wac domain is also critical for the association
of hacf1 with n-cor because deletion of the region
containing this domain prevented the interaction. consistent with this idea, overexpression of the hacf1-nid
partially relieved repression of nr-regulated genes.
point mutations at critical conserved residues or inter-

nal deletion specifically of the wac domain would
determine whether it is the minimal domain needed for
the interaction of hacf1 and n-cor.
this work also uncovers a previously unrecognized
function of acf1 in transcriptional repression of euchromatic genes in the mammalian system. before our
study, experiments in drosophila highlighted a role for
acf1 as a nonenzymatic component of the acf chromatin assembly/remodeling complex. some studies
have suggested that acf1 is involved in transcriptional
repression because it is required for the replication of
heterochromatin. acf1 also assembles chromatin with
evenly spaced nucleosomes and that contain histone
h1, hallmarks of repressive heterochromatin (28, 29).
these results indicated that acf1 may have a general
role in transcriptional repression. the data of this
study suggest for the first time that hacf1 has a direct
and specialized role in the repression of euchromatic
genes in the mammalian system. this is evidenced by
the finding that two vdr-regulated genes were derepressed during knockdown of hacf1, but other hormoneresponsive genes were not significantly affected.
only one other study provided direct evidence of the
repressive properties of acf1. acf1 null drosophila

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1802 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

displayed a suppression of position-effect variegation
and reduction of polycomb-mediated transcriptional
silencing in heterochromatin (27). because this study
used a genetic knockout approach, the loss of repression in heterochromatin observed may be, at least in
part, attributable to the inability of acf1 null drosophila
to assemble heterochromatin with evenly spaced nucleosomes. it remained unclear whether or not acf1
has a direct role in repression at heterochromatic loci
independent of its role in chromatin assembly and
replication. because our investigation uses rnaibased knockdown in cells that have fully assembled
chromatin, it addresses this question. this study
shows that hacf1 directly regulates the transcription of
euchromatic genes, independent of its ability to assemble heterochromatin. it is tempting to speculate
that, whereas the chromatin assembly and replication
function of hacf1 might establish repressed heterochromatin, the transcriptional repression of euchromatic genes may require hacf1 to stabilize repressive
chromatin architecture at its target promoters. we propose that, in addition to its role in chromatin assembly
and replication, hacf1 is important for repression of
both heterochromatic and euchromatic genes and that
it is also a potential transcriptional corepressor across
species. it remains to be determined whether or not
acf1, like n-cor/smrt, harbors any transcriptional
rds. this investigation should encourage future research to determine whether hacf1 has a direct transcriptional regulatory role in heterochromatic repression in the mammalian system and, conversely,
whether the drosophila homolog of human smrt/
ncor, termed smrter, interacts with dacf1 and
plays any role in heterochromatin silencing (42).
novel mechanisms in hormone-mediated
transcriptional regulation
our work reveals that hacf1 is critical for the presence
of the repressive n-cor complex at the hormoneinducible rankl and igfbp3 genes. rnai-mediated
depletion of hacf1 results in lowered levels of n-cor
near the tss of the rankl gene and at the vdre of
the igfbp3 gene even in the absence of hormone.
hacf1 knockdown also causes a dissociation of vdr
from the igfbp3 vdre, suggesting that it helps to
stabilize the repressive complex at the promoter. this
finding is supported by a recent study in which the
paralog to hacf1, wstf, was purified with vdr as part
of the atp-dependent chromatin remodeling winac
(wstf-inducing nucleosome assembly complex).
wstf bound to vdr in a ligand-independent manner
and stabilized the vdr complex at the vdre (43).
future studies should determine whether hacf1 and
wstf show gene specificity based on recruitment to
targets via n-cor and/or the receptor itself.
it is important to note that, although we were not
able to immunoprecipitate the vdr in the regions of
the rankl gene that were tested in this study, recent
evidence suggests that there are at least five vdres

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

located at significant distances upstream of the tss
as well as one vdr-binding site located very close to
the tss (34, 35). because the distal vdres also associate with rna pol ii, it has been proposed that
these vdres may be brought near the natural promoter of the gene by extensive chromatin looping (44).
this may explain why n-cor (and perhaps also hacf1)
is enriched near the tss of rankl. it will be interesting to determine whether hacf1 (as a member of a
chromatin remodeling complex) regulates transcription by maintaining these special chromatin structures.
the results of this study also strongly suggest that
hormone functions to release not only n-cor but also
hacf1 from promoters to cause the derepression of
genes, such as rankl and igfbp3. loss of the corepressors hacf1 and n-cor from these gene promoters during hacf1 knockdown leads to an increase in
transcription similar to hormone treatment. derepression caused by the release of corepressors may be,
therefore, more critical to the expression of these
genes than the recruitment of coactivators. if coactivator recruitment has a major role in transcriptional
activation of these genes, one would expect hormone
treatment to cause a more robust increase in mrna
levels than hacf1 knockdown. interestingly, the igfbp3 and rankl vdres are located several kilobases upstream of the tss. because the vdre is
located distal to the tss, coactivators recruited to this
site may not be as effective in activating transcription.
hormonal activation of transcription of rankl, igfbp3, and  xxxg1144xxx  genes may also be weak because the
dna-bound nr does not completely dissociate with
n-cor. in fact, in our studies, 1-h of vitd3 treatment
leads to about a 40% reduction of n-cor at these
genes. this is perhaps attributable to the presence of
additional corepressors, such as hacf1, which may
enhance n-cor association. it is, therefore, possible
that hacf1 may establish repression at a specific subset of vdr-regulated genes, those that have a distal
vdre and that are not greatly activated by hormone.
consistent with this suggestion is the fact that the
24-hydroxylase gene, which has a proximal vdre and
is highly up-regulated by vitd3 treatment, is not derepressed by hacf1 knockdown. this gene probably
does not associate with hacf1 and it may require the
addition of hormone and the subsequent recruitment
of coactivators to achieve such a robust activation.
(this study did not, however, analyze whether hacf1 is
targeted to the 24-hydroxylase gene.) it will be interesting to determine whether this is a common feature
of the nr-regulated genes that require hacf1 for maximum transcriptional repression.
although hacf1 stabilizes the repression complex in
the promoter of both the igfbp3 and rankl genes,
hacf1 knockdown causes different changes to histone
modification profile and histone occupancy at these
genes. overall, hacf1 seems to play a role in maintaining the features of repressive chromatin (e.g., histone
methylation and intact nucleosomes). in the igfbp3
promoter, for example, hacf1 rnai and 1-h vitd3

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

treatment lowered the levels of trimek9h3, a modification that stabilizes heterochromatic structure by
creating a binding site for the repressive heterochromatin protein 1 (45, 46). it is, therefore, possible that
hacf1 recruits a histone methyltransferase to these
promoters and/or a histone demethylase is a component of the derepression/activation pathway for these
genes.
at the rankl promoter, reduced levels of histones
h3 and h4 were observed under the conditions in
which transcription increased: 1-h vitd3 treatment and
hacf1 knockdown. although the chip assay cannot
show whether the observed histone loss is attributable
to nucleosome repositioning or nucleosome destabilization, either situation creates an open chromatin
structure. this open structure allows for histone variant exchange or for the basal transcriptional machinery to access the dna. the fact that hormone treatment and hacf1 knockdown increase mnase
accessibility to dna in the regions of the rankl gene
in which the levels of histones h3 and h4 decreased is
consistent with this idea. the histone eviction hypothesis, tested in this mammalian system, agrees with
studies in yeast that show that there is histone loss
and an incorporation of histone variants in actively
transcribed regions of the genome (6, 38, 39, 47).
this study uncovers a novel role of hormone (vitd3)
in histone h3 and h4 loss from a hormone-responsive
gene. hormone treatment causes release of hacf1
(and n-cor) from promoters, which destabilizes nucleosomal structure of euchromatic genes and leads
to the eviction of histones h3 and h4. such an open
chromatin structure is poised for transcriptional activation. because histone eviction/displacement is observed only in the rankl gene during vitd3 treatment,
it will be important to determine which genes are regulated by hormone-induced histone eviction (48). it will
also be of interest to analyze whether or not other
transcriptional signaling pathways in the mammalian
system use signal-dependent histone eviction as a
mechanism for gene regulation (49).
most work on acf1 investigates its relationship to its
enzymatic binding partner, focusing on how acf1 regulates the function of the atpase  xxxg2174xxx . we find that
hacf1 knockdown, which does not lead to a decrease
of  xxxg2174xxx  levels at the promoters, correlates with the
relief of transcriptional repression, the loss of the corepressor complex, and even the destabilization of the
nucleosome itself in these vitd3-regulated genes. this
indicates that hacf1 alone is crucial to the maintenance of repressive chromatin at these genes. considering that there are at least four  xxxg2174xxx -containing
complexes in humans, these study results should encourage future research to investigate the independent role of other  xxxg2174xxx  binding partners (e.g. wstf
and rsf) in transcription and other chromatin-based
processes. this would help to determine what makes
these complexes unique.
our findings also suggest that hacf1 and its paralog
wstf do not have a redundant function in transcrip-

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1803

tional repression of hormone-inducible genes. wstf
does not compensate for hacf1 in regulating these
genes when the level of hacf1 is reduced. it was
shown recently that wstf has a role in the ligandinduced activation and in transrepression of certain
vitd3-target genes (43, 50). additional characterization
of hacf1 and wstf will help determine whether or not
they play differential roles in the repression of hormone-sensitive genes.
in conclusion, our results establish a unique and
gene-specific role for the chromatin remodeling protein hacf1 in transcriptional repression of nuclear hormone-responsive genes. because lowering the levels
of hacf1 causes different changes in the histone tail
modifications and the histone occupancy of the igfbp3 and rankl promoters, we conclude that the
local chromatin architecture for each promoter is
unique. these results also uncover new mechanisms
in nr-regulated transcriptional repression. this includes a novel role for hormone in hacf1 release and in
the eviction of histones h3 and h4 from specific
genes. by elucidating another level of regulation of
nrs, our data provide a plausible mechanism involving hacf1 in the differential hormone responsiveness
of some vdr-regulated genes as well as highlight the
unique nature of individual hormone-responsive
genes.
as a result, acf1 has multiple roles in chromatin
biology. it functions as a component of the acf complex in chromatin assembly and replication. current
work now suggests that hacf1 is essential not only for
the establishment of transcriptionally repressive heterochromatic regions during dna replication (27) but
also for the maintenance of active repression of euchromatic genes in the mammalian system (this work).
results obtained from the current study will allow future investigations to determine the independent and
global roles of hacf1 (as well as of other nonenzymatic
subunits of chromatin assembly/remodeling complexes) in the transcription of hormone-responsive and
other cellular and viral genes.

materials and methods
antibodies and reagents
all-trans-retinoic-acid and thyroid hormone (t3) were from
sigma (st. louis, mo); 1,25-(oh)2 vitd3 was obtained from
biomol (plymouth meeting, pa). polyclonal antibody against
hacf1 was kindly provided by patrick varga-weisz (babraham institute, cambridge, uk). the following antibodies were
used: from upstate biotechnology (lake placid, ny), anti-ncor (06-892), anti-histone h3, c terminus (07-690), antihistone h4 (05-858), and anti-ack9h3 (06-942); and from
santa cruz biotechnology (santa cruz, ca), anti-wcrf/
hacf1 (sc-10627x) and anti-vdr (sc-1009). additional antibodies include anti-trimek9h3 (ab8898; abcam, cambridge,
uk) and anti-wstf (cell signaling technology, danvers,
ma).

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1804 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

yeast two-hybrid assay

isolation and rt of mrna

yrg2 yeast strain was cotransformed with galdbd-n-cor
rd2 and a human leukemia gal4 activation domain (ad)
fusion cdna library (clontech, mountain view, ca). transformants, 2 ⫻ 107, were selected onto sd-leu-trp-his plates.
specificity of interaction was confirmed by cotransforming
yrg2 with either galdbd-rd1 or -rd2 and galad-hacf1n
and plating onto leu-trp-his plates containing 20 mm
3-aminotriazole.

saos-2 cells were lysed in rneasy lysis buffer and homogenized over qiashredder columns. total rna was extracted
with the rneasy kit (qiagen, valencia, ca) and reverse transcribed with the superscript ii ribonuclease h rt kit (invitrogen) using 2 ␮g rna.

in vitro interaction assays
hacf1n (amino acids 1–313) and n-cor rd1 (amino acids
1–312) were subcloned into the pgex-4t2 vector (ge healthcare, little chalfont, uk) and transformed into bl21 cells.
gst fusion proteins were isolated by glutathione-sepharose
4b beads according to the protocol of the manufacturer (ge
healthcare). n-cor, smrt, and hacf1 deletion constructs
subcloned into pcdna3 vectors were synthesized in vitro in
the presence of [35s]methionine following the protocol of the
manufacturer (promega, madison, wi). in vitro interaction
assays were performed as described previously (51).
cell culture
saos-2 and hek293t cells were cultured as monolayers in
dmem and supplemented with antibiotics and 15 or 10%
fetal bovine serum (fbs) (hyclone, logan, ut), respectively.
saos-2 cells were kept in dmem supplemented with 10%
charcoal-stripped fbs (gemini bio-products, west sacramento, ca) for 48 h before hormone treatments.
coimmunoprecipitation
coimmunoprecipitations were performed as described with
minor modifications (51). hek293t cell lysate was incubated
overnight at 4 c with hacf1 antibody or equal amount of igg.
after sds-page, proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose
membrane and incubated with anti-n-cor antibody (1:500).
western blots were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence detection (ge healthcare).
transient protein expression
saos-2 cells were plated in 10-cm plates and transfected at
80% confluency by liposome-mediated transfer (lipofectamine 2000; invitrogen, carlsbad, ca) with 20 ␮g of the
following plasmids: control pcdna3, pcdna3-hacf1fl,
pcdna3-hacf1-nid, and cmx-n-cor. four to 5 h after
transfection, medium was changed to dmem containing
10% charcoal-stripped fbs. incubation continued for 48 h
before harvesting. under these conditions, cells were transfected at greater than 50% efficiency (as measured by green
fluorescent protein-tagged protein expression). transient
overexpression of n-cor was measured by western blot.
expression levels of hacf1fl and hacf1-nid were measured
by qpcr because antibody to hacf1 does not recognize
hacf1-nid.

real-time pcr
quantification of mrna and dna was performed in an abi
prism 7000 sequence detection system (applied biosystems, foster city, ca), using sybr green as detector dye.
reaction mixtures contained 5 ␮l sybr green, 200 nm
primer, and 20–40 ng template cdna. for mrna quantification, primers were designed to cross introns (sequences
available on request). reaction conditions were 95 c for 2
min, followed by 45 cycles of 95 c for 15 sec and 60 c for 45
sec. data were analyzed with threshold set in the linear range.
chip assay
dna immunoprecipitation was performed according to the
chip protocol of upstate biotechnology with minor modifications. control or hacf1-rnai-treated saos-2 cells were
maintained in 10% charcoal-stripped fbs for 48 h. half of the
control cells were treated with 10 nm vitd3 for 1 h. harvested
cells were formaldehyde-treated for 5 min at 37 c and sonicated for three cycles of 15 sec at level 3 of a misonix
sonicator (misonix, farmingdale, ny). equal amounts of lysate were incubated overnight at 4 c with 3–5 ␮g antibody.
immunoprecipitates were collected and eluted, and
crosslinks were reversed. dna was purified using the qiagen
pcr purification kit and used in qpcr reactions with primers
corresponding to five regions in the rankl and igfbp3
genes (sequences available on request).
mnase dna accessibility assay
saos-2 cells were washed twice in pbs, resuspended in lysis
buffer [10 mm tris-hcl (ph 7.5), 10 mm nacl, 3 mm mgcl2,
and 0.4% nonidet p-40], and incubated for 10 min on ice.
nuclei were pelleted and resuspended in the same buffer
plus 1 mm cacl2. the a260 of nuclei preparation was adjusted
to 0.5, and lysate was aliquoted into 300 ␮l portions. samples
were digested with either 0 or 3 u of mnase (sigma) for 15
min at 37 c. reactions were stopped with 60 ␮l of 60 mm
edta, 3% sds. samples were treated with 10 ␮g of  xxxg1963xxx  at 37 c for 30 min, followed by 100 ␮g proteinase k
at 55 c for 1 h. samples were phenol-chloroform extracted
twice and then ethanol precipitated. dna was quantitated by
real-time pcr with primers that generate amplicons of about
90 bp (sequences available on request).
statistical analysis
real-time pcr results are expressed as mean ⫾ sd, and
statistical analysis was done by paired student’s t test.

acknowledgments
rnai experiments
saos-2 cells were transfected at approximately 80% confluency using lipofectamine 2000. rnai  xxxd1891xxx  nm was used as
a double-stranded duplex for hacf1 (5⬘-aac acu gug aac
cac aag aug uu-3⬘) and sicontrol nontargeting sirna
#1 (dharmacon, lafayette, co). four to 5 h after transfection,
medium was changed to dmem containing 10% charcoalstripped fbs. incubation continued for 48 h before harvesting or hormone treatment.

we thank hongwu chen for sharing the yeast-two hybrid
library and patrick varga-weisz for the polyclonal anti-hacf1
and -wstf antibodies. we thank ramin shiekhattar for providing advice and reagents for the present studies. we thank
rachna chaudhari and meagan porter for administrative
assistance.

received february 19, 2007. accepted may 14, 2007.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

address all correspondence and requests for reprints to:
debabrata chakravarti, division of reproductive biology research, department of obstetrics and gynecology, robert h.
lurie comprehensive cancer center, feinberg school of
medicine, northwestern university, chicago, illinois 60611.
e-mail: debu@northwestern.edu.
this work was supported by national institutes of health
grant dk-65148 and national institutes of health/national
cancer institute predoctoral training grant r5-ca101871.
the authors have nothing to disclose.

mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806 1805

18.

19.

20.

references
21.
1. luger k, mader aw, richmond rk, sargent df, richmond tj 1997 crystal structure of the nucleosome core
particle at 2.8 a resolution. nature 389:251–260
2. bazett-jones dp, mendez e, czarnota gj, ottensmeyer
fp, allfrey vg 1996 visualization and analysis of unfolded
nucleosomes associated with transcribing chromatin.
nucleic acids res 24:321–329
3. rice jc, briggs sd, ueberheide b, barber cm, shabanowitz j, hunt df, shinkai y, allis cd 2003 histone
methyltransferases direct different degrees of methylation to define distinct chromatin domains. mol cell 12:
1591–1598
4. eberharter a, becker pb 2004 atp-dependent nucleosome remodelling: factors and functions. j cell sci 117:
3707–3711
5. ehrenhofer-murray ae 2004 chromatin dynamics at dna
replication, transcription and repair. eur j biochem 271:
2335–2349
6. ahmad k, henikoff s 2002 the histone variant h3.3
marks active chromatin by replication-independent nucleosome assembly. mol cell 9:1191–1200
7. mangelsdorf dj, thummel c, beato m, herrlich p,
schutz g, umesono k, blumberg b, kastner p, mark m,
chambon p, evans rm 1995 the nuclear receptor
superfamily: the second decade. cell 83:835–839
8. mckenna nj, o’malley bw 2002 combinatorial control
of gene expression by nuclear receptors and coregulators. cell 108:465–474
9. xu l, glass ck, rosenfeld mg 1999 coactivator and
corepressor complexes in nuclear receptor function. curr
opin genet dev 9:140–147
10. xu w 2005 nuclear receptor coactivators: the key to
unlock chromatin. biochem cell biol 83:418–428
11. rachez c, lemon bd, suldan z, bromleigh v, gamble m,
naar am, erdjument-bromage h, tempst p, freedman
lp 1999 ligand-dependent transcription activation by
nuclear receptors requires the drip complex. nature
398:824–828
12. chen j, kinyamu hk, archer tk 2006 changes in attitude, changes in latitude: nuclear receptors remodeling
chromatin to regulate transcription. mol endocrinol 20:
1–13
13. chen jd, evans rm 1995 a transcriptional co-repressor
that interacts with nuclear hormone receptors. nature
377:454–457
14. horlein aj, naar am, heinzel t, torchia j, gloss b,
kurokawa r, ryan a, kamei y, soderstrom m, glass ck,
rosenfeld mg 1995 ligand-independent repression by
the thyroid  xxxg1603xxx  mediated by a nuclear
receptor co-repressor. nature 377:397–404
15. lazar ma 2003 nuclear receptor corepressors. nucl recept signal 1:e001
16. underhill c, qutob ms, yee sp, torchia j 2000 a novel
nuclear receptor corepressor complex, n-cor, contains
components of the mammalian swi/snf complex and
the corepressor kap-1. j biol chem 275:40463–40470
17. li j, lin q, wang w, wade p, wong j 2002 specific
targeting and constitutive association of histone

22.
23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

deacetylase complexes during transcriptional repression. genes dev 16:687–692
xue y, wong j, moreno gt, young mk, cote j, wang w
1998 nurd, a novel complex with both atp-dependent
chromatin-remodeling and histone deacetylase activities. mol cell 2:851–861
alenghat t, yu j, lazar ma 2006 the n-cor complex
enables chromatin remodeler  xxxg2174xxx  to enhance repression by thyroid  xxxg1603xxx . embo j 25:
3966–3974
varga-weisz pd, wilm m, bonte e, dumas k, mann m,
becker pb 1997 chromatin-remodelling factor chrac
contains the atpases  xxxg2174xxx  and  xxxg2312xxx . nature
388:598–602
ito t, bulger m, pazin mj, kobayashi r, kadonaga jt
1997 acf, an  xxxg2174xxx -containing and atp-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling factor. cell 90:145–155
fyodorov dv, kadonaga jt 2002 binding of acf1 to dna
involves a wac motif and is important for acf-mediated
chromatin assembly. mol cell biol 22:6344–6353
ito t, levenstein me, fyodorov dv, kutach ak, kobayashi r, kadonaga jt 1999 acf consists of two subunits, acf1 and  xxxg2174xxx , that function cooperatively in the
atp-dependent catalysis of chromatin assembly. genes
dev 13:1529–1539
dirscherl ss, krebs je 2004 functional diversity of  xxxg2174xxx 
complexes. biochem cell biol 82:482–489
eberharter a, vetter i, ferreira r, becker pb 2004 acf1
improves the effectiveness of nucleosome mobilization
by  xxxg2174xxx  through phd-histone contacts. embo j 23:
4029–4039
peterson cl, logie c 2000 recruitment of chromatin
remodeling machines. j cell biochem 78:179–185
fyodorov dv, blower md, karpen gh, kadonaga jt
2004 acf1 confers unique activities to acf/chrac and
promotes the formation rather than disruption of chromatin in vivo. genes dev 18:170–183
collins n, poot ra, kukimoto i, garcia-jimenez c, dellaire g, varga-weisz pd 2002 an acf1- xxxg2174xxx  chromatinremodeling complex is required for dna replication
through heterochromatin. nat genet 32:627–632
lusser a, urwin dl, kadonaga jt 2005 distinct activities
of  xxxg441xxx  and acf in atp-dependent chromatin assembly. nat struct mol biol 12:160–166
makowski a, brzostek s, cohen rn, hollenberg an 2003
determination of nuclear receptor corepressor interactions with the thyroid  xxxg1603xxx . mol endocrinol
17:273–286
peng l, malloy pj, feldman d 2004 identification of a
functional  xxxd2019xxx  response element in the  xxxd2364xxx -like growth factor binding protein-3 promoter. mol
endocrinol 18:1109–1119
barsony j, prufer k 2002  xxxg2412xxx  and retinoid
x receptor interactions in motion. vitam horm 65:
345–376
fan x, roy em, murphy tc, nanes ms, kim s, pike jw,
rubin j 2004 regulation of rankl promoter activity is
associated with histone remodeling in murine bone stromal cells. j cell biochem 93:807–818
kim s, yamazaki m, zella la, shevde nk, pike jw 2006
activation of receptor activator of nf-␬b ligand gene
expression by  xxxd408xxx  is mediated
through multiple long-range enhancers. mol cell biol
26:6469–6486
kabe y, yamada j, uga h, yamaguchi y, wada t, handa
h 2005 nf-y is essential for the recruitment of rna
polymerase ii and inducible transcription of several
ccaat box-containing genes. mol cell biol 25:512–522
lachner m, jenuwein t 2002 the many faces of histone
lysine methylation. curr opin cell biol 14:286–298
lee ck, shibata y, rao b, strahl bd, lieb jd 2004
evidence for nucleosome depletion at active regulatory
regions genome-wide. nat genet 36:900–905

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

1806 mol endocrinol, august 2007, 21(8):1791–1806

38. schwabish ma, struhl k 2004 evidence for eviction and
rapid deposition of histones upon transcriptional elongation by rna polymerase ii. mol cell biol 24:10111–10117
39. jin j, cai y, li b, conaway rc, workman jl, conaway
jw, kusch t 2005 in and out: histone variant exchange
in chromatin. trends biochem sci 30:680–687
40. jeyakumar m, liu xf, erdjument-bromage h, tempst p,
bagchi mk 2007 phosphorylation of thyroid hormone
receptor-associated ncor corepressor holocomplex by
the dna-dependent protein kinase enhances its histone
deacetylase activity. j biol chem 282:9312–9322
41. yoon hg, chan dw, reynolds ab, qin j, wong j 2003
n-cor mediates dna methylation-dependent repression through a methyl cpg binding protein kaiso. mol
cell 12:723–734
42. tsai cc, kao hy, yao tp, mckeown m, evans rm 1999
smrter, a drosophila nuclear receptor coregulator, reveals that ecr-mediated repression is critical for development. mol cell 4:175–186
43. kitagawa h, fujiki r, yoshimura k, mezaki y, uematsu y,
matsui d, ogawa s, unno k, okubo m, tokita a, nakagawa t, ito t, ishimi y, nagasawa h, matsumoto t,
yanagisawa j, kato s 2003 the chromatin-remodeling
complex winac targets a nuclear receptor to promoters
and is impaired in williams syndrome. cell 113:905–917
44. pike jw, meyer mb, watanuki m, kim s, zella la, fretz
ja, yamazaki m, shevde nk 2007 perspectives on

ewing et al. • hacf1 in repression of vitd3-regulated genes

45.

46.
47.
48.

49.
50.

51.

mechanisms of gene regulation by  xxxd408xxx (3) and its receptor. j steroid biochem mol biol
103:389–395
jacobs sa, taverna sd, zhang y, briggs sd, li j, eissenberg jc, allis cd, khorasanizadeh s 2001 specificity
of the  xxxg623xxx  chromo domain for the methylated n-terminus of histone h3. embo j 20:5232–5241
lachner m, o’carroll d, rea s, mechtler k, jenuwein t
2001 methylation of histone h3 lysine 9 creates a binding
site for  xxxg623xxx  proteins. nature 410:116–120
workman jl 2006 nucleosome displacement in transcription. genes dev 20:2009–2017
vicent gp, nacht as, smith cl, peterson cl, dimitrov s,
beato m 2004 dna instructed displacement of histones
h2a and h2b at an inducible promoter. mol cell 16:
439–452
chen x, wang j, woltring d, gerondakis s, shannon mf
2005 histone dynamics on the interleukin-2 gene in response to t-cell activation. mol cell biol 25:3209–3219
fujiki r, kim ms, sasaki y, yoshimura k, kitagawa h,
kato s 2005 ligand-induced transrepression by vdr
through association of wstf with acetylated histones.
embo j 24:3881–3894
macfarlan t, parker jb, nagata k, chakravarti d 2006
thanatos-associated protein 7 associates with template
activating factor-i␤ and inhibits histone acetylation to
repress transcription. mol endocrinol 20:335–347

molecular endocrinology is published monthly by the endocrine society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost
professional society serving the endocrine community.

the endocrine society. downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualuser.displayname}] on 28 may 2015. at 02:06 for personal use only. no other uses without permission. . all rights reserved.

