copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
primary care respiratory journal (2007); 16(3): 149-154

review

the properties of inhaled corticosteroids: similarities and
differences
*neil c barnes
professor of respiratory medicine, barts and the london nhs trust school of medicine and dentistry, london, uk
received 16th april 2007; accepted 18th april 2007

summary
inhaled corticosteroids remain the most important therapy for chronic asthma in both adults and children. as all inhaled corticosteroids
act by binding to a common  xxxg1601xxx  there is little evidence of any real difference in clinical efficacy between the different
inhaled corticosteroids. the main potential differences are in their propensity to cause side effects. local side effects such as a hoarse
voice do occur in a proportion of adults and there is some limited evidence that  xxxd1690xxx  may cause less local side effects. in adults
there is little evidence for clinically important systemic side effects from doses of inhaled steroids below 800 mcg/day (beclomethasone
equivalent). above this dose a proportion of patients may show some adrenocortical suppression, though it is unlikely to be of clinical
importance. data on bone mineral density and fracture rates is discrepant, but an overview would suggest that below 800 mcg/day there
is no increase in fracture risk whereas above this dose there might be an increased fracture risk. the properties of  xxxd1690xxx  would
suggest that it has less propensity for systemic side effects, but large long-term studies are needed to confirm this. in children using
inhaled steroids at above-licensed doses reductions in short-term growth can occur, but there is little evidence for reductions in long-term
growth at normal doses. at above-licensed doses, biochemical adrenocortical suppression can occur with some unusual but documented
cases of clinical addisonian crisis. limited evidence in paediatric age groups would suggest that  xxxd1690xxx  may have some advantage
although it is not as yet licensed in all countries for paediatric use. data on differences in side effects between normal and asthmatic
patients, and between asthmatic patients with near-normal lung function compared to those with impaired lung function, indicate that
inhaled corticosteroids (particularly fluticasone) are absorbed more in those with normal lung function; this strongly supports stepping
down the inhaled steroid dose when asthma is controlled – as is recommended in asthma guidelines.
© 2007 general practice airways group. all rights reserved.
nc barnes. prim care resp j 2007; 16(3): 149-154.
doi:10.3132/pcrj.2007.00038

keywords inhaled corticosteroids, efficacy, properties, side effects, comparison
contents
introduction ..........................................................................................................................................................................
mode of action of inhaled steroids .....................................................................................................................................
relative potency of the different inhaled steroids ............................................................................................................
local side effects of inhaled corticosteroids .......................................................................................................................
systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids ..........................................................................................................................
cfc-free inhalers ...................................................................................................................................................................
conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................................
references .............................................................................................................................................................................

introduction
in adults and children inhaled corticosteroids are the most
important treatment for chronic asthma. this is because their
clinical effects are essential in achieving the goals of asthma

management as set out in national and international guidelines:
eliminating or reducing chronic symptoms of asthma; preventing
exacerbations; maximising lung function; reducing the need for
rescue beta2-agonist treatment; enabling normal activity including

* corresponding author: the london chest hospital, bonner road, london, e2 9jx, uk
tel: +44 (0)20 8983 2406 fax: +44 (0)20 8983 2279 e-mail: neil.barnes@bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk
primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org
doi:10.3132/pcrj.2007.00038

149
150
150
150
150
153
153
153

149

copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
nc barnes

exercise; and doing so in a safe manner.1,2 these attributes have
been demonstrated in numerous well conducted controlled clinical
trials. in addition, there is evidence from a limited number of
clinical trials and a huge number of database studies that inhaled
corticosteroids reduce hospitalisations due to asthma.3 database
and ecological studies strongly indicate that inhaled corticosteroids
markedly reduce the asthma death rate.4 in this regard they are the
only treatment for chronic asthma which has been shown to
reduce asthma deaths.
there are five inhaled steroids currently available in the uk:
 xxxd294xxx  (bdp), budesonide (bud), fluticasone
dipropionate (fp),  xxxd2665xxx  (mf) and  xxxd1690xxx  (cic).
a sixth inhaled steroid, triamcinolone acetate (taa), is available in
the usa and a number of other countries but is not available in the
uk. triamcinolone is less potent than the other inhaled corticosteroids and is less specific for the  xxxg1601xxx : it will
not be considered further in this review.

mode of action of inhaled steroids
all inhaled steroids work by binding to a common glucocorticoid
receptor – so the basic pharmacology and clinical studies would
indicate that the same clinical effect can be achieved with all
inhaled steroids though not at the same microgramme dose; i.e. if
given at a high enough dose, all inhaled corticosteroids can
potentially achieve the same clinical activity. in addition, the
equitherapeutic dose of different inhaled steroids varies
depending on the delivery device used. however, at doses of
inhaled steroids with equal clinical effect there are differences in
their side effect profiles, the importance of which is a subject of
considerable controversy. therefore, the main variation between
the different inhaled steroids is in their side effect profiles at
clinically equivalent doses.

relative potency of the different inhaled
steroids
the relative potency of different inhaled corticosteroids has been
the subject of considerable dispute and debate. this is due to a
number of factors. firstly, doing robust studies which can
accurately determine relative potencies in clinical trials is fraught
with difficulties – frequently, claims are made about relative
potency based on inadequate study design. secondly, efficacy is
affected by the delivery device, which brings another level of
complication. thirdly, whereas fluticasone, budesonide and
mometasone are active drugs in their own right, bdp and
 xxxd1690xxx  are pro-drugs. bdp has relatively poor activity and is
metabolised to 17-beclomethasone monoproprionate (17-bmp)
which is the main active constituent.  xxxd1690xxx  again has low
activity and is metabolised into its active constituent desciclesonide.5 although in vitro potency is often a poor guide to in
vivo effects, this is not the case with inhaled corticosteroids;
broadly speaking the drug’s activity at the  xxxg1601xxx 
primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org

in vitro is predictive of the in vivo potency. using different
methodologies the pharmacology section of the uk bts/sign
asthma guidelines group and the cochrane collaboration have
tried to determine the relative microgramme potency of commonly
used inhaled steroids.2,6 using these different methodologies they
came to the conclusion that bdp and budesonide were
approximately equiactive, whereas fluticasone is equally active at
half the microgramme dose. equiactive doses for the newer
inhaled steroids are more difficult to determine. available evidence
would suggest that mometasone is approximately equipotent to
fp and that  xxxd1690xxx  falls somewhere between the potency of
bdp and fluticasone.5 a further complication is the introduction of
cfc-free inhalers – see below.

local side effects of inhaled corticosteroids
the main local side effects of inhaled corticosteroids are oral
candidiasis, cough at the time of inhalation, hoarse voice and
dysphonia. cough is a local irritant effect and can usually be
overcome by a change in the delivery device; when using a metered
dose inhaler (mdi) the addition of a large volume spacer reduces
cough. oral candidiasis is dose-related; it is not frequently a major
problem and can usually be prevented by gargling, washing and
spitting out after taking the inhaler. in some cases, local antifungal
treatment may be needed. there are some individuals who are
exquisitely sensitive to even small doses of inhaled steroids and get
oral thrush despite all preventative measures.
the most difficult local side effect to manage is hoarse voice
and dysphonia. this is caused by the inhaled steroid being
deposited on the vocal cord and causing a myopathy of the
arytenoid muscles. since all inhaled steroids have to cross the vocal
cords to be active this is the most difficult side effect to overcome
and it is not helped by gargling and spitting out after inhaler use.
it tends to be worse with the dry powder inhalers than mdis
(where the effect can be decreased by using a large volume
spacer). dysphonia and hoarse voice are dose-related, and are not
usually a problem at low doses except in those who use their voice
professionally such as actors or singers. at higher doses dysphonia
can be troublesome for any individual. there is some evidence that
 xxxd1690xxx  has less propensity for causing upper airways
problems.7 this is thought to be due to  xxxd1690xxx  being a prodrug; the esters which convert  xxxd1690xxx  into the active moiety
des- xxxd1690xxx  are not present in high enough concentrations in
the upper airways to cause enough conversion to cause myopathy.

systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids
the systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids are caused by their
absorption into the systemic circulation. the fate of inhaled
steroids in the body is shown in figure 1.
when a steroid is inhaled a proportion of the drug is deposited
in the mouth and swallowed; it may then be absorbed in the
gastrointestinal tract where it is subject to first-past metabolism in

150

copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
the properties of inhaled corticosteroids: similarities and differences

figure 1. the fate of inhaled corticosteroids.

complete absorption
from the lung

10–40%
deposited in lung

systemic
circulation

lung

mouth and pharynx

orally bioavailable
fraction
absorption
from gut

liver
systemic
side effects

60–90% swallowed
(reduced by spacer
or mouth rinsing)

first-pass
inactivation

gi tract

the liver. fluticasone,  xxxd1690xxx  and mometasone are subject to
almost complete first-pass metabolism, whereas only
approximately 85% of bdp undergoes first-pass metabolism.
therefore, for fluticasone, mometasone and  xxxd1690xxx  the gutabsorbed drug can cause very little systemic activity, and even for
bdp the systemic activity due to gut absorption is low.
inhaled steroid deposited in the lung is the main source for
systemic absorption. the more drug deposited in the lung the more
the clinical activity increases but also the more the systemic
absorption increases. the main site of absorption of inhaled
corticosteroids is from the alveoli and therefore smaller particles
which tend to penetrate better into the alveoli are more likely to be
absorbed and cause systemic side effects. impaired lung function
also has an effect on absorption of inhaled corticosteroids. a
number of studies have shown – particularly for fluticasone
propionate – that absorption is higher in normal individuals than in
asthmatics with airflow obstruction.8-10 further studies have shown
that when asthmatic patients with airflow obstruction improve,
their absorption of fluticasone increases. this is probably because
in the obstructed asthmatic airway the drug impacts in the bronchi
where there is little absorption, whereas in normal individuals or
asthmatics with only minor airflow obstruction more drug reaches
the alveoli and is absorbed. this effect – of differential absorption
between normal subjects and asthmatic patients – is less marked
for budesonide and  xxxd1690xxx .9-11 the demonstration that
absorption of inhaled corticosteroids is greater in individuals with
normal lung function is a strong argument for stepping down the
dosage once asthma is controlled, particularly if lung function is
normal or near normal.
the potential or actual side effects of inhaled steroids are listed
in table 1. the side effect which has been most widely studied (as

it is readily amenable to testing) is adrenocortical suppression.
adrenocortical suppression is dose-related though there do seem
to be certain individuals, both among adults and children, who are
particularly sensitive to the adrenocortical suppressive effect of
steroids. in adults biochemical adrenocortical suppression only
seems to occur at doses of inhaled steroids above 800 mcg/day
(bdp equivalent). there are very few case reports of clinically
important adrenocortical suppression occurring in adults.12 in
children there are fewer controlled studies of the adrenocortical
suppressive effects of inhaled steroids but there are case series’
indicating that clinically important adrenocortical suppression may
occur at doses of inhaled corticosteroids above the licensed
dose.12,13 fluticasone is the commonest inhaled corticosteroid

primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org

151

table 1. potential systemic side effects of the inhaled
corticosteroids.
adrenocortical suppression
increased osteoporosis and bone fractures
skin thinning and purpura
weight gain
cataracts
glaucoma
diabetes mellitus
increased pulmonary infections
growth retardation in children

copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
nc barnes

reported to show adrenocortical suppression in children in these
case series’, but this may be because of preferential prescribing of
the drug at higher doses to those with more difficult asthma. there
is some evidence that  xxxd1690xxx  may have less adrenocortical
suppressive activity than conventional inhaled corticosteroids.14
easy bruising has been shown to be a side effect of inhaled
corticosteroids. the best controlled study demonstrating this was
the euroscop study in copd patients which showed a higher
rate of bruising in those treated with budesonide 800 mcg/day
than those treated with placebo.15 the relative propensity for
different inhaled corticosteroids to cause bruising has not been
formally studied.
in adults one of the main concerns with inhaled corticosteroids
is their potential for decreasing bone mineral density and causing
osteoporosis. a number of studies have shown the effects of
inhaled corticosteroids on markers of bone metabolism but the
relevance of these markers to the risk of reduced bone mineral
densisty or osteporosis is unclear. using triamcinolone at 1200
mcg/day over a three-year period in the lung health 2 study there
was a statistically significant reduction in bone mineral density at
the neck of the femur over a three-year period.16,17 this study
demonstrates that inhaled corticosteroids may cause reductions in
bone mineral density, but the extrapolation of results with
triamcinolone to other inhaled steroids is inappropriate since
triamcinolone has greater systemic bioavailability. a cochrane
review of controlled trials on the effect of inhaled corticosteroids
on bone mineral density and fracture rate showed no effect, but
the studies were probably too short-term to give a definitive
answer.18 the best controlled trial data comes from two studies in
copd: in the euroscop study budesonide 800 mcg/day over a
three-year period showed no detrimental effect on bone mineral
density – indeed, at the femoral trochanter there was an increase
in bone mineral density in the budesonide-treated group compared
with placebo;16 and in the recently published torch study,
measurement of bone mineral density was performed in a subset
of patients and showed that there was no difference in bone
mineral density in the group treated with fluticasone 1000 mcg/day
compared with placebo.19 furthermore, the torch study showed
no increase in fracture rate over the three years of the study.
database studies have produced conflicting results. wong et al, in
a cross sectional study of bone mineral density, reported an
increased fracture rate risk related to the cumulative dose of
inhaled corticosteroids.20 however, such cross sectional studies are
difficult to control for prescription of systemic steroids which are
known to cause reduced bone mineral density. database studies of
fracture risk have produced conflicting results. hubbard et al, using
a primary care database in the uk, reported a dose-dependent
increase in fractures with daily doses of inhaled corticosteroids of
above 600 mcg/day leading to a 2.5-fold increase in fractures.21 in
contrast, suissa et al, using a large database in quebec, showed an
increase in hip fractures only in those patients on >2000 mcg/day

bdp equivalent and, slightly oddly, an increased risk of upper limb
fractures of 12% for every 1000 mcg/day bdp equivalent.22 in all of
these studies, controlling for confounding variables such as
previous courses of oral steroids, smoking, and differences in
exercise (which can all influence bone mineral density) is difficult.
overall, the evidence would suggest that at doses under 800-1000
mcg/day of bdp equivalence there is no increased risk of reduction
in bone mineral density or fracture risk, and above 1000 mcg/day
it is possible that an increased risk occurs.
data on cataracts are again discordant. a prospective study of
95 patients aged 5-25 years on a median dose of bdp or
budesonide of 750 mcg/day over a five-year period showed no
occurrence of posterior subcapsular cataracts.23 in contrast a
database study reported by cummings et al showed the relative
risk of cataracts was increased by inhaled corticosteroids.24 the
torch study, in a very limited subset of patients, showed no
increase in cataract risk.19 overall the data on cataracts is too
limited to determine if there is an increased risk or not and there
is no data to indicate that there are differences between different
inhaled corticosteroids.
with regard to other potential side effects such as weight
gain, hypertension and diabetes, there is really little evidence for
this in adults and no evidence of differences between different
inhaled corticosteroids. with regard to infection risk, there is no
evidence in asthmatic individuals of an increased risk of infection;
however, somewhat surprisingly, in the torch study there was
an increase in physician-reported pneumonia.19 this may be
because there is chronic bronchial sepsis in 30-40% of copd
patients. there is again no evidence of differences between
different inhaled corticosteroids. small observational studies show
no evidence of an increased risk of reactivation of tuberculosis,
and again there is no evidence of a difference between different
inhaled corticosteroids.25
the major concern in paediatric practice is the potential for
inhaled corticosteroids to cause growth suppression. short term
studies using knemometry, a technique which very accurately
measures the growth of the lower leg, has shown effects with fp
above 200 mcg/day and budesonide above 400 mcg/day.26 longer
term studies of the effects of inhaled corticosteroids on growth are
complicated by the fact that asthma itself can decrease growth,
particularly if it is poorly controlled.27 in longer term studies over
several years, a small effect on growth is seen in the first year with
the effect diminishing over time. in the camp study, budesonide
200 mcg/day over a 4-6 year time period caused a 1.1 cm decrease
in growth compared to placebo; however, this group of children
had very mild asthma.28 in the start study, budesonide 200
mcg/day over a three-year period caused a 1.34 cm decrease in
growth in the first year but this diminished to only 0.33 cm by the
third year.29 sorkness et al showed no effect of fluticasone 200
mcg/day on growth.30 ferguson et al compared fluticasone 200
mcg/day with budesonide 400 mcg/day; they showed equivalent

primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org

152

copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
the properties of inhaled corticosteroids: similarities and differences

asthma control but growth was 0.9 cm per year less with
budesonide than with fluticasone.31 the data would suggest that
budesonide and bdp cause growth suppression at doses above
400 mcg/day and fluticasone above 200 mcg/day. data on
 xxxd1690xxx  is limited but at a dose of 160 mcg/day no effect on
cortisol was seen in a paediatric study.32 the basic pharmacology
of  xxxd1690xxx  would suggest that it may have less growth
suppressant effect, but this needs to be confirmed in larger longterm studies and at higher doses.

cfc-free inhalers
chlorofluorocarbon (cfc) propellant inhalers may have different
particle size characteristics to cfc-free inhalers. this does not
seem to be a problem with fluticasone, where the cfc and
hydrofluoroalkane (hfa) preparations have similar efficacy and
side effects. however, for bdp, one cfc-free preparation has a
smaller particle size, thereby increasing the deposition of the drug
in the lung and the propensity for absorption from the alveoli, and
at the same microgramme doses there is evidence of an increase
in systemic side effects.33 although there is a theoretical argument
that deposition of particles in smaller airways may be beneficial
there is little hard clinical evidence to support this notion.

conclusion
inhaled corticosteroids are the most important treatment for
asthma. there is little evidence for any difference in clinical
efficacy between the different inhaled steroids. the main
potential difference between inhaled steroids is in their
propensity to cause local and systemic side effects. there is some
limited evidence that  xxxd1690xxx  may cause less local side effects.
in adults, there is little evidence for any systemic side effects at
doses below 800mcg/day bdp equivalent. in children, there is
little evidence for reduction in long-term growth at normal
licensed doses. the properties of  xxxd1690xxx  would suggest that
it has less propensity for systemic side effects, but large longterm studies are needed to confirm this.

novel corticosteroid for the treatment of asthma. j pharmacol exp ther 2005;
314:568-74.
6.

adams n, bestall jm, lasserson tj, jones pw. fluticasone versus
beclomethasone or budesonide for chronic asthma in adults and children. the
cochrane library (issn 1464-780x).

7.

kalliner ma. pharmacological characteristics and adrenal suppression with
newer inhaled corticosteroids: a comparison of  xxxd1690xxx  and fluticasone
propionate. clin ther 2006;28:319-31.

8.

brutsche mh, brutsche ic, munawar m et al. a comparison of
pharmacokinetics and systemic effects of inhaled fluticasone a propionate in
patients with asthma and healthy volunteers: a randomised crossover study.
lancet 2000;356:556-61.

9.

harrison tw, wisniewski a, honour j, tattersfield ae. comparison of the
systemic effects of  xxxd2145xxx  and budesonide given by dry powder
inhaler in healthy and asthmatic subjects. thorax 2001;56:186-91.

10. harrison tw, tattersfield ae. plasma concentration of  xxxd2145xxx 
and budesonide following inhalation from dry powder inhalers by healthy and
asthmatic subjects. thorax 2003;58:258-60.
11. nave r, gunawardena ka, zech k, bethke td. pharmacokinetic disposition of
inhaled  xxxd1690xxx  and its metabolite desisobutyryl- xxxd1690xxx  in healthy subjects
and patients with asthma are similar. int j clin pharmacol ther 2006;44:1-7.
12. todd gr, acerini cl, ross-russell r, zahra s, warner jt. survey of adrenal crisis
associated with inhaled corticosteroids in the united kingdom. arch dis child
2002;87:457-61.
13. mortimer kj, tata lj, smith cj et al. oral and inhaled corticosteroids and
adrenal insufficiency: a case-control study. thorax 2006;61:405-08.
14. weinbrenner a, huneke d, zschiesche m et al. circadian rhythm of serum
cortisol after repeated inhalation of the new topical steroid  xxxd1690xxx . j clin
endocrinol metab 2002;87:2160-3.
15. pauwels ra, lofdahl cg, laitinen la et al. long-term treatment with inhaled
budesonide in persons with mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who
continue smoking. european respiratory society study on chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. n engl j med 1999;340:1948-53.
16. lung health study research group. effect of inhaled triamcinolone on the
decline in pulmonary function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. n engl
j med 2000;343:1902-09.
17. scanlon, pd. connett je, wise ra et al and the lung health research group.
loss of bone density with inhaled triamcinolone in lung health study ii. am j
respir crit care med 2004;170:1302-09.
18. jones a, fay jk, burr m, stone m, hood k, roberts g. inhaled corticosteroid
effects on bone metabolism in asthma and mild chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. the cochrane library (issn 1464-780x).
19. calverley pm, anderson ja, celli b et al; torch investigators. salmeterol and

conflict of interest declaration
the author has lectured for or received consulting fees from glaxosmithkline,
astrazeneca, altana, merck, generics and teva. he has received research funding
from glaxosmithkline and astrazeneca which has gone into departmental funds.

 xxxd2145xxx  and survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. n
engl j med 2007;356:775-89.
20. wong ca, walsh lj, smith cj et al. inhaled corticosteroids use and bonemineral density in patients with asthma. lancet 2000;355:1399-403.

neither he nor his family own shares in any pharmaceutical company.

21. hubbard r, tattersfield a, smith c, west j, smeeth l, fletcher a. use of inhaled

references

22. suissa s, baltzan m, kremer r, ernst p. inhaled and nasal corticosteroid use and

corticosteroids and the risk of bone fracture. chest 2006;130:1082-8.
1.

british thoracic society, scottish intercollegiate guidelines network. british
guideline for management of asthma. thorax 2003;58(suppl 1):1-94.

2.

global initiative for asthma (gina). global strategy for asthma management
and prevention: nhlbi/who workshop report. bethesda: national institutes of
health, national heart, lung and blood institute, 2002. publication no. 02-3659.

3.

suissa s, ernst p, kezouh a. regular use of inhaled coritcosteroids and the long
term prevention of hospitalisation for asthma. thorax 2002;57:880-4.

4.

ernst p, spritzer wd, suissa s et al. risk of fatal and near fatal asthma in relation
to inhaled corticosteroid use. jama 1992;268:3462-4.

5.

belvisi mg, bundschuh ds, stoeck m, et al. preclinical profile of  xxxd1690xxx , a

primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org

the risk of fracture. am j respir crit care med 2004;169:83-6.
23. simons fer, persuad mp, gillespie ca, cheang m, shuckett ep. absence of
posterior subcapsular cataracts in young patients treated with inhaled
glucorticosteroids. lancet 1993;342:776-8.
24. cumming rg, mitchell p, leeder sr. use of inhaled corticosteroids and the risk
of cataracts. n engl j med 1997;337:8-14.
25. bahceclier nn, nuhoglu y, nursoy ma, kodalli n, barlan ib, basaran mm.
inhaled corticosteroid therapy is safe in tuberculin-positive asthmatic children.
pediatr infect dis j 2000;19:215-18.
26. agertoft l, pederson s. short-term knemometry and urine cortisol excretion in

153

copyright gpiag - reproduction prohibited
nc barnes

children treated with  xxxd2145xxx  and budesonide: a close-response

institute. j allergy clin immunol 2007;119:64-72.
31. ferguson ac, van bever ho, teper am, lasytsya o, goldfrad ch, whitehead

study. eur resp j 1997;10:1507-12.
27. balfour-lynn l. growth and childhood asthma. arch dis child 1986;61:1049-55.

pj. a comparison of the relative growth velocities with budesonide and

28. the childhood asthma management program research group. long-term

 xxxd2145xxx  in children with asthma. respir med 2007;101:118-29.

effects of budesonide or nedocromil in children with asthma. n engl j med

32. pedersen s, garcia-garcia ml, manjra a, theron i, engelstatter r. a comparative

2000;343:1054-63.

study of inhaled  xxxd1690xxx  160 microg/day and  xxxd2145xxx  176

29. pauwels ra, pedersen s, busse ww et al, start investigators group. early
intervention with budesonide in mild persistent asthma: a randomised, doubleblind trial. lancet 2003;361:1071-6.

microg/day in children with asthma. pediatr pulmonol 2006;41:954-61.
33. lipworth bj, jackson cm. pharmacokinetics of chlorofluorocarbon and
hydrofluoroalkane metered-dose inhaler formulations of beclamethasone

30. sorkness ca, lemanske rf jr, mauger dt, et al; the childhood asthma

dipropionate. br j clin pharmacol 1999;48:866-8.

research and education network of the national heart, lung, and blood

available online at http://www.thepcrj.org

primary care respiratory journal
www.thepcrj.org

154

