update

trends in pharmacological sciences

vol.28 no.7

research focus

cox-2 in play at the aha and the fda
garret a. fitzgerald
institute for translational medicine and therapeutics, 153 johnson pavilion, school of medicine, hamilton walk, university of
pennsylvania, pa 19104, usa

the inhibition of cyclooxygenase (cox)-2 confers a small
but absolute risk of cardiovascular events on patients
taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids).
this risk has been established by placebo-controlled
trials of nsaids selective for cox-2; traditional nsaids
seem to be heterogeneous with respect to cardiovascular risk. the american heart association (aha) has proposed a ‘stepped-care’ approach to the use of nsaids in
patients with cardiovascular disease, whereas the food
and drug administration (fda) has failed to approve
the cox-2-selective nsaid  xxxd2069xxx . in this article,
these actions of the aha and the fda are interpreted
in the light of current knowledge, prompting the formulation of scientific questions that might be addressed.

introduction
placebo-controlled trials have established that selective
inhibitors of cyclooxygenase (cox)-2 (e.g. rofecoxib,  xxxd3481xxx  and celecoxib) confer a small but absolute cardiovascular hazard [1]. recently, the american heart association
(aha: http://www.americanheart.org/) has proposed a
‘stepped-care’ approach to the treatment of patients
with concurrent arthritis and heart disease [2], and the
food and drug administration (fda: http://www.fda.gov/)
has considered for market approval another selective
inhibitor of cox-2,  xxxd2069xxx  (http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
a61696a4-f4db-11db-b748-000b5df10621.html). here,
these recommendations are considered in the light of
existing knowledge about the newer specific inhibitors of
cox-2 and the older, traditional (t) nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids).
mechanistic considerations
evidence from studies of drug action in humans,
proof-of-principal studies in rodent models, observational
studies and randomized, placebo-controlled trials is
remarkably congruent with the hypothesis that the cardiovascular hazard from nsaids (tnsaids and selective
inhibitors of cox-2) results, in the first instance, from
suppression of cox-2-derived prostacyclin (pgi2) and, to
some degree, pge2 [1] (figure 1). all nsaids inhibit coxdependent prostaglandin formation but display a wide
range of isoform selectivity for cox-2 – with the coxibs
at one end of the spectrum and tnsaids such as naproxen
and ibuprofen at the other end [1,3]. pgi2 acts as a
restraint on endogenous stimuli that promote thrombosis,
corresponding author: fitzgerald, g.a. (garret@spirit.gcrc.upenn.edu).
available online 18 june 2007.
www.sciencedirect.com

hypertension, atherogenesis and cardiac damage in vivo
[1]. among these stimuli is the platelet cox-1 product
thromboxane (tx)a2. however, this is not a simple ‘balance’ but, rather, reflects components of an intricate biological system or network of many mediators [1]. thus,
suppression of platelet txa2 by low-dose aspirin would be
expected to attenuate, rather than abolish, a cardiovascular hazard conferred via this mechanism [4].
information from randomized comparisons of nsaids
is also consistent with this mechanism (figure 2). when
the comparison spans a wide breadth of cox selectivity, a
significant divergence is observed among the most clinically important end-points – thrombotic cardiovascular
events such as myocardial infarction and stroke – and
complicated upper-gastrointestinal (gi) events such as
serious gi bleeds. this is true of the comparison between
rofecoxib and naproxen in the vioxx gastrointestinal
outcomes research (vigor) trial and in the overview of
phase ii and iii comparisons of  xxxd2069xxx  and naproxen (http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/07/briefing/
2007-4290b1-02-merck.pdf). a similar tendency (40 versus
27 myocardial infarctions, strokes or cardiovascular
deaths) is evident in the comparison of  xxxd2517xxx  and
naproxen in the underpowered therapeutic arthritis
research and gastrointestinal event trial (target)
study [5].
comparison across a narrower spectrum of selectivity
for cox-2, as in the comparison of diclofenac with  xxxd2069xxx  in the multinational  xxxd2069xxx  and diclofenac
arthritis long-term (medal) program [6], fails to detect
a significant difference in either thrombotic events or
complicated gi events. instead, a distinction is apparent
in less-pronounced phenotypes of cardiovascular and gi
dysfunction: for  xxxd2069xxx , more heart failure, hypertension and discontinuations for cardiovascular cause, and for
diclofenac more uncomplicated gi events and resultant
drug discontinuations. hepatic dysfunction and resultant
discontinuation were also more common with diclofenac
than with  xxxd2069xxx  [6], although the relationship between
this and cox inhibition is unclear; it might represent an
‘off-target’ effect of this particular nsaid. the tnsaid
diclofenac exhibits selectivity for cox-2 that resembles
that of celecoxib, and epidemiological evidence is consistent with the likelihood that diclofenac also confers a cardiovascular risk [1,3]. when the spectrum of selectivity is
narrow – particularly when the selected population is at
low risk for cardiovascular events, as in the celecoxib
long-term arthritis safety study (class) investigation
– no difference in either gi or cardiovascular events is
detected among the comparators (figure 2).

0165-6147/$ – see front matter ß 2007 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tips.2007.05.007

304

update

trends in pharmacological sciences

vol.28 no.7

figure 1.  xxxd208xxx  (aa) is mobilized for release from the phospholipid domain of cell membranes by nonspecific stimuli that activate phospholipases. such
phospholipases include a cytosolic  xxxg1759xxx  with high affinity for this substrate. aa is then subjected to metabolism by lipoxygenases (loxs) to catalyze the
formation of leukotrienes and related compounds, by p450 isozymes to form epoxyeicosatrienoic acids and by prostaglandin g/h synthases to form prostaglandins. cox
products are acted on to form prostaglandins and thromboxane, which ligate prostanoid receptors (e.g. i prostanoid receptor: ip) to evoke a wide array of contrasting
biological effects.

the cardiovascular hazard from these drugs comprises
myocardial infarction, stroke, hypertension and congestive
heart failure. an overview of data derived from these trials
indicates that myocardial infarction predominates over
stroke and that the hazard for myocardial infarction is
similar among inhibitors – rofecoxib and celecoxib – that
differ in their degree of selectivity for cox-2 [7]: a result in
keeping with the medal program [6]. mechanistically, this
is explicable with respect to the differential impact of these
drugs on platelet cox-1-derived txa2. given the nonlinear
relationship between inhibition of the capacity of platelets to
generate txa2 and inhibition of platelet activation in vivo,
even drugs such as celecoxib and diclofenac – which inhibit
platelet cox-1 to a modest degree (20–30%), transiently
during the dosing interval – would be expected to leave
platelet function unaffected, as do rofecoxib,  xxxd3481xxx  and
 xxxd2069xxx  [1]. apart from the special case of platelets, the
relationship between inhibition of prostaglandin formation
www.sciencedirect.com

and prostaglandin-dependent function seems to be
approximately linear in other cell types [4].
the implication of these observations is that control of
blood pressure alone might be expected to have a minor role
in limiting the cardiovascular hazard that results from inhibiting cox-2. although low-dose aspirin would be expected
to attenuate, but not abolish, the thrombotic hazard [4],
there is little clinical evidence pertaining to this issue,
despite the available data being consistent with this likelihood [1,5]. however, epidemiological evidence is consistent
with the concomitant administration of aspirin undermining
the differential gi benefit that might derive from selecting
an nsaid that is selective for inhibiting cox-2 [8].
the likelihood of a cardiovascular hazard is
fundamentally related to drug exposure. thus, the dose
administered, the disposition of the drugs involved and the
inter-individual variability in such variables are crucial for
cardiovascular risk at the individual level [1,9,10]. in this

update

trends in pharmacological sciences

vol.28 no.7

305

figure 2. increasing degrees of selectivity for cox-2 are associated with augmented cardiovascular (cv) risk, whereas increasing degrees of selectivity for cox-1 are
associated with augmented gi risk. the relative size of the circles indicates the variation in sample sizes among the trials. the average selectivity for each drug is presented,
ranging from drugs that are highly selective for inhibition of cox-2 (e.g.  xxxd2069xxx ) to those that are more selective for cox-1 (e.g. naproxen). given the interindividual
variability in response to these drugs [13], selectivity is a continuous variable at the individual level. etoriover refers to the overview of phase ii and phase iii trials of
 xxxd2069xxx .

regard, the doses selected for use in randomized trials often
exceed those used most commonly in clinical practice. this,
together with the likelihood of enhanced compliance in a
trial, might undermine the extrapolation of risk estimates
from trial data to clinical practice.

recommendations from the aha
the stepped-care approach recommended by the aha is
illustrated in figure 3. the guidelines ‘above the line’
recommend the short-term use of aspirin, acetaminophen,
non-acetylated salicylates, the synthetic opioid tramadol

figure 3. ‘stepped-care’ approach to the management of musculoskeletal symptoms. shown is the approach recommended by the aha [2]. it has been suggested that, in
patients with known cardiovascular disease or those at risk of ischemic heart disease, clinicians should use a stepped-care approach to pharmacological therapy – focusing
on agents with the lowest reported risk of cardiovascular events – and then progress towards other agents, with consideration of the risk–benefit balance at each step. it was
indicated that, ‘once the decision is made to prescribe an nsaid (below the horizontal line), additional considerations assume importance, as illustrated by the
recommendations at the bottom left and right of the diagram’ [2]. however, several drugs ‘above the line’ – aspirin, acetaminophen and salicylates – also inhibit cox
enzymes. abbreviations: asa,  xxxd234xxx  (aspirin); ppi, proton-pump inhibitor. reproduced, with permission, from ref. [2].
www.sciencedirect.com

306

update

trends in pharmacological sciences

and (other) narcotic analgesics. perhaps here coincides the
greatest area of controversy with the greatest dearth of
relevant evidence. for example, there is little randomized
evidence – particularly among these cox inhibitors and
the opioids – on which to base a choice of drug with respect
to either efficacy or unwanted effects. long-term studies of
opioids have not been performed, so there is not even
indirect information regarding their comparative efficacy
and tolerance under chronic-dosing conditions. the limitations of tramadol have been highlighted recently [11]. few
appreciate that 1-g acetaminophen, the commonest daily
dosage in the usa, inhibits both cox-1 and cox-2 by
50% [12] and that, at daily doses >2 g, its gi profile
resembles that of tnsaids [13].
indirect comparisons of randomized trials indicate that
increasing the dose of aspirin might undermine its cardioprotection [14]. however, there are no controlled direct
comparisons to address this hypothesis or, indeed, the
prevalent notion that serious gi adverse effects are more
common with high doses of aspirin than with equi-efficacious doses of tnsaids, although epidemiological observations are compatible with this possibility [15].
‘below the line’ in figure 3, there is more information
and less controversy. given the cardiovascular hazard
established for selective cox-2 inhibitors in placebo-controlled trials, it would seem reasonable to view them as the
last-choice nsaids for patients with established cardiovascular disease, which itself predisposes to cardiovascular complications from cox-2 inhibitors [1].
the older tnsaids are mechanistically heterogeneous
with respect to cardiovascular risk [1,3]. whereas diclofenac and, perhaps,  xxxd2561xxx  have a similar selectivity to
celecoxib for cox-2 and should be avoided in patients with
established cardiovascular disease, the human pharmacology of naproxen raises the possibility that it could be
cardioprotective because of sustained inhibition of platelet
cox-1 in some individuals [1,3]. this is consistent with
evidence of its weak protective or neutral effect in many,
but not all [1,15], epidemiological studies. the overview
analysis of kearney et al. suggests that it is neutral [7].
drugs such as naproxen at the cox-1 end of the spectrum
would be expected to confer relatively greater gi hazard
and, indeed, there are epidemiological data consistent with
this [16]. there is less clinical information on ibuprofen
than on naproxen or diclofenac, although the pharmacology of ibuprofen indicates that it might be neutral or
weakly harmful [1]. thus, a priority for public health is to
establish whether there is a difference with respect to
cardiovascular risk between naproxen and ibuprofen in
patients with established cardiovascular disease. a problem is that both drugs might undermine the cardioprotective effects of low-dose aspirin [12,17], which confounds
the interpretation of the prospective randomized evaluation of celecoxib integrated safety versus ibuprofen or
naproxen (precision) trial [18].
the advice to monitor for adverse effects and to reduce
drug exposure as much as possible while sustaining efficacy is logical. however, given the marked variation
among individuals in response to these drugs [9], limitation of drug exposure would reduce hazard in a population
but would not necessarily avoid it at the individual level.
www.sciencedirect.com

vol.28 no.7

 xxxd2069xxx  at the fda
the recommendation (by 20:1) by the fda advisory
panel not to approve  xxxd2069xxx  (http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
a61696a4-f4db-11db-b748-000b5df10621.html) is in contrast to an earlier recommendation to reintroduce rofecoxib after its withdrawal and to maintain  xxxd3481xxx  and
celecoxib on the market despite unanimous votes that all
three drugs confer a cardiovascular hazard [1]. this
reflects a direction from the fda to the advisory panel
before the meeting that the approval of new drugs now
requires the identification of a benefit that is distinct
from that already demonstrated for previously approved
drugs in the class (http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/
07/briefing/2007-4290b1-01-fda.pdf). clearly, the current
data regarding  xxxd2069xxx  do not meet this standard [6],
and the subsequent failure by the agency to approve
the drug followed the recommendation of the advisory
panel (http://www.ft.com/cms/s/a61696a4-f4db-11dbb748-000b5df10621.html). however, application of similar
logic would lead to the withdrawal of celecoxib, diclofenac
and, perhaps,  xxxd2561xxx  from the market. diclofenac confers an identical risk of thrombotic events to that conferred
by  xxxd2069xxx , with no evidence of incremental benefit, and –
although evidence from controlled trials has established
that celecoxib is associated with a cardiovascular hazard –
long-term treatment in the class investigation failed to
support any gi advantage for celecoxib over tnsaids.
 xxxd2561xxx  resembles both celecoxib and diclofenac in
terms of its selectivity for inhibiting cox-2 [1].
if this logic were pursued, it would substantially limit
patient choice among the nsaids and would increase the
divergence in this area between the fda and other regulatory agencies, including the european agency for the
evaluation of medicine products (emea: http://www.
emea.europa.eu/). however, the dearth of investment in
the science that is required to define individual markers of
susceptibility to benefit and to hazard from nsaids leaves
the agency and its advisors with a hobson’s choice: drug
withdrawal or ‘black box’ warnings that are difficult to
quantify and are often ignored.
concluding remarks
we are trying to solve a problem with a sledgehammer
when a scalpel would be best.
ideally, the fda would be empowered to require of
sponsors that they invest in studies to address pertinent
questions.
(i) do patients differ in their response to distinct
nsaids and, if so, why?
(ii) do patients at low cardiovascular risk undergo risk
transformation during extended dosing with nsaids
that are selective for cox-2? this is mechanistically
plausible and consistent with the outcome of placebocontrolled trials of rofecoxib and celecoxib.
(iii) if this occurs, are there genetic, pharmacokinetic,
biochemical and/or physiological responses that
identify patients at emerging risk?
(iv) is there a difference in the cardiovascular hazard
conferred by naproxen compared with that conferred
by ibuprofen in low-risk populations not using
aspirin?

update

trends in pharmacological sciences

(v) is there a difference in the cardiovascular hazard
conferred by naproxen compared with that conferred
by ibuprofen in high-risk populations? this might be
assessed using a  xxxg1645xxx  antagonist to avoid a potential
interaction with aspirin [1].
(vi) cox-2-selective drugs do not interact to undermine
the cardioprotective effects of low-dose aspirin [9].
to what extent can aspirin and antihypertensive
therapy mitigate the cardiovascular risk from these
drugs at the individual level and how will this affect
the overall risk–benefit situation of a drug?
experience with cox-2 continues to highlight the
limitations of approaches to both the detection and the
mitigation of hazards that complicate drug use in what
might be a small fraction of a patient population likely to
benefit. it draws attention to the need for regulatory
agencies to be empowered and financed to undertake
scientific investigation in collaboration with, but also independently of, sponsors in the pursuit of knowledge.
thereby, strategies could be refined to identify patients
at risk, while conserving the benefits of novel and established therapeutic entities.
acknowledgements
many thanks to tilo grosser for suggestions during the preparation of this
manuscript. i am supported by grants (rr 0233567, hl 81012, hl62250,
hl083799 and hl 62250) from the national institutes of health.

disclosure statement
during the past year, i have received compensation for consulting from
genentech, merck*, novartis, decode*, bayery, lilly*, beckman, astra
zeneca* and the genome institute of the novartis foundation*. i have
received payment from nicoxy for serving on its scientific advisory board
and from logical therapeuticsy for a series of consultations. i receive direct
support for investigator-initiated research from two industry sources:
mercky (part of the payment relates to studies regarding coxs) and
ingelheim. i (and my spouse) hold no stock, do not belong to speaker
panels and am uninvolved in the litigation relating to cox inhibitors.

references
1 grosser, t. et al. (2006) biological basis for the cardiovascular
consequences of cox-2 inhibition: therapeutic challenges and
opportunities. j. clin. invest. 116, 4–15
2 antman, e.m. et al. (2007) use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs:
an update for clinicians: a science advisory from the american heart
association. circulation 115, 1634–1642

*
y

these consultations relate to eicosanoid-related targets other than cox.
these consultations relate to cox inhibitors.

www.sciencedirect.com

vol.28 no.7

307

3 capone, m.l. et al. (2007) pharmacodynamics of cyclooxygenase
inhibitors in humans. prostaglandins other lipid mediat. 82, 85–94
4 cheng, y. et al. (2006) cyclooxygenases, microsomal  xxxd1903xxx 
synthase-1, and cardiovascular function. j. clin. invest. 116, 1391–
1399
5 schnitzer, t.j. et al. (2004) comparison of  xxxd2517xxx  with naproxen
and ibuprofen in the therapeutic arthritis research and gastrointestinal event trial (target), reduction in ulcer complications:
randomised controlled trial. lancet 364, 665–674
6 cannon, c.p. et al. (2006) cardiovascular outcomes with  xxxd2069xxx  and
diclofenac in patients with osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis in
the multinational  xxxd2069xxx  and diclofenac arthritis long-term
(medal) programme: a randomised comparison. lancet 368, 1771–
1781
7 kearney, p.m. et al. (2006) do selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors
and traditional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs increase the
risk of atherothrombosis? meta-analysis of randomised trials. bmj
332, 1302–1308
8 garcia rodriguez, l.a. and barreales tolosa, l. (2007) risk of upper
gastrointestinal complications among users of traditional nsaids and
coxibs in the general population. gastroenterology 132, 498–506
9 fries, s. et al. (2006) marked interindividual variability in the
response to selective inhibitors of  xxxg1884xxx . gastroenterology
130, 55–64
10 hinz, b. et al. (2006) more pronounced inhibition of  xxxg1884xxx ,
increase in blood pressure, and reduction of heart rate by treatment
with diclofenac compared with celecoxib and rofecoxib. arthritis
rheum. 54, 282–291
11 cepeda, m.s. et al. (2007) tramadol for osteoarthritis: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. j. rheumatol. 34, 543–555
12 catella-lawson, f. et al. (2001) cyclooxygenase inhibitors and the
antiplatelet effects of aspirin. n. engl. j. med. 345, 1809–1817
13 garcia rodriguez, l.a. and hernandez diaz, s. (2001) relative risk of
upper gastrointestinal complications among users of acetaminophen
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. epidemiology 12, 570–576
14 antithrombotic triallists’ collaboration (2002) collaborative metaanalysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention
of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. bmj
324, 71–86
15 lanas, a. et al. (2006) risk of upper gastrointestinal ulcer bleeding
associated with selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors, traditional nonaspirin non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aspirin and combinations. gut 55, 1731–1738
16 rahme, e. and nedjar, h. (2007) risks and benefits of cox-2 inhibitors
vs non-selective nsaids: does their cardiovascular risk exceed their
gastrointestinal benefit? a retrospective cohort study. rheumatology
(oxford) 46, 435–438
17 capone, m.l. et al. (2005) pharmacodynamic interaction of naproxen
with low-dose aspirin in healthy subjects. j. am. coll. cardiol. 45,
1295–1301
18 couzin, j. (2005) massive trial of celebrex seeks to settle safety
concerns. science 310, 1890–1891

