protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245
www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep

classical ligands interact with native and recombinant tubulin from
onchocerca volvulus with similar rank order of magnitude
eddie m. wampande a, j. richard mcintosh b, george w. lubega
a

a,*

department of parasitology and microbiology, faculty of veterinary medicine, makerere university p.o. box 7062, kampala, uganda
b
department of molecular, cellular and developmental biology, university of colorado, boulder 80309-0347, usa
received 13 september 2006, and in revised form 4 march 2007
available online 25 april 2007

abstract
the a- and b-tubulin genes from onchocerca volvulus were individually expressed for the ﬁrst time in escherichia coli (dh5a). the
recombinant tubulins were puriﬁed, renatured and reconstituted into oligomers, probably dimers, which were competent to bind three
classical tubulin ligands: mebendazole (mbz), taxol (tax) and vinblastine (vbn). a new charcoal-dependent binding assay allowed
accurate discrimination between speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc ligand binding in crude cell extracts. to compare the magnitude of binding
of both native and recombinant forms of tubulin, we developed an elisa assay for estimating the amount of tubulin in soluble protein
extracts of o. volvulus. binding assays were performed; both the maximum binding at saturating ligand concentrations (bmax) and the
equilibrium dissociation constants (kd) were determined. the bmax values of the diﬀerent ligands were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from one
another (p < 0.05), but the order of the bmax and kd for each drug were vbn > tax > mbz for both native and recombinant tubulin.
indeed, bmax values for mbz with native and recombinant tubulins were similar. on average, native tubulin had higher or similar binding capacity (bmax) but a consistently higher aﬃnity (lower kd) than the recombinant tubulin. we conclude that at least some of the
recombinant molecules form receptors that are similar to those in native tubulin dimers. these data suggest that recombinant tubulin
can be used to develop a molecular screen for novel anti-tubulin ligands to develop into drugs against onchocerciasis.
 2007 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
keywords: recombinant and native tubulin; onchocerca volvulus; classical ligands; binding capacity and binding aﬃnity; tubulin expression

tubulin, a major constituent of microtubules, is present in all eukaryotic cells [1]. genetic and pharmacological perturbations show that tubulin is an essential
protein. although highly conserved, the tubulins of lower
eukaryotes, such as protozoa and helminthes, have diﬀerent sensitivities to microtubule perturbing agents compared to tubulins of higher eukaryotes, such as
mammals [1]. this encourages hope for the development
of novel, selective anti-tubulin chemotherapeutic compounds. classical antimitotic agents, including benzimidazoles (bz),1 vinblastine (vbn), colchicine (clc),
 xxxd2980xxx  (pdn), and taxol (tax) act by binding
*

corresponding author. fax: +256 41 534336.
e-mail address: glubega@imul.com (g.w. lubega).
1
abbreviations used: mbz, mebendazole; tax, taxol; vbn, vinblastine; bz, benzimidazoles; clc, colchicine; pdn,  xxxd2980xxx .
1046-5928/$ - see front matter  2007 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pep.2007.04.011

to tubulin. since tubulin and microtubules exist in a
dynamic equilibrium in vivo, tubulin ligands that interfere
with this equilibrium are commonly lethal, either through
blocking microtubule assembly or by stabilizing existing
polymers. this interference disrupts cell physiology and
blocks cell division [2,3].
existing anti-tubulin drugs are important treatments for
many human and animal diseases. for example, many bzs
are potent fungicides and nematocides. paclitaxel (taxol), a
dipteroid, now plays an important role in cancer chemotherapy, but its toxicity, aqueous insolubility and complex
chemical structure make this line of compounds diﬃcult to
modify for drug development [4,5]. it remains to be seen
whether novel compounds with activities similar to or better than those of existing drugs can be found. understanding the kinetics of tubulin-drug interactions would help to
give an insight into this possibility.

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

237

on the other hand, some anti-tubulin drugs appear to be
useless for the treatment of some parasites. there is no
clear evidence for a vinblastine (vbn)-binding site on helminthes tubulin, and attempts to localize the binding site of
vbn to either a or b subunit of vertebrate tubulin have
achieved only limited success [4,6]. therefore, with this limited information, it seems unlikely that vbn-like ligands
can act as lead compounds in the screening or combinatorial chemistry for development of novel anthelmintics. the
importance of the vbn-binding site is highlighted in this
study.
the anti-tubulin ligands that are widely used as anthelmintics, for instance the bzs, lack clinical signiﬁcance as
macroﬁlaricides [7]. whereas albendazole, a bz, is eﬀective
against lymphatic ﬁlariasis [8], it is ineﬀective against
onchocerciasis. a ﬂubendazole analogue [8] kills adult
onchocerca worms, and might well have been developed
into a commercial drug, but it displays signiﬁcant toxicity
for the host. because this ﬂubendazole analogue is an eﬀective macroﬁlaricide, it has been tempting to look for novel,
tubulin-binding compounds (irrespective of chemical class
or tubulin-binding site) with enhanced selectivity for
macroﬁlaria.
to enhance this drug discovery process, one needs biochemical quantities of an active drug target. it is diﬃcult,
however, to gather onchocerca worms, because the surgical
procedure for obtaining them from patients is expensive
and traumatic, and tubulin abundance within them is limited [9–12]. further, there are no suitable laboratory animal hosts for propagating onchocerca volvulus [13]. the
immediate focus of this study was therefore to determine
whether one could make recombinant tubulin with receptor
characteristics similar to those of native tubulin. our
approach has been to compare the interactions of classical
tubulin ligands with native and recombinant tubulin from
o. volvulus. the long-term objective of this study is to provide knowledge and tools that will help to develop an assay
for identifying novel lead ligands that interact eﬀectively
with onchocerca tubulin and kill the adult parasite without
harming its host. we assume that such novel compounds
should mimic the activity of the classical ligands, though
they could be structurally diﬀerent.
in this paper, we report for the ﬁrst time, the successful
expression of both a- and b-tubulin of o. volvulus in escherichia coli. we ﬁnd that both native and recombinant tubulins rank ligands similarly in terms of bmax and kd and
propose that recombinant tubulin can be useful in the
development of a molecular screen for novel anti-tubulin
chemotherapeutics for onchocerciasis

the plasmids, ptrp2 a or ptrp2 b, were transformed into
dh5a e. coli cells that had been made competent by the
calcium chloride method [16]. positive transformants were
selected on ampicillin agar, and prospective clones were
conﬁrmed to contain the appropriate gene by release of the
insert through restriction digestion or pcr ampliﬁcation.
cells from a colony that carried the insert of interest were
grown to mid-log phase (od600 = 0.8–1.0) at 37 c while
shaking at 200 rpm in 50 ml of lb medium containing
100 lg/ml ampicillin and 200 lg/ml tryptophan (to repress
the promoter activity). to induce expression, the grown cells
were diluted 40-fold with m9 medium lacking tryptophan
but containing 100 lg/ml ampicillin, 4 g/l glucose, 2 mm
 xxxd2534xxx  and incubated for 2 h at 37 c. fifty micrograms
per milliliter ﬁnal concentration of 3 b-indole acrylic acid
was then added to further enhance protein expression, and
the culture was incubated at 30 c for a further 16 h.

materials and methods

puriﬁcation and solubilisation of the inclusion bodies
containing the expressed tubulin

enzymes used
restriction endonucleases and t4 dna ligases were
purchased from amersham. the pcr kit was purchased

from invitrogen. the enzyme reaction conditions were as
recommended by the supplier.
onchocerca volvulus a- and b-tubulin cdnas
the a-tubulin cdna was cloned during the course of
this study (genbank accession no. dq010542). the btubulin cdna was obtained courtesy of t. geary [14].
the cdna’s were sub-cloned and expressed as outlined
in the subsequent paragraphs.
construction of ptrp2 a or ptrp2 b recombinant plasmids
to introduce the appropriate restriction sites the inserts
were regenerated by pcr using a-tubulin or b-tubulin
cdnas of o. volvulus as templates and modiﬁed complementary primers (for a-tubulin: forward primer: 5 0 taa atc gat  xxxg873xxx  cga ggt gat atc agt
aca-3 0 and reverse: 5 0 -taa gga tcc tca ata
ctc ctc gcc ttc gcc-3 0 ; for b-tubulin: forward primer: 5 0 -taa atc gat gag aga aat tgt tca
tgt tca agc-3 0 , reverse primer: 5 0 -tta gga tcc
tta ctc ttc ctg ttc aat gta ttc c-3 0 ) that
included clai (forward primers) and bamhi (reverse
primers) restriction sites. the pcr products were cut with
clai and bamhi, puriﬁed by agarose gel electrophoresis,
and ligated with the ptrp2 vector [15], which had been similarly digested and puriﬁed, to produce recombinant plasmids ptrp2 a and ptrp2 b, respectively.
transformation of e. coli and induction of tubulin expression

both a- and b-tubulin were expressed in inclusion bodies,
which were solubilised in alkaline urea, then puriﬁed and
concentrated utilizing amicon cones as described [17–19].
the concentrate was ﬁnally dialyzed for 6–8 h at 4 c against

238

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

pem buﬀer (0.1 m pipes, 2 mm  xxxd2534xxx , and 1 mm egta)
containing 10% glycerol, 1 mm pmsf, and 2 mm gtp. the
dialyzed sample was centrifuged at 12,000g and 4 c for
30 min to remove aggregated tubulin, and the protein concentration of the supernatant phase was determined by the
method of bradford [20], using bsa as standard. to characterize the expressed proteins sds–page and western blot
analyses were done as described in [17].
reconstitution of recombinant a- and b-tubulin monomer
into heterodimer
reconstitution of the expressed tubulin monomers into
a/b hetero-oligomers (the preparation probably contained
both heterodimers and hetero-oligomers of higher order)
was initiated by mixing equal amounts of recombinant aand b-tubulin in pem buﬀer containing 2 mm gtp, 5%
glycerol, and 20 mm  xxxd302xxx  hydrochloride (protease
inhibitor), then incubating at 37 c for 1 h to allow the tubulins to form microtubule or microtubule-related structures. the sample was later transferred onto ice, cacl2
added (2 mm ﬁnal concentration), and incubation continued for a further 1 h. this allowed the tubulin protein to
disassemble yielding a soluble form of the tubulin, which
was used in the drug-binding studies. the fact that this
tubulin contained hetero-oligomers of both a- and b-tubulin was demonstrated by the immunoprecipitation kit
(amersherm) and western blot (see results).
preparation of o. volvulus soluble protein extracts and antitubulin antibodies
nodulectomies were performed on patients with palpable
onchocerca nodules; the worms were extracted from nodules
as described [21], with modiﬁcations for optimal extraction,
and kept frozen for future use. fresh or frozen o. volvulus
adult worms were washed with cold pem buﬀer until they
were visibly clean. the worms were cut into small pieces
and 1.5 volumes of pem buﬀer containing 2 mm pmsf
was added. the mixture was homogenized on ice using a
hand-held polytron homogenizer, using bursts of a few seconds each, until the mixture was homogeneous. the resultant homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 min at
4 c, and the supernatant re-centrifuged at 100,000g for
1 h at 4 c to produce a clear supernatant. the protein content in this supernatant was quantiﬁed and either used immediately or stored at 80 c until needed. in order to reliably
estimate the tubulin content in the supernatant speciﬁc
anti-tubulin antibodies were used in elisa. the speciﬁc
antibodies were raised in rabbits against recombinant
o. volvulus b-tubulin (rabbit anti-b tubulin sera).
determination of o. volvulus tubulin concentration by
elisa
in this assay, known concentrations of recombinant btubulin were used to construct a standard curve from which
the unknowns could be determined by interpolation. two

hundred microliters of a 40 lg/ml solution of poly-l-lysine
(pll) were added to elisa plates (corning) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature to allow the pll to coat
the plates. the pll solution was removed, then 200 ll of
0.2% glutaraldehyde in pbs was added to the wells and
incubated for a further 30 min at room temperature to
immobilize the pll on the plates. this solution was discarded, and the wells washed three times with pbs. then
known concentrations of recombinant b-tubulin (0.4–
5.0 lg/assay) or 10 ll of o. volvulus soluble extract (test
sample) in 200 ll of 0.1 m carbonate buﬀer or 200 ll of
0.1 m protein-free carbonate buﬀer alone (blank or control
wells) were added and incubated overnight at 4 c to allow
coating of the wells with tubulin (the pll selectively binds
tubulin plus other acidic proteins). the solution was then
discarded, and the wells were washed three times with
pbs containing 0.05% tween 20. two hundred microliters
of 5% bsa in pbs were added, and the plates were incubated at room temperature for 1 h to block any non-speciﬁc binding sites. the blocking solution was discarded,
and 100 ll of primary antibody, consisting of the rabbit
antiserum raised against onchocerca b-tubulin, diluted
1:200 in pbs and containing 3% bsa, was added and incubated at 37 c for 1 h. the wells were washed as described
above to remove the unbound antibodies. then 100 ll of
secondary antibody consisting of anti-rabbit, peroxidaseconjugated igg (1:1000 dilution) (amersham) was added
in each well and incubated for a further 1 h at 37 c. after
washing as before, 200 ll of the substrate solution consisting of 5 mm orthophosphate phenyldiamine (opd) substrate (icn biomedical) and 0.04% v/v hydrogen
peroxide in 0.1 m citrate–phosphate (ph 5) buﬀer were
added and incubated for 10 min before the reaction was
stopped with 3 n  xxxd3258xxx . absorbances were measured using an elisa reader (multiskan plus) at 492 nm,
and the net absorbance readings were obtained by subtracting the negative control (column 1) reading from each of
the absorbances obtained from the various wells containing
known amounts of recombinant b-tubulin or unknown
amounts of the test samples. the net absorbance values
were then assembled with their corresponding recombinant
b-tubulin concentrations to generate a standard curve. the
amounts of tubulin in the unknown (test) samples were
estimated by interpolation of their net absorbance values
onto the linear range of the standard curve. for the calculations of binding parameters described below, soluble
tubulin was assumed to be an a–b heterodimer.
drug-binding studies
establishment of optimal binding conditions
various binding situations were investigated in order to
determine the best conditions for the actual binding experiments. these included: conditions for solubilisation of bz
compounds, incubation temperatures of assay components,
assay volumes, order of adding assay components, charcoal concentration for extracting unbound drug, charcoal

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

extraction time and temperature, and the amount of
tubulin per assay. the procedure that produced the strongest and most reproducible binding results was then used
for all the experiments reported here. in this procedure,
the protein samples were ﬁrst incubated on ice for at least
1 h in the presence of 2 mm cacl2, to promote tubulin depolymerization, and in the presence of 20 mm  xxxd302xxx 
hydrochloride to inhibit any proteases that might be
present. the reagents of the binding reaction were then
mixed in a speciﬁc order. first added was 10 ll of either
100% dmso (for the ‘‘total binding,’’ i.e. tb tubes) or
100 lm unlabeled ligand in 100% dmso (‘‘non-speciﬁc
binding,’’ i.e. nsb tubes), followed by 20 ll of [3h] ligand,
and then 70 ll of pem buﬀer containing 1% bsa. samples
were then mixed by vortexing, brieﬂy centrifuged to collect
all the liquid in the tube, and incubated at 37 c for 1 h to
allow equilibration of the contents at this temperature. one
hundred microliter of ice-cold sample buﬀer containing
either 1% bsa (blank) or the protein sample (40 lg/assay
recombinant protein) in binding sample buﬀer were then
added and vortexed, and the tube again brieﬂy centrifuged
to collect the liquid contents, followed by incubation for a
further 30 min at room temperature. the mixing of the
pre-warmed (37 c) and ice-cold samples means that the
incubation (binding assay) was instantly started at room
temperature (18.5–25 c). the binding reaction was terminated by addition of 500 ll of a suspension of activated
charcoal (14 mg/ml) containing 1% bsa, which had been
equilibrated at room temperature with stirring. this mixture was immediately vortexed and centrifuged at 13,000g
for 5 min to sediment the unbound drug (adsorbed on
charcoal). to determine the amount of bound drug,
500 ll of the supernatant were added to 5 ml of scintillation
cocktail, and the amount of radioactivity (dpm) determined using a scintillation counter (beckman, ls 650).
the net drug bound in the assay was determined as
described by [17,22,23].
results
expression of o. volvulus a- or b-tubulin genes in e. coli
an optimized method for puriﬁcation and naturation of
recombinant tubulin was developed and the yield evaluated
(table 1). fig. 1 shows the coomassie blue stained sds–
page (a and b) of total cellular protein extracts from
the uninduced or induced cells or puriﬁed expressed tubulin. similar samples were also processed for immunoblotting fig. 1(c and d) using commercial anti-chicken-a- or
b-tubulin monoclonal antibodies. a prominent protein of
about 50 kda was observed in each case.
determining whether the recombinant tubulin formed heterooligomers
the puriﬁed tubulin monomers were persuaded to
dimerise (form dimer) as described in materials and

239

methods. the putative dimers were immunocomplexed
with either anti-a or anti-b monoclonal antibodies or
buﬀer (control) and immunoprecipitated by complexing
with protein a-coated beads, followed by centrifugation.
pelleted proteins were detected by western blot using
anti-a or anti-b tubulin monoclonal antibodies. both aand b-tubulin antibodies were able to independently pull
down an immunoprecipitate that contained both the target and counterpart subunits, but neither subunit was
immunoprecipitated in the control, where no antibody
was added (data not shown).
evaluation of the presence and speciﬁcity of anti-b tubulin
antibodies in the serum used for estimation of tubulin content
in o. volvulus supernatant
the rabbit immune sera, day 28, recognized recombinant and native b-tubulin from o. volvulus, but it bound
neither o. volvulus a-tubulin nor rat brain tubulin
(fig. 2). the commercial anti-chicken b-tubulin monoclonal antibody, on the other hand, recognized both the parasite and rat brain b-tubulin but not a-tubulin. there were
no antibodies in the pre-immune serum to recognize tubulin in any sample (data not shown).
estimation, from the standard curve of the amount of native
tubulin in o. volvulus crude extracts
a typical saturable standard curve was obtained by
using known amounts of recombinant b-tubulin plotted
against the net absorbance values obtained by elisa,
using a ﬁxed amount of rabbit immune serum containing
anti-b tubulin antibodies (fig. 3). the percentage of tubulin in the soluble extract was approximately 0.8% of the
total soluble protein.
drug-binding studies
optimal drug-binding assay conditions
mebendazole (mbz) and most other benzimidazoles
(bz) are sparingly soluble in water, so these compounds
were initially dissolved in 100% dmso and subsequently
mixed with aqueous solutions, keeping the ﬁnal dmso
concentration at 5% to prevent the drug from precipitating. also, the order of component addition turned out to
be important to ensure that the bz compounds did not
precipitate, so it was always as described in materials
and methods and as indicated in the legend of fig. 4.
it was also important to keep the tubulin sample on
ice to ensure that it remained soluble. on the other hand
bz binds tubulin with high aﬃnity only at temperatures
ranging from room temperature to 37 c. the binding
under cold conditions is of low aﬃnity, but at elevated
temperatures, tubulin assembly might inﬂuence the
binding model. therefore, conditions were devised by
which the temperature of the protein sample was quickly
raised to above room temperature. this allowed

240

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

fig. 1. expression and identiﬁcation of a- and b-tubulin from onchocerca volvulus. coomassie blue stained sds–page (a for a and b for b ) and the
corresponding western blot membranes (c for a and d for b) show the tubulin (see arrow) expressed in e. coli using the ptrp2 vector. transformed e. coli
cells were grown in presence of excess tryptophan (to repress expression) (lane 1) and later induced (lane 2) to express the tubulin (in absence of
tryptophan). the tubulin which was produced in inclusion bodies was puriﬁed and renatured (lane 3). for western blots, commercial anti-chicken a- or btubulin monoclonal antibodies were used.

fig. 2. demonstration of the presence and speciﬁcity of the anti-b tubulin antibodies in the immune serum used to estimate tubulin content in o. volvulus
supernatant. amounts (30 lg) of recombinant a-tubulin (lane 1), o. volvulus crude soluble extract (lane 2), mammalian soluble extract of the brain, (lane 3)
and recombinant b-tubulin, (lane 4) were run on sds–page in triplicates. one gel was stained with coomassie blue (a). the other two gels were
processed for western blot using rabbit anti-b tubulin immune serum (b) or commercial anti-chicken b-tubulin monoclonal antibodies (c).

high-aﬃnity bz-tubulin interaction to begin before
substantial protein assembly could take place (see legend
of fig. 4). this was achieved by making the ﬁnal
incubation volume 200 ll, so that half of this (buﬀer
containing the ligands to be tested) was pre-warmed to
37 c while the other half, which contained the tubulin,
was kept on ice. mixing the two halves instantly
brought the assay temperature to room temperature
(18–25 c).

optimal charcoal extraction conditions were intensively
investigated, because speciﬁc binding (sb) could assume a
negative value for many protein samples, due to erroneous
determination of the background for the nsb assay (data
not shown). particularly investigated was the right concentration of the charcoal that would extract the unbound
ligand(s) from the tb and nsb to the same extent, despite
the presence of a large concentration of the unlabeled drug
in the nsb tubes.

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

40 lg/assay was taken as a suitable concentration and
was used in the subsequent binding experiments. this
was possible provided that the procedure given in the legend of fig. 4 was followed. deﬁning nsb with a ﬁnal concentration of unlabelled ligand higher than 5 lm required
more stringent charcoal conditions to which the tubulin–
ligand complex was not stable (data not shown).

0.3

od (492 nm)

241

0.2

determination of the optimal unlabeled ligand, charcoal, and
recombinant protein concentrations for use in drug-binding
studies
through many trial experiments we determined that the
background radioactivity was about the same in both
assays when the ﬁnal unlabeled ligand and charcoal concentration were 5 lm and p10 mg/ml, respectively, (see
fig. 4i). therefore, a ﬁnal charcoal concentration of
10 mg/ml and a ﬁnal unlabelled ligand concentration of
5 lm were used in all subsequent experiments. under these
conditions a linear plot of protein concentration against
counts was observed for a/b dimer (fig. 4ii). at p40 lg/
assay the binding for the reconstituted dimer was more
than twice the corresponding background tubes, so

interactions of [3h] classical ligands with native or
recombinant tubulin preparations from o. volvulus
the binding aﬃnity (kd) and the number of binding
sites (bmax) of the ligands for various samples were determined from the saturation data presented in fig. 5 using
non-linear regression in graphpad’s prism 4 software
(table 2). when the bmax values for native and recombinant tubulins were compared, vbn and tax registered
signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) higher values for the native than
for the recombinant tubulin, whereas mbz had similar
bmax values for the two types of tubulin samples. on the
other hand all the ligands registered a signiﬁcantly
(p < 0.05) higher aﬃnity (kd 10 times lower) for the native
than for the recombinant tubulin. the bmax values of the
diﬀerent ligands were compared and found to be signiﬁ-

1

3

5

concentration of rbeta-tubulin (mug/assay)

counts in dpm

i

5000

tb assay
nsb assay

2500

0

ii

5000

specific binding

fig. 3. a typical standard curve for estimation of b-tubulin content in o.
volvulus total soluble protein extracts. the standard curve was generated
using net absorbance values of known concentrations (0.4–5.0 lg/assay) of
the recombinant b-tubulin (r-b) obtained by elisa, as described in
materials and methods. the linear range of the curve was used to estimate
tubulin content in the unknown samples.

native and recombinant tubulin from o. volvulus shows
classical ligand-binding behavior
saturation binding was achieved for all ligands within
the range of concentrations used for both native and
recombinant a/b tubulin preparations; the binding tended
to plateau towards the higher concentrations used
(fig. 5). the binding proﬁles of native and recombinant
dimers were similar, with vbn being bound the most
and mbz the least in both types of samples. these data
were subsequently analyzed using graphpad (see table 2).

0.1

2500

0
0

10

20

final charcoal concentration
mg/ml

25

85

protein concentration mug/assay

fig. 4. interaction of [3h] classical ligand with increasing charcoal or recombinant protein concentration. seventy microliters pem buﬀer containing 1%
bsa were added to 10 ll of 100% dmso (tb assay) or 10 ll of 100 lm unlabeled mbz in 100% dmso (nsb assay) and then 20 ll of 10 lm (i) or 2 lm
(ii) of [3h] mbz stock concentrations (speciﬁc activity 1250 dpm/pmol) added in 1.5 ml tubes. the tubes were pre-incubated in replicates for 1 h at 37 c.
then 100 ll of ice-cold buﬀer (i) or recombinant protein (10–100 lg/assay) (ii) was added to appropriate tubes and incubated for a further 30 min at room
temperature. thus, ﬁnal incubation concentrations were 5% dmso, 1 lm (i) or 0.2 lm (ii) [3h] mbz and 5 lm unlabelled mbz. the unbound drug was
removed by addition of 500 ll of (0–40 mg/ml) (i) or 10 mg/ml (ii) ﬁnal charcoal concentration containing 1% (w/v) bsa in pem buﬀer, followed by
immediate vortexing and centrifugation. then 500 ll of the supernatant was removed and added to 5 ml of scintillation liquid and counted in the
scintillation counter. in (i) total counts remaining in tb or nsb after extraction with diﬀerent charcoal concentration were plotted. the optimum charcoal
concentration for equivalent extraction from tb and nsb assay was established as 10 mg/ml and was tested in speciﬁc binding assays at diﬀerent tubulin
concentrations (ii).

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

bound
(pmol/mg protein)

a

native

vbn

b

recombinant

1000

vbn

5000

tax

2500

mbz

bound
(pmol/mg protein)

242

tax
mbz
500

0

0
0

1
[3h] ligand (mum)

0

1

[3h] ligands (mum)

fig. 5. speciﬁc binding of classical ligands to native and recombinant tubulin of o. volvulus. binding conditions and procedure were as described in legend
of fig. 4 or materials and methods using 40 lg of protein per assay of either native or recombinant heterooligomers or buﬀer (background). speciﬁc
activities of [3h] mbz or [3h] tax or [3h] vbn were 1250 dpm/pmol, 416 dpm/pmol and 4170 dpm/pmol, respectively.

cantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05) with rank order being
vbn > tax > mbz for both native and recombinant
tubulin. the diﬀerences were of approximately a factor of
3 in case of native tubulin but were less than 1.5· for
recombinant tubulin. with a given protein type, the binding aﬃnities for the diﬀerent ligands tended to be similar;
even where diﬀerences were observed the aﬃnities diﬀered
by less than a factor of 10).
discussion
in this paper, we report the ﬁrst successful prokaryotic
expression and reconstitution of a- and b-tubulin from o.
volvulus. we have used these proteins to examine the interactions of o. volvulus tubulin with three classical tubulin
ligands of major interest. until now, the comprehensive
study of tubulin from this species has been hampered by
the scarcity of worms and the limited abundance of tubulin
in them [9–11].
both a- and b-tubulin subunits were successfully
expressed in bacteria. these proteins could be at least
partially renatured and persuaded to form hetero-oligomers, as indicated by an immunoprecipitation procedure
(data not shown). to determine whether the reconstituted recombinant tubulin was competent for ligand
binding, a sensitive and reliable binding assay was developed. charcoal extraction has been the procedure of
choice for separating bound drug from free for many
investigators [12,17,24–27]. however this procedure can
be a problem when the determination of a true speciﬁc
binding (sb) is required, because the non-speciﬁc binding
(nsb) assay includes a large excess of total free ligand
(labeled plus unlabelled). this amount is signiﬁcantly
greater than the amount of drug in the total binding
(tb) assay, which contains labelled ligand only. the
background binding in the two types of assays can therefore be so diﬀerent that the background for nsb may be
higher than the tb itself. in such a case no speciﬁc binding (sb) can be determined, because subtracting nsb
from tb would give a negative value. nevertheless,

where tb for a sample is inherently high, as it is in nematode eggs, sb can be calculated, provided the backgrounds for tb and nsb are determined separately for
all the concentrations [12]. however, the risk of misrepresenting sb still remains, and such a procedure would
be cumbersome for high throughput screening. in this
study we determined optimal charcoal conditions for
the even extraction of unbound ligand from tb and
nsb assays. exploration of these conditions suggested
that charcoal acts as a ‘‘pseudo receptor’’ for the drug,
since the unlabeled ligand can displace the labeled ligand
from the charcoal. this situation could raise the radioligand background to a level that depended on the concentration of the unlabeled ligand used. the ﬁnal
concentrations of unlabeled ligand and charcoal that
resulted in even extraction of free ligand from tb and
nsb assay were 5 lm and 10 mg/ml, respectively, so
these were adopted throughout the study. means of
achieving standard optimum temperature and polymerization state of the tubulin for the assay were also devised
(fig. 4). with these conditions speciﬁc binding could be
determined reproducibly.
native tubulin was required to validate the ligand binding by recombinant tubulin. it was, however, impossible to
get enough pure native tubulin from onchocerca for this
purpose [9–13]. fortunately, with the binding procedure
adopted above, it was not necessary to purify the tubulin;
the ligands will bind tubulin speciﬁcally even in crude
extracts [12]. once nsb has been determined accurately,
tubulin binding (i.e. sb) can be derived by subtracting
nsb from tb [12]. this procedure was followed in the current study. however, it was still necessary to know the
amount of tubulin in the crude extracts in order to be able
to state the amount of binding in terms of moles or units of
ligand per unit tubulin. therefore, in each assay the
amount of tubulin was determined using an elisa procedure that was based on anti-recombinant b-tubulin
immune serum raised in rabbits. the amount of tubulin
in onchocerca was estimated at only 0.8% of the total soluble protein in an extract prepared as described in materi-

the soluble form of a- (i) and b-tubulin (ii) expressed in e. coli cells was obtained as described [17–19] and the concentrate further natured by dialysis as described in materials and methods. by sds–
page analysis, the puriﬁed proteins showed molecular size of 50 kda with over 80% purity (see fig. 1a and b) and the yield was over 15 mg for a- and 20 mg for b-tubulin from 2 l of the cultured cells .
this result suggested that the amount of the expressed proteins was approximately 30–40% in total soluble proteins from bacterial cells; hence the expression system can provide large amounts of both
proteins. to conﬁrm the proteins a western blot was performed as described in legend of fig. 1.

42.1
85.3
30.4
25.2
120 ml (fraction ii diluted 20· in naturing buﬀer)
5 ml (fraction iii concentrated 24· through ultra ﬁltration and
dialysis)

93.2
85.2

30–40
42.1
100
93.2
not determined
30.4
10 ml (1 g of pellet per 2 ml of lysis buﬀer)
6 ml (3 g of pellet dissolved in 3 ml of 8 m urea)

(ii) b-tubulin
fraction i (cell pellet from 2 l culture)
fraction ii (pellet of inclusion bodies from 10 ml of
lysate)
fraction iii (urea homogenate)
fraction iv (natured and concentrated tubulin fraction)

31.6
81.1
25.4
20.2
120 ml (fraction ii diluted 20· in naturing buﬀer)
5 ml (fraction iii concentrated 24· through ultra ﬁltration &
dialysis)

88.2
81.1

30–40
31.6
100
88.2
not determined
25.4
10 ml (1 g of pellet per 2 ml of lysis buﬀer)
6 ml (3 g of pellet dissolved in 3 ml of 8 m urea)

total protein yield (% )
total protein (mg)
volume (ml)
step

table 1
puriﬁcation and naturation of o. volvulus a- and b-tubulin proteins expressed in e. coli

(i) a-tubulin
fraction i (cell pellet from a 2 l culture)
fraction ii (pellet of inclusion bodies from 10 ml of
lysate)
fraction iii (urea homogenate)
fraction iv (natured and concentrated tubulin fraction)

tubulin yield (%)

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

243

als and methods. this low level of tubulin is not surprising
because tubulin content in parasitic nematodes is normally
low, usually less than 1% [9–12].
tubulin binding was investigated for classical [3h]
ligands, ([3h] mbz, [3h] tax and [3h] vbn). the results
presented showed that all the above [3h] classical ligand
bound both native and recombinant tubulin dimers. the
native tubulin had a signiﬁcantly higher number of receptors per mole of tubulin (bmax) than the recombinant tubulin; one possible reason for this phenomenon is that only
some of the recombinant molecules are properly folded
and are therefore able to bind ligand with high aﬃnity.
this is probably true since [27] observed that refolding procedures may result in only 5–10% active proteins.
according to the bmax values, the binding of diﬀerent
ligands may be ranked as follows: vbn > tax > mbz.
the same rank order was observed with both native and
recombinant dimers. this means that there are more
vbn receptors than tax receptors and more for tax
than mbz in both native and recombinant dimers. this
correlation suggests that receptors similar to those found
in native tubulin were reconstituted in the recombinant
tubulin preparation. on the other hand this rank order
of the number of receptors for the three ligands is interesting because vbn is expected to be more toxic to cells than
say mbz [28].
all of the ligands displayed a signiﬁcantly higher aﬃnity
for native than for recombinant tubulin. the diﬀerences in
aﬃnity are about one order of magnitude (i.e. a factor of
10). this suggests that not only the number of recombinant
receptors formed is less than the number of moles of tubulin present, but also that some or all of the receptors (tubulin molecules) may not have the exact native fold. similarly
the aﬃnity of mbz for recombinant b-tubulin of heamonchus contortus was lower than that for native tubulin [17].
although the binding aﬃnity of the three ligands studied
here diﬀer by a factor of 10 between native and recombinant tubulin, these ligands bind each protein type with an
aﬃnity of the same order of magnitude, whether native
or recombinant tubulin.
variations in binding strengths between receptor samples are not surprising, since it has been observed that dissociation constant values for agonists like radioligands can
vary when using receptors in the presence of other proteins
that may also bind the radioligand being considered [29],
and more so because it is very diﬃcult to realize a homogeneous population of receptors [30]. nevertheless, the data
suggest that either protein (native or recombinant) can be
used to compare ligands and rank them correctly, both in
terms of bmax and aﬃnity. if it becomes important for a
major program of drug screening, this claim should be substantiated using a larger number of tubulin ligands, but the
fact that it holds for three distinct ligands in the current
study is highly suggestive.
the question of improper folding cannot be ruled out
[27] and tubulin is a particular problem because of its
dependence upon both chaperones and a pathway of fold-

244

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

table 2
the bmax and kd values for the interaction of [3h] classical ligands with native or recombinant tubulin preparations from o. volvulus
type of tubulin preparation

bmaxa,c (pmol/mg tubulin)
[3h] mbz

ab dimer
native tubulin

640 ± 189
674 + 54 f

kdb,c (lm)

[3h] tax
f

[3h] vbn

g

935 ± 68
2307 + 136

[3h] mbz
j

h

999.5 ± 55
5006 ± 820

k

3.38 ± 1.3
0.29 ± 0.1

[3h] tax
n
p

2.22 ± 0.24
0.38 ± 0.06

[3h] vbn
r
p

2.03 ± 1.07
0.38 ± 0.17

r
p

the data presented in fig. 5 were analyzed using graphpad to obtain the bmaxa and kdb values for various ligands and each tubulin preparation. the
statistical computation was by one-way anova whereby values in the column and rows were compared.
a
bmax, maximum binding at inﬁnite ligand concentration.
b
kd, dissociation constants (measure of binding aﬃnity).
c
the data are mean ± se of three replicated experiments (n = 6); within columns or rows, values sharing diﬀerent superscript alphabetic letters were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05), while values with same letters were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p > 0.05).

ing factors [31,32]. therefore, expressing tubulin in a native
state (e.g. in a eukaryotic expression system) or reconstituting in the presence of folding factors [32] would probably
reconcile these data and improve the validity of the assay.
the binding of mbz, vbn or tax to individual
recombinant a- or b-tubulin monomers of o. volvulus
and the binding stoichiometry of these ligands with the various protein preparations are discussed else where [wampande and lubega, unpublished]. here, in a nutshell, we
show that: native tubulin had a higher or same binding
capacity and higher aﬃnity (lower kd) for all the classical
ligands than did the recombinant hetero-oligomer but both
tubulin preparations rank ligands correctly. the ﬁndings in
this study should be compared with tubulin expressed in a
eukaryotic system or expressed in a prokaryote and renatured with a eukaryotic cell extract [32]; this will help to
explain why there were diﬀerences in aﬃnities and number
of sites.
nevertheless, it may be concluded from this study that
both native and recombinant dimeric tubulin reconstituted
as described can rank ligands correctly both in terms of
bmax and kd. this in turn suggests that recombinant tubulin can be used to develop a molecular screen for novel
anti-tubulin ligands for developing into chemotherapeutics
against onchocerciasis.
acknowledgments
this investigation received ﬁnancial support from the
world bank/undp/who special programme for research and training in tropical diseases (tdr) through a
grant to g.w. lubega; e.m. wampande acknowledges
the training assistance from tdr, and j.r. mcintosh
thanks the american cancer society for their support.
thanks to dr. timothy geary (pﬁzer animal health, kalamazoo, mi, usa) for the onchocerca volvulus b-tubulin
cdna.
references
[1] p.j. dawson, w.e. gutteridge, k.a. gull, comparison of the
interaction of anthelmintic benzimidazole with tubulin isolated from
mammalian tissue and the parasite nematode ascaridia galli,
biochem. pharmacol. 33 (1983) 1069–1074.

[2] e. lacey, the role of the cytoskeleton protein, tubulin, in the mode of
action and mechanism of drug resistance to benzimidazole, int. j.
parasitol. 18 (1988) 885–936.
[3] l.a. amos, microtubule structure and its stabilization, org. biomol.
chem. 2 (2004) 2153–2160.
[4] s. gupta, b. bhattacharyya, antimicrotubular drugs binding to vinca
domain of tubulin, mol. cell biochem. 253 (2003) 41–47.
[5] wei hu, hui dong, yue-zhong li, xi-tao hu, guan-jun han,
yin-bo qu, a high-throughput model for screening anti-tumor
agents capable of promoting polymerization of tubulin in vitro, acta
pharmacol. sin. 6 (2004) 775–782.
[6] r.f. luduena, biochemistry of tubulin, in: k. roberts, j.s. hyams
(eds.), microtubules, academic press, london, 1986, pp. 65–116.
[7] t.g. geary, s.c. nulf, m.z. favreau, l. tang, r.k. prichard,
n.t. hetzenbuhler, three b-tubulin cdna from the parasitic
nematode haemonchus contortus, mol. biochem. parasitol. 50
(1992) 29–306.
[8] who expert committee on onchocerciasis. third report, world
health organ. tech. rep. ser. 752 (1987) 1–167.
[9] p.a. friedman, e.g. platzer, e.l. carroll, tubulin characterization
during embryogenesis of ascaris suum, dev. biol. 76 (1980) 47–57.
[10] p. kohler, r. bachmann, intestinal tubulin as possible target for
chemotherapeutic action of mebendazole in parasitic nematodes,
mol. biochem. parasitol. 4 (1981) 325–336.
[11] l. tang, r.k. prichard, characterization of tubulin from nippostrongylus brasiliensis, and comparison with mammalian brain tubulin, mol. biochem. parasitol. 29 (1988) 133–140.
[12] g.w. lubega, r.k. prichard, beta tubulin and benzimidazole
resistance in sheep nematode haemonchus contortus, mol. biochem.
parasitol. 47 (1991) 129–138.
[13] e.j. albeiz, d.w. buttner, b.o.l. duke, diagnosis and expiration of
nodules in human onchocerciasis, trop. med. parasitol. 39 (1998)
331–346.
[14] t.g. geary, s.c. nulf, s.j. alexander-bowman, b.m. mahmoud,
r.k. prichard, r.d. klein, cloning and characterization of cdna
encoding beta tubulins from diroﬁlaria immitis and onchocerca
volvulus, j. parasitol. 2 (1998) 356–360.
[15] m.k. olsen, s.k. rockenbach, k.a. curry, c.c. tomich, enhancement of heterologous polypeptide expression by alterations in the
ribosome-binding-site sequence, j. biotechnol. 9 (1989) 179–190.
[16] i.g. cowell, c.a. austinmethods in molecular biology cdna
library protocols, 69, human press inc., new jersey, 1997, pp. 1–
140.
[17] g.w. lubega, t.g. geary, r.d. klein, r.k. prichard, expression of
cloned b-tubulin genes of haemonchus contortus in e. coli: interaction
of recombinant b-tubulin with native tubulin and mebendazole, mol.
biochem. parasitol. 62 (1993) 281–292.
[18] j. sambrook,  xxxd1971xxx . fritsch, t. maniatis, molecular cloning: a
laboratory mannual, second ed., cold spring harbor laboratory
press, cold spring harbor, 1989.
[19] m.e. oxberry, t.g. geary, c.a. winterrowd, r. prichard, individual expression of recombinant a- and b-tubulin from heamonchus

e.m. wampande et al. / protein expression and puriﬁcation 55 (2007) 236–245

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

contortus. polymerization and drug eﬀects, protein expr. purif. 21
(2001) 30–39.
m.m. bradford, a rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein dye
binding, anal. biochem. 72 (1976) 248–254.
h. schultzkey, a.j. albiez, d.v. buttner, isolation of living onchocerca volvulus from nodules, tropenmed. parasitol. 28 (1977) 430–528.
e. lacey, e. john, c.j. claude, c.c. culvenor, interaction of
phormopsin and related compounds with puriﬁed sheep brain
tubulin, biochem. pharmacol. 36 (1987) 2133–2138.
e. lacey, r.k. prichard, interaction of benzimidazoles (bz) with
tubulin from bz-sensitive and bz-resistant isolates of haemonchus
contortus, mol biochem. parasitol. 19 (1986) 171–181.
e. lacey, mode of action of benzimidazoles, parasitol. today 6
(1986) 112–115.
g.j. russell, e. lacey, diﬀerential stability of the bz-tubulin
complex in bz-resistant and bz-susceptible isolates of heamonchus
contortus and trichostrongylus columbriformis, int. j. parasitol. 22
(1992) 399–402.

245

[26] m.e. oxberry, t.g. geary, r.k. prichard, assessment of benzimidazole binding to individual recombinant tubulin isotypes from
heamonchus contortus, parasitology 122 (2000) 683–687.
[27] k. tadahiko, d.f. carmichael, a. sommer, r.c. thompson,
refolding of recombinant proteins, methods enzymol. 185 (1990)
187–195.
[28] d.o.k. ochola, r.k. prichard, g.w. lubega, classical ligands bind
tubulin of trypanosomes and inhibit their growth in vitro, j. parasitol.
88 (2002) 600–604.
[29] h.i. yamamura, s.j. enna, m.j. kuhar, methods in neurotransmitter receptor analysis, raven press, new york, 1990, pp. 100–500..
[30] i.m. kloitz, number of receptor sites from scatchad graphs. facts an
fantasies, science 217 (1982) 1247–1249.
[31] g. tian, y. huang, h. rommelaere, j. vandekerckhove, c. ampe,
n.j. cowan, pathway leading to correctly folded  xxxg2353xxx , cell 86
(1996) 287–296.
[32] c. shah, c.z. xu, j. vickers, r. williams, properties of microtubules
assembled from mammalian tubulin synthesized in escherichia coli,
biochemistry 40 (2001) 4844–4852.

