0022-3565/07/3232-614–625$20.00
the journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
copyright © 2007 by the american society for pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
jpet 323:614–625, 2007

vol. 323, no. 2
125500/3270875
printed in u.s.a.

a select set of opioid ligands induce up-regulation by
promoting the maturation and stability of the rat ␬-opioid
receptor in human embryonic kidney 293 cells
kenneth m. wannemacher, prem n. yadav, and richard d. howells
graduate school of biomedical science (k.m.w., r.d.h.) and department of biochemistry and molecular biology (p.n.y.,
r.d.h.), university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey-new jersey medical school, newark, new jersey
received may 8, 2007; accepted august 23, 2007

chronic administration of morphine or other opioid agonists for pain relief results in tolerance to the analgesic
effects and physical dependence (mcquay, 1999). in contrast,
chronic blockade of opioid receptors with antagonists such as
naloxone and naltrexone does not result in physical dependence and was shown nearly 30 years ago to be associated
with supersensitivity to the analgesic actions of morphine
(tang and collins, 1978). the enhanced analgesic effects of
morphine following infusion of naloxone were correlated with
this work was supported by the national institute on drug abuse (grant
da09113 to r.d.h.) and by the irene and eric simon brain research foundation (summer research fellowship to k.m.w.).
article, publication date, and citation information can be found at
http://jpet.aspetjournals.org.
doi:10.1124/jpet.107.125500.

was associated with an increase in the number of cell surface
receptors and a 2-fold increase in the emax for guanosine 5⬘-o(3-[35s]thio)triphosphate binding. glycosidase digestion indicated that the 52- and 42-kda receptors contained complex
and high-mannose n-glycans, respectively, pulse-chase analysis and glycosidase digestion sensitivities suggested that the
42-kda rkor species was a precursor of the 52-kda species.
naltrexone did not alter rkor mrna levels or translational
efficiency, and rkor up-regulation was not inhibited by cycloheximide. brefeldin a caused accumulation of intracellular
rkor intermediates, and coincubation with naltrexone increased the levels of the brefeldin-induced species significantly. these results suggest that select opioid ligands upregulate rkor by enhancing the rate of receptor folding and
maturation and by protecting the receptor from degradation,
resulting in an increase in the number of rkor binding sites,
immunoreactive protein, and functional receptors.

an increase in the number of opioid receptor binding sites
(lahti and collins, 1978). antagonist-mediated opioid receptor up-regulation has been shown to occur in vivo for ␮-opioid
receptors (mors), ␦-opioid receptors, and ␬-opioid receptors
(kors) (morris et al., 1988; lesscher et al., 2003), highlighting its biological relevance; however, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. the steady-state level of opioid receptor mrnas did not change in response to chronic in vivo
antagonist treatment; therefore, post-transcriptional mechanisms are apparently involved (for review, see unterwald
and howells, 2008).
a large number of human diseases, for example cystic
fibrosis, are due to genetic mutations that cause protein
misfolding (thomas et al., 1995; welch and howard, 2000).

abbreviations: mor, ␮-opioid receptor; kor, ␬-opioid receptor; hek, human embryonic kidney; salvinorin a, (2s,4ar,6ar,7r,9s,
10as,10br)-9-(acetyloxy)-2-(3-furanyl)dodecahydro-6a,10b-dimethyl-4,10-dioxo-2h-naphtho[2,1c]pyran-7-carboxylic acid methyl ester; zlll,
carbobenzoxy-leucyl-leucyl-leucinal; rkor, the rat ␬-opioid receptor; pbs, phosphate-buffered saline; page, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis;
pngase f, peptide: n-glycosidase f; endo h, endoglycosidase h; wga, wheat germ agglutinin; bfa, brefeldin a; pcr, polymerase chain
reaction; dmem, dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium; u69,593, (5␣,7␣,8␤)-(⫹)-n-methyl-n-(7-[1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-oxaspiro[4,5]dec-8-yl)benzeneacetamide; [35s]gtp␥s, guanosine 5⬘-o-(3-[35s]thio)triphosphate; anova, analysis of variance.
614

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

abstract
ligand-induced regulation of the rat ␬-opioid receptor
(rkor) was investigated in human embryonic kidney 293
cells stably expressing the flag-tagged rkor. incubation of
rkor cells with naltrexone for 24 h increased the bmax
⬎3-fold, with no change in the affinity of [3h] xxxd1913xxx .
two immunoreactive receptor species were present in cell
lysates: naltrexone treatment caused a ⬎3-fold increase
in the 52-kda species while decreasing the level of the
42-kda species. dynorphin(1–13), u69,593 [(5␣,7␣,8␤)-(⫹)n-methyl-n-(7-[1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-oxaspiro[4,5]dec-8-yl)benzeneacetamide], or salvinorin a [2s,4ar,6ar,7r,9s,10as,
10br)-9-(acetyloxy)-2-(3-furanyl)dodecahydro-6a,10b-dimethyl-4,10-dioxo-2h-naphtho[2,1c]pyran-7-carboxylic
acid methyl ester] treatment did not alter the level of immunoreactive rkor protein, whereas  xxxd2070xxx , cyclazocine,
naloxone, and naloxone methiodide increased the 52-kda
and decreased the 42-kda rkor bands. receptor up-regulation

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

that the chaperone effect was due to ligand engagement of
intracellular misfolded receptors (petaja-repo et al., 2002).
in the present study, we used complementary biochemical
and pharmacological approaches to investigate the regulation by agonists and antagonists of the kor stably expressed
in hek 293 cells and explored the mechanism of the observed up-regulation induced by a select set of ligands.

materials and methods
materials. dynorphin a(1–13) was a product of multiple peptide
systems (san diego, ca). naloxone methiodide was purchased from
sigma-aldrich (st. louis, mo), and salvinorin a was from tocris
bioscience (ellisville, mo). all other opioid ligands were obtained
from the national institute on drug abuse (bethesda, md). n-dodecyl-␤-d-maltopyranoside was purchased from anatrace (maumee,
oh). carbobenzoxy-leucyl-leucyl-leucinal (zlll) was obtained from
peptides international (louisville, ky). all other chemicals and reagents were from sigma-aldrich.
cell culture and transfection. hek 293 cells were transfected
with an expression plasmid encoding the rat ␬-opioid receptor tagged
with an n-terminal flag epitope (kindly provided by dr. lakshmi
devi, mt. sinai medical center, new york, ny) using lipofectamine
2000 (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca). a clonal cell line stably expressing
the flag-tagged rat ␬-opioid receptor (rkor) cells was obtained
following transfected cell selection in media containing 1 mg/ml
 xxxg418xxx  (invitrogen). cell cultures were maintained at 37°c in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% co2 in dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 u/ml penicillin,
100 ␮g/ml streptomycin sulfate, and 0.25 mg/ml  xxxg418xxx . rkor cells
were incubated with ligands, reagents, or vehicle in serum-free dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium for various times as indicated at
37°c.
membrane preparation and radioligand binding assays.
rkor cells were harvested in phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) and
centrifuged at 500g for 5 min. cell pellets were resuspended in pbs
and centrifuged as above. the cell pellets were homogenized with a
tekmar tissuemizer (cincinnati, oh) in 50 mm tris hcl, ph 7.5,
and a membrane fraction was prepared by ultracentrifugation of the
homogenate at 100,000g for 30 min. the membrane pellet was
washed with 50 mm tris hcl, ph 7.5, and resuspended by homogenization in 0.32 mm sucrose and 50 mm tris hcl, ph 7.5. membrane preparations were stored at ⫺80°c if not used immediately.
the protein concentration of the membrane preparations was determined using the dc protein assay (bio-rad, hercules, ca) with
bovine  xxxg124xxx  as the standard. radioligand binding assays
were conducted in a final volume of 0.25 ml, using rkor cell membrane preparations diluted with 50 mm tris hcl, ph 7.5, to contain
15 to 20 ␮g of protein/0.25 ml. saturation binding assays were
conducted in duplicate at room temperature using concentrations of
[15,16-3h](⫺) xxxd1913xxx  (specific activity, 50.0 ci/mmol; perkin
elmer, boston, ma) ranging from 0.05 to 7 nm. samples containing
tritiated  xxxd1913xxx  in the presence of excess unlabeled cyclazocine (1 ␮m) were assayed to define nonspecific binding, which was
subtracted from total binding to obtain specific binding. after incubation for 30 min to reach equilibrium, binding assays were terminated by filtration through whatman gf/b filters (vwr international, buffalo grove, il). filters were immersed in ecoscint h liquid
scintillation cocktail (national diagnostics, somerville, nj) before
determination of filter-bound radioactivity using a beckman ls 1701
scintillation counter (beckman coulter, fullerton, ca). saturation
curves were analyzed by nonlinear regression using prism 3.0
(graphpad software, san diego, ca) to determine bmax and kd
values.
western blotting. rkor whole-cell lysates were prepared by
solubilization of cells with 1% n-dodecyl-␤-d-maltopyranoside, 50
mm tris hcl, ph 7.5, 150 mm nacl, 1 mm cacl2, 1 mm mgcl2, 10%

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

various mutations of g protein-coupled receptors also result
in improper folding and loss of function. mutant rhodopsins
cause retinitis pigmentosa (sung et al., 1991), mutated forms
of the luteinizing  xxxg1603xxx  result in endocrine disorders in males and females (latronico and segaloff, 1999),
and mutations at various loci in the vasopressin  xxxg231xxx 
are responsible for x-linked  xxxg231xxx 
(oksche and rosenthal, 1998). these genetic mutations
cause improper folding during protein synthesis, and the
misfolded receptors are deglycosylated, ubiquitinated, and
degraded by the 26s proteasome under the surveillance of
the endoplasmic reticulum quality control system (ellgaard
and helenius, 2003).
morello et al. (2000) reported that nonpeptidic vasopressin
receptor antagonists increased cell surface expression and
rescued the function of several mutant forms of the  xxxg231xxx  that cause human x-linked  xxxg231xxx . they proposed that the antagonists acted intracellularly as pharmacological chaperones by binding to and
stabilizing the newly synthesized mutant receptors, thereby
promoting proper folding, maturation, exit from the endoplasmic reticulum, and trafficking to the cell surface. the
antagonists, however, did not increase the cell surface expression of the wild-type v2 vasopressin receptor. it was also
reported that pharmacological chaperones rescued mutant
misfolded forms of  xxxg930xxx  receptors that cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (leanosmiranda et al., 2005).
in the opioid field, substitution of the  xxxd233xxx  in the
dry sequence of the mor reduced receptor expression to
undetectable levels in transfected cells; however, inclusion of
naloxone in the cell culture medium greatly enhanced the
binding activity and expression level of the mutated receptor
(li et al., 2001). naloxone, however, had minimal effects on
wild-type mor binding and immunoreactivity. it was concluded that naloxone up-regulated the mutant d164q mor
receptor by stabilizing the active conformation of the binding site, thereby inhibiting constitutive internalization and
proteolysis.
chaipatikul et al. (2003) reported that deletion of the sequence rlskv within the third intracellular loop or krcfr
from the proximal c terminus of the rat mor led to low
levels of receptor expression in transfected hek 293 cells,
and incubation of cells with hydrophobic antagonists and
agonists increased the cell surface expression of the mutant
mors. again, the active ligands had no effect on the cell
surface expression of the wild-type mor. deletion of either
the rlskv or krcfr sequences from the mor did not
cause the mutants to become constitutively active; hence, the
mechanism for the mutant receptor up-regulation differed
from that proposed by li et al. (2001), and it was suggested
that the hydrophobic mor ligands were promoting the intracellular trafficking of the mutant receptors.
it has also been reported that a d95a substitution in the
␦-opioid receptor resulted in significant retention of incompletely processed receptor precursors in the endoplasmic reticulum, and cell-permeable antagonists increased the maturation and exit of the receptor from the endoplasmic
reticulum and increased the cell surface expression of the
mutant receptor (petaja-repo et al., 2002). in this instance,
cell-permeable antagonists also acted as pharmacological
chaperones for the wild-type receptor, and it was proposed

615

616

wannemacher et al.
intron between exons 3 and 4 of the rkor gene. the rkor pcr
product is 301 bp in length. the level of actin mrna in each sample
was determined for normalization of the rkor mrna. the actin
sense-strand primer, 5⬘-ttggccttagggttcagggggg-3⬘, and
the antisense-strand primer, 5⬘-cgtggggcgccccaggcacca-3⬘,
yield an actin pcr product 243 bp long. analysis of the pcr reaction
products was done using 7500 system sds software (applied
biosystems).
comparison of the rate of de novo rkor mrna translation by metabolic labeling with [35s]methionine and
[35s]cysteine after incubation of rkor cells in the absence
and presence of naltrexone. rkor cells were preincubated in the
absence or presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 2 h. the culture medium
was removed and replaced with methionine- and cysteine-free
dmem in the absence and presence of naltrexone and incubated
further for 1 h. [35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine (translabel; mp
biomedicals, irvine, ca) were added at 100 ␮ci/ml, and rkor cells
were incubated in the absence and presence of naltrexone for an
additional 1 h at 37°c to allow incorporation of the radiolabeled
amino acids into newly synthesized protein. whole-cell lysates were
prepared as described above, and rkor was immunoprecipitated by
overnight incubation at 4°c with anti-flag m1 monoclonal antibody conjugated to agarose beads. at the end of the incubation, the
beads were washed three times with column wash buffer (0.5%
triton x-100, 50 mm tris hcl, ph 7.5, 150 mm nacl, 10% glycerol,
1 mm cacl2, and 1 mm mgcl2), followed by two additional washes
with column buffer containing 300 mm nacl. the m1 antibodyantigen complex is ca2⫹-dependent; therefore, rkor was eluted
from the beads with 20 mm edta in sds sample loading buffer. the
eluted protein was resolved using 10% sds-page and visualized by
autoradiography.
comparison of the rate of maturation of rkor by pulsechase metabolic labeling in the absence and presence of
naltrexone. rkor cells were incubated in methionine- and cysteine-free dmem for 1 h at 37°c. [35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine
were added at 150 ␮ci/ml, and rkor cells were incubated for an
additional 30 min at 37°c. cells were washed with serum-free
dmem containing 120 ␮g/ml cycloheximide to block further protein
synthesis and incubated in the absence or presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 1, 2, 3, or 4 h in the continued presence of cycloheximide.
whole-cell lysates were prepared, and rkor immunoprecipitations
were performed as described above. the 35s-labeled rkor was resolved using 10% sds-page and visualized by autoradiography.
analysis of rkor up-regulation by flow cytometry. rkor
cells were treated with or without naloxone (1 ␮m) or naloxone
methiodide (20 ␮m) for 24 h. cells were harvested and dissociated in
chilled pbs, ph 7.2, supplemented with 2 mm edta, then fixed with
3.7% paraformaldehyde for 5 min at room temperature. cells were
washed with pbs to remove the paraformaldehyde, then incubated
with mouse monoclonal anti-flag m2 antibody (sigma-aldrich) for
1 h in the presence of 1% (v/v) normal goat serum in pbs to block
nonspecific binding. cells were washed with pbs, then incubated
with goat anti-mouse igg conjugated with alexafluor 488 (molecular
probes, carlsbad, ca) for 30 min. cells were analyzed with a facscan flow cytometer (becton dickinson, mountain view, ca) by
acquiring 10,000 cells from each sample, and the geometric mean of
fluorescence intensity was calculated using cellquest pro 5.2 software (bd biosciences, san jose, ca).
evaluation of naloxone and u69,593 cell permeability.
hek 293 cells (25 million cells/ml) were incubated in serum-free
dmem with 10 nm [n-allyl-2,3-3h](⫺) naloxone (specific activity,
67.0 ci/mmol; perkin elmer) or 10 nm [phenyl-3,4-3h](⫺) u69,593
(specific activity, 41.7 ci/mmol; perkin elmer) in a total volume of 1
ml for 1, 2, or 4 h at 37°c. cells were harvested and centrifuged at
160g for 3 min. cell pellets were washed four times with serum-free
dmem to removed residual [3h] ligands, and aliquots were taken for
scintillation counting. the thoroughly washed cell pellet was resuspended in h2o, and cells were broken by hypotonic lysis. membranes

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

glycerol, and a protease inhibitor cocktail (1:100; sigma-aldrich).
the detergent lysate was centrifuged at 16,000g for 20 min, and the
supernatant was recovered for immunoblot analysis. sds-page and
western blotting, using the anti-flag m1 monoclonal antibody
(sigma-aldrich) for detection of the epitope-tagged rkor, was done
as described previously (chaturvedi et al., 2001), and levels were
normalized to ␣-tubulin as a loading control (detected with a monoclonal antibody to ␣-tubulin from sigma-aldrich). several exposure
times were developed to ensure that the signal on the film had not
reached saturation, and band intensities were quantified using syngene software (synoptics ltd., cambridge, uk).
characterization of rkor n-linked glycosylation. cell lysates were prepared as described above for western blot analysis.
peptide: n-glycosidase f (pngase f; new england biolabs, ipswich,
ma) was added to a final concentration of 625 u/ml and incubated for
3 h at 37°c. for digestion with endoglycosidase h (endo h; roche
diagnostics, indianapolis, in), sodium acetate, ph 6.0, was added to
the cell lysate to bring the concentration to 100 mm, and samples
were incubated with the enzyme (500 mu/ml) for 3 h at 37°c. digests
were resolved using 10% sds-page and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride. receptor species were identified using the antiflag m1 antibody as described above.
for wheat germ agglutinin (wga)-agarose chromatography, cells
were solubilized with 1% n-dodecyl-␤-d-maltopyranoside lysis buffer
and incubated for 6 h with wga-agarose (vector laboratories, burlingame, ca). the receptor-bound wga beads were washed five
times with column wash buffer containing 0.5% triton x-100, 50 mm
tris hcl, ph 7.5, 150 mm nacl, 10% glycerol, 1 mm cacl2, and 1
mm mgcl2. proteins bound to the resin were eluted with 500 mm
n- xxxd2683xxx  in column wash buffer. eluted proteins were
resolved using 10% sds-page, transferred to polyvinylidene
diflouride, and rkor was detected using anti-flag m1 antibody as
described above.
involvement of the proteasome in turnover of the rkor.
rkor cells were incubated in serum-free medium for 6 h in the
absence or presence of 10 ␮m zlll, a cell-permeable proteasome
inhibitor, and whole-cell lysates were analyzed by western blotting.
effect of cycloheximide and brefeldin a on naltrexoneinduced ␬-receptor up-regulation. rkor cells were preincubated at 37°c for 30 min in the absence or presence of 120 ␮g/ml
cycloheximide or with 3 ␮g/ml brefeldin a (bfa), then incubated for
an additional 2 or 6 h as indicated in the absence and presence of
kor ligands (1 ␮m). cell lysates were prepared and subjected to
sds-page and western blot analysis using the anti-flag m1
antibody for rkor detection and a tubulin antibody for normalization of protein loading.
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (pcr).
rkor cells were incubated in the absence or presence of 1 ␮m
naltrexone for 2 or 24 h. cells were harvested in pbs and centrifuged
at 500g for 5 min. cell pellets were washed with pbs and centrifuged
as above. cells were lysed with tri reagent (sigma-aldrich) to
extract rna, mixed with 0.2 volumes of chloroform, and centrifuged
at 12,000g for 15 min. total rna was precipitated from the upper
aqueous layer with isopropanol and centrifuged for 12,000g for 15
min. rna pellets were washed with chilled 70% ethanol and resuspended in diethylpyrocarbonate-treated water. cdna was prepared
using random hexamer primers and thermoscript reverse transcriptase (invitrogen). ten percent of the cdna synthesis reaction was
added to sybr green master mix (applied biosystems, foster city,
ca) and amplified for 40 cycles on a 7500 real time pcr system
(applied biosystems) using an rkor sense-strand primer, 5⬘-ttggctactggcatcatctg-3⬘, derived from transmembrane domain
4-encoding sequence in exon 3 of the rkor transcript, and a rkor
antisense-strand primer, 5⬘-gactgcaaccactaccagca-3⬘, derived from transmembrane domain 6-encoding sequence in exon 4 of
the rkor transcript. this choice of primers ensured that any possible contaminating genomic dna in the rna preparation would not
lead to false-positive pcr products, due to the long intervening

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

617

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

were removed by centrifugation at 100,000g for 30 min at 4°c. the
presence of [3h]naloxone and [3h]u69,593 in the resulting cytoplasmic and membrane pellets was determined by liquid scintillation
counting.
agonist-induced stimulation of [35s]gtp␥s binding. rkor
cell membrane fractions were prepared, and [35s]gtp␥s binding
assays were conducted as described previously (yadav et al., 2007).
rkor membrane fractions (7.5 ␮g of protein) were incubated with
0.3 nm [35s]gtp␥s (specific activity, 1117 ci/mmol; amersham bioscience, piscataway, nj) and 10 ␮m gdp (calbiochem, la jolla, ca)
in the absence or presence of varying concentrations of u69,593
(ranging from 1 nm to 100 ␮m) in 1 ml of 50 mm hepes-koh, ph
7.5, 5 mm mgcl2, 1 mm egta, 100 mm nacl, 0.1% bovine serum
albumin, 1 mm dithiothreitol, and 0.025% digitonin. reactions were
incubated at 30°c for 90 min. nonspecific binding was determined by
incubation of samples in the presence of 15 ␮m unlabeled gtp␥s
and was subtracted from total basal and total agonist-stimulated
binding. reactions were terminated by filtration through whatman
gf/b filters. filters were immersed in ecoscint h liquid scintillation
cocktail before determination of filter-bound radioactivity using a
beckman ls 1701 scintillation counter. dose-response curves were
analyzed by nonlinear regression using prism 3.0 (graphpad software) to determine emax and ec50 values.

results
differential up-regulation of rkor by select ␬-receptor ligands. a clonal hek 293 cell line was established
following transfection and  xxxg418xxx  selection that stably expressed the rkor. the apparent dissociation constant (kd)
for [3h] xxxd1913xxx  was 0.9 ⫾ 0.3 nm, and the maximum
number of binding sites (bmax) was 1.6 ⫾ 0.3 pmol/mg protein
(mean ⫾ s.e.m., n ⫽ 10). to investigate ligand-dependent
regulation of the receptor, rkor cells were incubated in the
absence and presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 2, 8, or 24 h, and
membrane fractions derived from these cells were assayed by
saturation analysis using [3h] xxxd1913xxx . the kd for
[3h] xxxd1913xxx  was not changed significantly at any time
point following naltrexone treatment (p ⬎ 0.05, anova,
newman-keuls multiple comparison test); however, the bmax
increased 2-fold after 2 h of incubation with naltrexone and
increased more than 3-fold following 8- and 24-h exposure to
the antagonist (fig. 1, a and c). the differences in bmax
values between naltrexone-treated samples and the saline
control were all statistically significant at all time points (p ⬍
0.05, anova, newman-keuls multiple comparison test).
western blot analysis of rkor cell lysates revealed that
two immunoreactive rkor species were expressed, with apparent molecular masses of 42 and 52 kda (fig. 1b). these
bands were not observed in control, nontransfected hek 293
cell lysates, confirming that the 42- and 52-kda species were
different forms of the rkor expressed in transfected cells.
the 42-kda receptor species was more abundant than the
52-kda form under basal conditions. after exposure of rkor
cells to naltrexone, the levels of the 52-kda rkor increased
in parallel with the time-dependent increase in kor binding
sites (fig. 1, b and c), whereas the level of the 42-kda band
decreased 2-fold at 2 h and decreased 3-fold relative to the
tubulin control following naltrexone treatment for 8 and 24 h
(fig. 1, b and c).
we next sought to characterize the efficacy of other ligands
to induce up-regulation of the ␬ receptor. incubation of rkor
cells for 24 h with 1 ␮m dynorphin a(1–13), a potent endogenous peptide agonist, did not alter the levels of the 52- or

fig. 1. kinetics of naltrexone-induced up-regulation of rkor. culture
medium for rkor cells was replaced with serum-free media at zero time,
and cells were incubated at 37°c in the absence or presence of 1 ␮m
naltrexone for 2, 8, or 24 h. a, membrane fractions were prepared from
each treatment group and assayed by saturation analysis using [3h] xxxd1913xxx  (0.05–7 nm). b, whole-cell lysates were prepared from each
sample and subjected to sds-page and western blot analysis using the
anti-flag m1 antibody to detect rkor or ␣-tubulin antibody to control
for the amount of protein loaded in each lane and for normalization of
quantitative analysis. c, quantitative analysis of the naltrexone-induced
changes in bmax (n ⫽ 3) and levels of the 52- and 42-kda rkor immunoreactive species (n ⫽ 3). ⴱ, p ⬍ 0.05; ⴱⴱ, p ⬍ 0.01; ⴱⴱⴱ, p ⬍ 0.001,
anova, newman-keuls multiple comparison test for naltrexone-treated
samples versus saline controls.

42-kda rkor species, in marked contrast to the effect of
naltrexone under the same conditions (fig. 2a). dynorphin
was still inactive when assayed  xxxd1891xxx  ␮m (data not shown). in
addition, treatment of rkor cells with dynorphin did not
alter the kd of [3h] xxxd1913xxx  or the rkor bmax com-

618

wannemacher et al.

pared with controls as determined by binding assays, unlike
the marked increase in bmax induced by naltrexone (fig. 2b).
the endogenous kor peptide agonist, ␤-neoendorphin, was
similarly inactive regarding kor up-regulation when assayed at 1 and 10 ␮m (data not shown). the possibility that
dynorphin was degraded during the incubation period was
considered; however, incubation of dynorphin in the cell culture media for 24 h did not significantly alter its ic50 when
subsequently assayed for displacement of [3h] xxxd1913xxx 
binding (data not shown), suggesting that there was minimal
degradation during the incubation period.
analysis of other ␬ ligands revealed that the efficacy of a
ligand to up-regulate the rkor was not simply related to
whether the ligand was an agonist or antagonist. incubation
of rkor cells for 24 h with u69,593, a nonpeptide arylacetamide ␬ agonist, or salvinorin a, a naturally occurring, nonnitrogenous ␬ agonist, similarly had no effect on the level of

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 2. ligand-dependent up-regulation of kor. rkor cells were incubated for 24 h with either saline (control), 1 ␮m dynorphin a(1–13), or 1
␮m naltrexone. a, whole-cell lysates were analyzed by western blotting
using the anti-flag m1 antibody to detect rkor or ␣-tubulin antibody.
b, membrane fractions were prepared and assayed by saturation analysis
using [3h] xxxd1913xxx  (0.05–7 nm). c, rkor cells were incubated in
serum-free medium for 24 h with either saline (control) or with various
opioid ligands (each at 1 ␮m). cell lysates were subjected to sds-page
and western blot analysis. data are representative of three independent
experiments.

the 52-kda rkor, although both compounds decreased the
level of the 42-kda band relative to the vehicle-treated control (fig. 2c). incubation of salvinorin in the cell culture
media for 24 h did not significantly alter its ic50 when
subsequently assayed for displacement of [3h] xxxd1913xxx 
binding (data not shown), suggesting that there was minimal
degradation of salvinorin during the incubation period. furthermore, when u69,593, salvinorin, or ␤-neoendorphin were
coincubated  xxxd1891xxx  ␮m with naltrexone at 1 ␮m, the inactive
compounds did not inhibit naltrexone-induced ␬-receptor upregulation (data not shown). to our knowledge, this is a novel
finding that select nonpeptidic ␬ ligands are unable to upregulate the ␬-opioid receptor. in contrast, the potent oripavine agonist  xxxd2070xxx  and the benzomorphan agonist cyclazocine significantly increased the level of the 52-kda rkor
immunoreactive band relative to the control (fig. 2c) and
decreased the 42-kda species. incubation of rkor cells with
naloxone, an antagonist that is structurally similar to naltrexone, also up-regulated the rkor 52-kda band and decreased the level of the 42-kda band (fig. 2c).
we next investigated whether the quaternary analog of
naloxone, naloxone methiodide, which is generally assumed
to be unable to diffuse across the plasma membrane due to its
permanent positive charge, was capable of inducing rkor
up-regulation. because naloxone methiodide has been shown
to have a lower affinity for the guinea pig brain kor compared with naloxone (magnan et al., 1982), we first compared
the affinities of naloxone methiodide and naloxone for the
rkor expressed in hek 293 cells. as shown in fig. 3a,
naloxone methiodide competitively inhibited [3h] xxxd1913xxx  binding to rkor membranes; however, its affinity was
more than 20-fold lower than that of naloxone (kis were
480 ⫾ 85 and 21 ⫾ 2 nm for naloxone methiodide and naloxone, respectively). given the greater than 20-fold difference in affinity between naloxone and naloxone methiodide,
the efficacy of naloxone methiodide to up-regulate rkor
binding sites was tested at 1 and 20 ␮m and compared with
the effect of 1 ␮m naloxone. after 24-h incubation with 1 ␮m
naloxone, the bmax for [3h] xxxd1913xxx  increased 2-fold
relative to controls (fig. 3b, p ⬍ 0.05, anova, newmankeuls multiple comparison test). at an equimolar (1 ␮m)
concentration, naloxone methiodide increased the bmax by
approximately 30%; however, the difference was not statistically significant compared with the control (p ⬎ 0.05). incubation of rkor cells with 20 ␮m naloxone methiodide,
however, proved to be equally as effective as 1 ␮m naloxone
at increasing the bmax (p ⬍ 0.05, anova, newman-keuls
multiple comparison test). western blot analysis confirmed
that incubation of rkor cells with 20 ␮m naloxone methiodide significantly increased the level of the 52-kda receptor
species and decreased the 42-kda species to an extent similar
to 1 ␮m naloxone (fig. 3c). up-regulation of rkor by naloxone and naloxone methiodide was also investigated using
fluorescence-activated cell sorting to determine whether antagonist treatment led to an increased number of ␬ receptors
on the cell surface. treatment of cells for 24 h with either 1
or 20 ␮m naloxone methiodide caused a significant 60%
increase in the number of cell surface ␬ receptors (fig. 3d,
p ⬍ 0.05, anova, newman-keuls multiple comparison test).
the magnitude of the increase in the number of cell surface
receptors determined by fluorescence-activated cell sorting
was not statistically different from the increase in bmax de-

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

619

termined by radioligand binding (p ⬎ 0.05, anova, newman-keuls multiple comparison test).
biochemical characterization of the rkor immunoreactive species. to investigate the glycoprotein nature of
the receptor, rkor cell lysates were digested with two glycosidases, pngase f and endo h. digestion with pngase f
resulted in a decrease of the apparent molecular mass of both
the 52- and the 42-kda kor species, which was indicative
that both forms contain extensive complex n-linked glycosylation (fig. 4a). in contrast, only the 42-kda kor species was
sensitive to endo h digestion, which was converted to a form
with an apparent molecular mass of 35 kda (fig. 4a). it is
unclear why the apparent molecular masses of the pngase f
and endo h products differ. the theoretical molecular weight
of the unmodified epitope-tagged rat ␬ receptor is 43,600,
indicating that the endo h digestion product, which should
have a single n- xxxd2683xxx  moiety on each of two
putative asparagines within n-linked glycosylation consen-

sus sites in the amino-terminal domain of the receptor, migrates anomalously on sds-page. putative differential olinked glycosylation of the 52- and 42-kda forms further
complicates the expected migration patterns on sds-page.
further biochemical characterization of the kor expressed in rkor cells was accomplished using wga-agarose
lectin affinity chromatography. it was observed that only the
52-kda receptor was bound and subsequently eluted from the
wga-agarose matrix, whereas the 42-kda species did not
interact avidly with the matrix and was recovered in the
flow-through fraction (fig. 4b).
the cell-permeable proteasome inhibitor, zlll, was utilized to determine whether the proteasome was involved in
the turnover of the 42- and 52-kda ␬ receptors. rkor cells
were incubated for 6 h in the absence and presence of 10 ␮m
zlll, and then whole-cell lysates were analyzed by western
blotting. incubation of rkor cells with the proteasome inhibitor caused a robust 5-fold increase in the level of the

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 3. comparison of rkor up-regulation by naloxone and naloxone methiodide. a, rkor membrane fractions were used to measure the apparent
dissociation constant (ki) of naloxone and naloxone methiodide. ten concentrations (between 1 nm and 1 mm) of each ligand were assayed for
displacement of [3h] xxxd1913xxx  binding (7 nm). ic50 values were determined by nonlinear regression analysis of the displacement curves using
prism 3.0, and ki values were calculated using the cheng-prusoff equation. the graph is representative of three independent experiments. b, rkor
cells were incubated at 37°c with 1 ␮m naloxone or naloxone methiodide at 1 or 20 ␮m for 24 h, and membrane fractions were prepared for saturation
analysis using [3h] xxxd1913xxx . the increases in bmax of the treated samples are plotted relative to the vehicle control, which was normalized to
100%. neither ligand affected the kd of [3h] xxxd1913xxx . values represent the means of three independent experiments. ⴱ, p ⬍ 0.05, anova
followed by newman-keuls multiple comparison test for treated samples compared with controls. c, western blot analysis of cell lysates following
incubation of rkor cells for 24 h with saline (control), 1 ␮m naloxone, or 20 ␮m naloxone methiodide. the immunoblot shown is representative of three
independent experiments. d, rkor cells were incubated at 37°c with saline, naloxone (1 ␮m), or naloxone methiodide (20 ␮m) for 24 h. cells were
then dissociated, fixed with paraformaldehyde, washed, incubated with anti-flag m2 monoclonal antibody for 1 h, and then incubated with
anti-mouse igg conjugated with alexafluor 488 for 30 min. cell surface receptors were quantified with a facscan flow cytometer by acquiring 10,000
cells from each sample, and the geometric mean of fluorescence intensity was calculated using cellquest pro 5.2 software. data are the means of four
independent experiments. ⴱ, p ⬍ 0.05, anova, newman-keuls multiple comparison test for treated samples versus saline controls.

620

wannemacher et al.

52-kda kor species and a smaller 2-fold increase in the
42-kda form, whereas ␣-tubulin levels remained unchanged
(fig. 4c). it is apparent that the proteasome is involved in
the basal turnover rate of the ␬-opioid receptor.
effect of naltrexone on kor mrna levels and translational efficiency of kor mrna and sensitivity of naltrexone-induced rkor up-regulation to cycloheximide. reverse transcriptase-pcr was performed to determine
whether the naltrexone-induced up-regulation of kor binding
sites and immunoreactivity were associated with an increase in
the level of rkor mrna. cells that had been treated in the
absence and presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 2 or 24 h showed
no change in the steady-state levels of rkor mrna after normalization to actin mrna (fig. 5, a and b).
to determine whether naltrexone-induced up-regulation of
rkor was due to an increase in the translational efficiency of
its mrna, rkor cells were metabolically labeled with
[35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine in the presence or absence

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 4. biochemical characterization of the rkor immunoreactive species. a, rkor cell lysates were incubated with pngase f (625 u/ml) or
endo h (500 mu/ml) for 3 h at 37°c. digests were resolved using 10%
sds-page, and receptor species were identified using the anti-flag m1
antibody. b, rkor cells were solubilized with dodecylmaltoside and incubated for 6 h with wga-agarose. the flow-through (ft) fraction was
collected, and proteins bound to the resin were eluted with 500 mm
n- xxxd2683xxx  in column wash buffer. samples were assayed by
western blotting using anti-flag m1 antibody. c, rkor cells were
incubated for 6 h in the absence and presence of 10 mm zlll, and then
whole-cell lysates were assayed by western blotting using the anti-flag
m1 and ␣-tubulin antibodies. data are representative of three independent experiments.

of naltrexone. after the 1-h pulse period, the 42-kda band
was the predominant kor receptor species, and a significantly lower amount of the label was incorporated into the
52-kda form of the receptor. as seen in fig. 5c, naltrexone
treatment did not alter the incorporation of radiolabeled
amino acids into either the 42- or 52-kda species, suggesting
that naltrexone did not alter the rate of de novo rkor protein
synthesis.
the effect of the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide,
on ligand-induced ␬-receptor up-regulation was also investigated. for these experiments, a 2-h incubation time was used
to limit the cellular toxicity of the inhibitor. as shown earlier
in fig. 1, naltrexone treatment alone for 2 h increased the
level of the 52-kda ␬-receptor band by 2-fold and reduced the
level of the 42-kda form by 50%. incubation of rkor cells
with cycloheximide alone caused a 50% decrease in the
steady-state level of the 52-kda species and a 90% decrease
in the 42-kda species, whereas ␣-tubulin levels remained
unchanged. when coincubated with the antagonist, cycloheximide had no effect on naltrexone-induced kor up-regulation (fig. 5d). the 52-kda kor band was increased 2-fold by
naltrexone relative to the sample incubated with cycloheximide alone, and naltrexone also induced a further reduction
in the level of the faint 42-kda band in the presence of
cycloheximide. the lack of change in the level of ␣-tubulin
following inhibition of protein synthesis indicated that ␣-tubulin has a significantly longer half-life than the ␬ receptor
and provided evidence that cycloheximide was not overtly
toxic to the cell following short-term (2 h) exposure.
effect of bfa on ␬-receptor maturation and naltrexone-induced up-regulation. we next tested the effect of
disrupting the intracellular membrane secretory pathway with
brefeldin a on ligand-induced receptor up-regulation. treatment of rkor cells for 6 h with naltrexone caused an approximate 3-fold increase in the 52-kda kor species and a concomitant 2-fold decrease in the 42-kda species (fig. 6a), which was
similar to the results obtained after 8 h of exposure (fig. 1b).
after incubation of the cells for 6 h with bfa alone (at a
concentration slightly lower than that used previously by
petaja-repo et al., 2002 and chen et al., 2006), the pattern of
rkor immunoreactivity was altered. after bfa treatment, the
predominant receptor species in rkor cells was a diffuse band
with an apparent molecular mass of approximately 44 kda, and
a faint 48-kda form was also present (fig. 6a). the 42- and
52-kda receptors observed under basal conditions were absent.
coincubation of rkor cells with bfa and naltrexone for 6 h
increased the accumulation of the brefeldin-induced species by
more than 1.5-fold (fig. 6a). to confirm that the bfa-induced
receptor species were localized on intracellular membranes,
intact rkor cells were digested with trypsin. because there is
an arginine in the extracellular amino-terminal domain of the
rat ␬ receptor, and a lysine within the flag epitope at the
amino terminus of the receptor, digestion with trypsin will
release amino-terminal peptides rendering rkor undetectable
with anti-flag antibodies if the receptor is present on the cell
surface. after trypsin digestion, the 52-kda kor species disappeared, confirming its presence on the cell plasma membrane,
whereas the 42-kda species remained intact (fig. 6b). ␣-tubulin immunoreactivity was unaltered, verifying that the trypsin
digestion did not disrupt the integrity of the plasma membrane.
treatment of intact live cells with trypsin also failed to alter the
kor species that were present after bfa treatment, confirm-

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

621

ing that they were localized intracellularly (fig. 6b). similar to
naltrexone, coincubation with  xxxd2070xxx , cyclazocine, naloxone,
and naloxone methiodide increased the abundance of the bfadependent species, whereas dynorphin, u69,593, and salvinorin a had no effect (fig. 6c). it is significant that select
nonpeptidic ␬ ligands were incapable of up-regulating the bfadependent rkor species, whereas other ligands, including naloxone methiodide, stabilized the intracellular, bfa-induced receptor species.
pulse-chase analysis of the ␬ receptor in the absence and presence of naltrexone. rkor cells were labeled with [35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine for 30 min, then
chased with unlabeled amino acids in the presence or absence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for various times. after the 30-min
labeling period, the 42-kda kor species was predominant
(fig. 7a). a maximal 40% conversion of the 42-kda receptor
to the 52-kda species was observed after a 1-h chase in the
absence of naltrexone (fig. 7a). the extent of conversion
increased maximally to 80 to 90% after a 2-h chase in the
presence of naltrexone. naltrexone treatment caused an increase in the ratio of the 52- to 42-kda species relative to the
control samples at all chase times (fig. 7a).
cellular uptake of [3h]naloxone and [3h]u69,593.
to gain further insight into the mechanism and cellular
compartment involved in ligand-dependent receptor upregulation, we sought to determine whether the active
ligands were cell permeable. to assess cell permeability,

we incubated untransfected hek 293 cells with [3h]naloxone (which induces ␬-receptor up-regulation, fig. 2c) or
[3h]u69,593 (which does not induce ␬-receptor up-regulation, fig. 2c). after incubation of cells with either tritiated
ligand for 1, 2, or 4 h, followed by extensive washing to
remove any extracellular ligand, the cells were subjected
to hypotonic lysis and ultracentrifugation to separate the
cytoplasmic fraction from the lysed cell membranes. both
[3h]naloxone and [3h]u69,593 were present in the cytoplasmic fraction, as evident from the increased ligand content of the cytoplasmic fraction relative to the last cell
wash (fig. 8, a and b). these results provide direct evidence that select nonpeptidic opioid ligands are cell permeable. the results also imply that the cell permeability of
a ligand is not, in itself, sufficient for inducing ␬-receptor
up-regulation, given the inactivity of u69,593.
functional consequences of naltrexone-induced
rkor up-regulation. [35s]gtp␥s binding was assayed to
determine whether the naltrexone-induced up-regulation of
rkor was associated with an increase in agonist-dependent
g protein activation. rkor cells were incubated for 24 h in
the absence or presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone, and stimulation
of [35s]gtp␥s binding induced by u69,593 was assayed using membrane preparations from each group (fig. 9). naltrexone pretreatment caused a significant 2.2-fold increase in
the emax of u69,593 activation, from 250 ⫾ 30% of basal
levels in the controls to 540 ⫾ 35% of basal levels in the

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 5. effect of naltrexone on kor mrna levels and translational efficiency and insensitivity of naltrexone-induced rkor up-regulation to
cycloheximide. rkor cells were incubated at 37°c in the absence and presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 2 (a) or 24 (b) h. total rna was isolated, and
real-time pcr was performed with the rkor and actin primer pairs. relative rkor/actin mrna levels are displayed (n ⫽ 9). c, rkor cells were
preincubated in the absence or presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone for 2 h. culture medium replaced with methionine- and cysteine-free dmem in the
absence and presence of naltrexone and incubated further for 1 h. [35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine were added at 100 ␮ci/ml, and rkor cells were
incubated with and without naltrexone for an additional 1 h at 37°c. rkor was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates with anti-flag m1
antibody-agarose beads, resolved using 10% sds-page, and visualized by autoradiography. data are representative of three independent experiments. d, rkor cells were preincubated at 37°c for 30 min in the absence and presence of cycloheximide (120 ␮g/ml), then incubated for an additional
2 h in the absence and presence of naltrexone (1 ␮m). cell lysates were prepared and subjected to sds-page and western blot analysis using the
anti-flag m1 and ␣-tubulin antibodies. data are representative of three independent experiments.

622

wannemacher et al.

naltrexone-treated samples (mean ⫾ s.e.m., p ⬍ 0.05, twotailed student’s t test). naltrexone pretreatment did not significantly alter the ec50 of u69,593, which was 330 ⫾ 60 and
170 ⫾ 25 nm in vehicle- and naltrexone-treated samples,
respectively (mean ⫾ s.e.m., p ⫽ 0.06, two-tailed student’s t
test).

discussion
although the observation of antagonist-mediated opioid
receptor up-regulation was made many years ago (lahti and
collins, 1978), the mechanism has remained enigmatic. in
this study, the abundance of rkor mrna did not change
following naltrexone, indicating that receptor up-regulation
occurred at a post-transcriptional step. previous studies also
found no change in ␮- and ␦-receptor mrna levels after
antagonist treatment (jenab et al., 1995; unterwald et al.,
1995; castelli et al., 1997). naltrexone did not alter amino
acid incorporation into rkor during a 1-h pulse, suggesting
that up-regulation occurred post-translationally. consistent
with this observation, ligand-induced rkor up-regulation
was insensitive to inhibition of protein synthesis.
rkor up-regulation was associated with a decrease in the
level of the 42-kda precursor and a concomitant increase in
the mature 52-kda receptor, and the increase in immunore-

activity occurred in parallel with the increase in bmax. the 3to 4-fold up-regulation observed herein was significantly
greater than the maximal 30% up-regulation of the human
kor induced by naloxone (chen et al., 2006). the reason for
the discrepant magnitudes of up-regulation may be due to
species differences or to the use of different cell lines to
express the receptors.
we found that rkor did not down-regulate following incubation of rkor cells with agonists, suggesting that ligandinduced up-regulation was not simply the reversal of processes involved in down-regulation. jordan et al. (2000) also
reported that treatment with dynorphin a(1–13) and
u69,593 for 24 to 72 h did not down-regulate the rkor
expressed in chinese hamster ovary cells. it has been observed that prolonged treatment with u50,488h led to downregulation of the human, but not rat, kor expressed in
chinese hamster ovary cells (zhang et al., 2002). this species-dependent difference is remarkable given that the human and rat kors are identical in 94% of amino acid positions. chen et al. (2006) reported that alkaloid agonists (with
the exception of  xxxd2070xxx ) caused a modest reduction (15–
30%) in the level of the mature 55-kda human kor, whereas
 xxxd2070xxx , pentazocine, naloxone, norbinaltorphimine, and
naloxonazine increased the level by 10 to 30%.

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 6. effect of brefeldin a on ␬-receptor
processing and ligand-induced up-regulation. a, rkor cells were preincubated at
37°c for 30 min in the absence and presence of 3 ␮g/ml bfa, then incubated with
and without 1 ␮m naltrexone for 6 h, and
cell lysates were assayed by western
blotting. b, rkor cells were treated with
or without 3 ␮g/ml bfa for 6 h at 37°c,
then 0.25% trypsin was added and incubated for 5 min at 37°c. cells were harvested and washed, and whole-cell lysates were analyzed by western blotting
using the anti-flag m1 and ␣-tubulin
antibodies. c, rkor cells were preincubated at 37°c for 30 min in the absence
and presence of 3 ␮g/ml bfa, then incubated with and without opioid ligands for
6 h, and cell lysates were assayed by
western blotting. ligands were tested at
1 ␮m, except naloxone methiodide, which
was used at 20 ␮m. whole-cell lysates
were prepared and subjected to western
blot analysis. data are representative of
three independent experiments.

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

in our study, dynorphin(1–13), ␤-neoendorphin, salvinorin
a, and u69,593 did not induce up-regulation of rkor; however, other agonists ( xxxd2070xxx  and cyclazocine) did. all antagonists that were tested (including naloxone methiodide)
up-regulated rkor. it is obvious that neither relative ligand
affinity nor pharmacological profile (agonist or antagonist)
correlated with the capability to induce up-regulation. at the
concentrations used, all ligands tested would saturate the
rkor binding sites at the cell surface; therefore, engagement
of the receptor on the plasma membrane was not sufficient
for induction of up-regulation. up-regulation was associated
with more efficient processing of the 42-kda intermediate to
the 52-kda mature receptor, so it is possible that the active
ligands exert their activity by entering the cell and acting as
pharmacological chaperones, as proposed for the vasopressin
receptor (morello et al., 2000). it is also possible that agonists
and antagonists capable of inducing up-regulation do so by

fig. 8. cellular uptake of [3h]naloxone and [3h]u69,593. untransfected
hek 293 cells were incubated in serum-free dmem with 10 nm [3h]naloxone (a) or [3h]u69,593 (b) for 1, 2, or 4 h at 37°c. cells were harvested,
washed four times, then lysed in hypotonic buffer. the cell cytoplasm was
separated from the membrane pellet by centrifugation at 100,000g for 30
min at 4°c. the presence of tritiated ligand in the resulting fractions was
determined by liquid scintillation counting. inset, tritiated ligand content
in the last wash and cytoplasmic fractions. data are the means of three
independent experiments. ⴱ, p ⬍ 0.05; ⴱⴱ, p ⬍ 0.01, anova, newmankeuls multiple comparison test for cytoplasm versus last wash at each
time point.

activating a signal transduction pathway that is initiated by
receptor binding at the cell surface that regulates intracellular receptor maturation. pertussis toxin does not inhibit ligand-induced rkor up-regulation, however, and ligands
that did not induce up-regulation did not block the up-regulation induced by active ligands (k. m. wannemacher and
r. d. howells, unpublished data).
one might speculate that the inactivity of dynorphin(1–13)
was due to its peptidic nature, which would disfavor membrane permeability; however, it has been reported that
dynorphin(1–17) was membrane permeable (marinova et al.,
2005). if dynorphin(1–13) is cell-permeable, it is possible that

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 7. pulse-chase analysis of ␬-receptor expression following naltrexone
treatment. rkor cells were incubated in methionine- and cysteine-free
dmem for 1 h at 37°c. [35s]methionine and [35s]cysteine were added at
150 ␮ci/ml, and cells were pulse-labeled for 30 min at 37°c. cells were
washed with serum-free dmem containing 120 ␮g/ml cycloheximide to
block further incorporation and incubated in the absence or presence of 1
␮m naltrexone for various times in the continued presence of cycloheximide. rkor was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates with anti-flag
m1 antibody-agarose beads, and the eluted protein was resolved using
10% sds-page and visualized by autoradiography (a). b, quantitative
analysis of the 52-kda species over time. c, quantitative analysis of the
42-kda species over time.

623

624

wannemacher et al.

it lacks the activity of a pharmacological chaperone. the
same argument may be applicable to explain the inactivity of
u69,593 because we have shown that it is cell-permeable
(fig. 8b). it is also likely that salvinorin a is cell-permeable
because it is uncharged, hydrophobic, and orally active. if
these ligands can penetrate the cell, their inactivity may be
due to a lack of intrinsic activity as pharmacological chaperones. it is widely assumed that quaternary opioid analogs,
like naloxone methiodide, are not cell permeable; however,
subcutaneous injection of quaternary naloxone and quaternary nalorphine precipitated withdrawal in morphine-dependent rhesus monkeys (valentino et al., 1983), supporting the
notion that naloxone methiodide can enter the cell because it
is able to cross the blood-brain barrier.
in transfected hek 293 cells, the predominant 42-kda
receptor species and the less abundant 52-kda ␬ receptor
species contained asparagine-linked oligosaccharides, based
on their susceptibility to digestion with pngase f. the two
pngase f-digestion products migrated differently, presumably due to other post-translational modifications, such as
o-glycosylation, that occur on the larger pngase product. in
contrast, only the 42-kda receptor was cleaved by endoglycosidase h, indicating that it contained high mannose-type
oligosaccharides. this suggested that the 42-kda form was a
biosynthetic intermediate of the 52-kda species. pulse-chase
analysis also strongly supported this proposal (fig. 7). in
addition, the 52-kda receptor species bound to and was
eluted from wga-agarose, whereas the 42-kda form did not.
wga binds to outer chain n- xxxd2683xxx  and terminal
sialic acid residues in complex-type oligosaccharides (bhavanandan and katlic, 1979), and peroxidase-conjugated
wga was shown to stain the trans-golgi cisternae, transgolgi network, associated vesicles, and the cell membrane,
but not the nuclear envelope, rough endoplasmic reticulum,
or cis-golgi cisternae (tartakoff and vassalli, 1983). these
observations provide further support that the 52-kda kor
receptor species is located in a membrane compartment dis-

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

fig. 9. increased agonist-induced stimulation of [35s]gtp␥s binding
following naltrexone-induced rkor up-regulation. rkor cells were incubated at 37°c for 24 h in the absence and presence of 1 ␮m naltrexone.
membrane fractions (7.5 ␮g of protein) were incubated with 0.3 nm
[35s]gtp␥s and 10 ␮m gdp in the absence or presence of varying
concentrations of u69,593 at 30°c for 90 min. reactions were terminated
by filtration, and filter-bound radioactivity was determined by liquid
scintillation counting. dose-response curves were analyzed by nonlinear
regression using prism 3.0 (graphpad software) to determine emax and
ec50 values. data are representative of three independent experiments.
inset, western blot analysis of rkor in cell lysates derived from the
vehicle- and naltrexone-treated cells.

tal to the trans-golgi in the secretory pathway, and the
42-kda species is localized in an intracellular membrane
compartment somewhere between the endoplasmic reticulum and the medial-golgi cisternae. trypsin treatment of
intact cells completely eliminated the 52-kda kor but did
not affect the 42-kda kor, suggesting that the 52-kda receptor was located on the plasma membrane, whereas the
42-kda form was intracellular.
a large fraction (30%) of newly synthesized proteins are
degraded by the proteasome as a result of misfolding and
targeting by the endoplasmic reticulum quality control system (schubert et al., 2000). incubation of rkor cells with a
proteasome inhibitor increased the abundance of both kor
species, although the effect was greater for the 52-kda form.
therefore, the proteasome is also involved in the turnover of
the rkor, as reported previously for ␮- and ␦-opioid receptors (chaturvedi et al., 2001). proteasome inhibition blocked
the degradation of both kor species, but stabilization of the
smaller form presumably also promotes its processing to the
52-kda receptor.
bfa disrupts the secretory pathway by inhibiting anterograde vesicular transport through the golgi apparatus and
causes the collapse of golgi cisternae and the redistribution
of golgi enzymes into the endoplasmic reticulum (lippincottschwartz et al., 1989). bfa acts as an uncompetitive inhibitor of the  xxxg186xxx  guanine nucleotide exchange factor, gbf1, by
binding to an  xxxg186xxx -gdp/gbf1 complex (niu et al., 2005).
after incubation of rkor cells with bfa, the apparent molecular mass of the predominant rkor species increased to
44 kda. this shift was probably due to the mixing of enzymes
from the golgi cisternae with those of the endoplasmic reticulum, and the 44-kda intermediate was unable to traffic out
of the endoplasmic reticulum/golgi apparatus in the presence of bfa. treatment of whole cells with trypsin failed to
alter the abundance of the bfa-induced species, providing
evidence that the 44-kda protein was located intracellularly
(in the bfa-induced, merged endoplasmic reticulum/golgi
complex). processing was obviously incomplete after bfa
because the mature 52-kda receptor species was absent.
acquisition of sialic acid is one of the last steps in n-linked
oligosaccharide processing, and the sialyltransferase resides
in the trans-golgi network that does not redistribute back
into the endoplasmic reticulum in the presence of bfa
(chege and pfeffer, 1990; lippincott-schwartz et al., 1991).
coincubation of bfa with naltrexone, naloxone, naloxone
methiodide,  xxxd2070xxx , or cyclazocine further increased the
accumulation of the 44- to 48-kda kor immunoreactivity by
1.5-fold relative to bfa treatment alone. this subset of ligands was the same that up-regulated the 52-kda kor
species in the absence of bfa (figs. 2c and 3c), providing
support for the hypothesis that these ligands act intracellularly by binding to the ␬-receptor population trapped in the
bfa-induced er/golgi tubules, stimulating proper folding
and inhibiting proteolysis mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation system that degrades misfolded proteins.
we propose that the molecular mechanism responsible for
kor up-regulation involves a pharmacological chaperone
action of a select subset of kor ligands mediated by ligand
engagement of intracellular receptors, thereby enhancing the
folding and rate of receptor maturation through the secretory
pathway and by protecting receptor intermediates from deg-

ligand-induced up-regulation of the ␬-opioid receptor

radation by the proteasome. the outcome is an increase in
the number of kor binding sites, an increase in the level of
kor protein at the cell surface, and supersensitivity to agonist-induced g protein activation. it appears that cellular
permeability is necessary but not sufficient for a ligand to
induce kor up-regulation. the basis of the differential chaperone activity of select kor ligands will require further
investigation.
acknowledgments

we thank alexandra terskiy for helpful comments and critically
reading the manuscript.
references

(1991) brefeldin a’s effects on endosomes, lysosomes, and the tgn suggest a
general mechanism for regulating organelle structure and membrane traffic. cell
67:601– 616.
magnan j, paterson sj, tavani a, and kosterlitz hw (1982) the binding spectrum
of narcotic analgesic drugs with different agonist and antagonist properties. naunyn schmiedebergs arch pharmacol 319:197–205.
marinova z, vukojevic v, surcheva s, yakovleva t, cebers g, pasikova n, usynin i,
hugonin l, fang w, hallberg m, et al. (2005) translocation of dynorphin neuropeptides across the plasma membrane. j biol chem 280:26360 –26370.
mcquay h (1999) opioids in pain management. lancet 353:2229 –2232.
morello j-p, salahpour a, laperriere a, bernier v, arthus m-f, lonergan m,
petaja-repo u, angers s, morin d, bichet dg, et al. (2000) pharmacological
chaperones rescue cell-surface expression and function of misfolded v2 vasopressin receptor mutants. j clin invest 105:887– 895.
morris bj, millan mj, and herz a (1988) antagonist-induced opioid receptor upregulation: ii. regionally specific modulation of mu, delta and kappa binding sites
in rat brain revealed by quantitative autoradiography. j pharmacol exp ther
247:729 –736.
niu t-k, pfeifer ac, lippincott-schwartz j, and jackson cl (2005) dynamics of
gbf1, a brefeldin a-sensitive  xxxg186xxx  exchange factor at the golgi. mol biol cell
16:1213–1222.
oksche a and rosenthal w (1998) the molecular basis of nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus. j mol med 76:327–337.
petaja-repo ue, hogue m, bhalla s, laperriere a, morello jp, and bouvier m (2002)
ligands act as pharmacological chaperones and increase the efficiency of ␦ opioid
receptor maturation. embo j 21:1628 –1637.
schubert u, anton lc, gibbs j, norbury cc, yewdell jw, bennink jr (2000) rapid
degradation of a large fraction of newly synthesized proteins by the proteasome.
nature 404:770 –774.
sung c-h, schneider bg, agarwal n, papermaster ds, and nathans j (1991)
functional heterogeneity of mutant rhodopsins responsible for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. proc natl acad sci u s a 88:8840 – 8844.
tang ah and collins rj (1978) enhanced analgesic effects of morphine after chronic
administration of naloxone in the rat. eur j pharmacol 47:473– 474.
tartakoff am and vassalli p (1983) lectin-binding sites as markers of golgi subcompartments: proximal-to-distal maturation of oligosaccharides. j cell biol 97:
1243–1248.
thomas pj, qu b, and pederson pi (1995) defective protein folding as a basis of
human disease. trends biochem sci 20:456 – 459.
unterwald em, rubenfeld jm, imai y, wang jb, uhl gr, and kreek mj (1995)
chronic opioid antagonist administration up-regulates  xxxg1635xxx  binding
without altering  xxxg1635xxx  mrna levels. mol brain res 33:351–355.
unterwald em and howells rd (2008) up-regulation of opioid receptors, in opioid
receptors and antagonists: from bench to clinic: contemporary neuroscience
series (dean rl iii, bilsky ej, and negus ss iii eds), humana press, totowa, nj,
in press.
valentino rj, katz jl, medzhiradsky f, and woods jh (1983) receptor binding,
antagonist, and withdrawal precipitating properties of opiate antagonists. life sci
32:2887–2896.
welch wj and howard m (2000) antagonists to the rescue. j clin invest 105:853–
854.
yadav pn, chaturvedi k, and howells rd (2007) inhibition of agonist-induced down
regulation of the ␦-opioid receptor with a proteasome inhibitor attenuates opioid
tolerance in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. j pharmacol exp ther 320:1–9.
zhang f, li j, li j-g, and liu-chen l-y (2002) (⫺)u50,488h [(trans)-3,4-dichloron-methyl-n-[2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-cyclohexyl]benzeneacetamide] induces internalization and down-regulation of the human, but not the rat, ␬-opioid receptor: structural basis for the differential regulation. j pharmacol exp ther 302:1184 –1192.

address correspondence to: dr. richard d. howells, department of biochemistry and molecular biology, 185 south orange avenue, msb e643,
newark, nj 07101-1709. e-mail: howells@umdnj.edu

downloaded from jpet.aspetjournals.org at aspet journals on november 14, 2015

bhavanandan v and katlic a (1979) the interaction of wheat germ agglutinin with
sialoglycoproteins. j biol chem 254:4000 – 4007.
castelli mp, melis m, mameli m, fadda p, diaz g, and gessa gl (1997) chronic
morphine and naltrexone fail to modify ␮-opioid receptor mrna levels in the rat
brain. mol brain res 45:149 –153.
chaipatikul v, erickson-herbrandson lj, loh hh, and law py (2003) rescuing the
traffic-deficient mutants of rat ␮-opioid receptors with hydrophobic ligands. mol
pharmacol 64:32– 41.
chaturvedi k, bandari p, chinen n, and howells rd (2001) proteasome involvement in agonist-induced down regulation of ␮ and ␦ opioid receptors. j biol chem
276:12345–12355.
chege nw and pfeffer sr (1990) compartmentation of the golgi complex: brefeldin
a distinguishes trans-golgi cisternae from the trans-golgi network. j cell biol
111:893– 899.
chen y, chen c, wang y, and liu-chen ly (2006) ligands regulate cell surface level
of the human ␬ opioid receptor by activation-induced down-regulation and pharmacological chaperone-mediated enhancement: differential effects of nonpeptide
and peptide agonists. j pharmacol exp ther 319:765–775.
ellgaard l and helenius a (2003) quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum. nat
rev mol cell biol 4:181–191.
jenab s, kest b, and inturrisi ce (1995) assessment of delta opioid antinociception
and receptor mrna levels in mouse after chronic naltrexone treatment. brain res
691:69 –75.
jordan ba, cvejic s, and devi la (2000)  xxxg1633xxx  endocytosis by
dynorphin peptides. dna cell biol 19:19 –27.
lahti r and collins r (1978) chronic naloxone results in prolonged increases in
opiate binding sites in brain. eur j pharmacol 51:185–186.
latronico ac and segaloff dl (1999) naturally occurring mutations of the luteinizing  xxxg1603xxx : lessons learned about reproductive physiology and g protein-coupled receptors. am j hum genet 65:949 –958.
leanos-miranda a, ulloa-aguirre a, janovick ja, and conn pm (2005) in vitro
coexpression and pharmacological rescue of mutant  xxxg930xxx  receptors causing hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in humans expressing
compound heterozygous alleles. j clin endocrinol metab 90:3001–3008.
lesscher hm, bailey a, burbach jp, van ree jm, kitchen i, and gerrits ma (2003)
receptor-selective changes in mu-, delta-, and kappa-opioid receptors after chronic
naltrexone treatment in mice. eur j neurosci 17:1006 –1012.
li j, chen c, huang p, and liu-chen l (2001)  xxxd1422xxx  up-regulates the
constitutively active d3.49(164)q mutant of the rat ␮-opioid receptor by stabilizing
the structure and blocking constitutive internalization and down-regulation. mol
pharmacol 60:1064 –1075.
lippincott-schwartz j, yuan lc, bonifacino js, and klausner rd (1989) rapid
redistribution of golgi proteins into the er in cells treated with brefeldin a:
evidence for membrane cycling from golgi to er. cell 56:801– 813.
lippincott-schwartz j, yuan lc, tipper c, amherdt m, orci l, and klausner rd

625

