recombinant human keratinocyte growth factor  xxxd2829xxx  reduces oral mucositis and improves patient outcomes after stem cell transplant.  oral mucositis, the breakdown of the mucosal lining of the oropharynx, occurs as a result of a toxic insult to the normal epithelium of the oral mucosa. typically this is seen after exposure to a toxic agent such as radiation or chemotherapy; therefore, it is a frequent problem for patients undergoing treatment for cancer. in clinical trials, mucositis has been reported in up to 98% of patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy followed by hematological stem cell transplant. when mucositis develops it causes severe patient symptoms such as pain, but it is also associated with inferior clinical outcomes including increased infection, narcotic use and even mortality. in clinical trials,  xxxd2829xxx , a recombinant humanized keratinocyte growth factor (rhukgf), has demonstrated an ability to decrease the incidence and duration of mucositis. in the registrational phase iii trial in patients undergoing stem cell transplant for hematological malignancies, only 63% of patients who received  xxxd2829xxx  developed world health organization grade 3 or 4 mucositis compared to 98% of patients on the placebo arm (1). the patients on the  xxxd2829xxx  arm also had a shorter duration of mucositis with significantly decreased pain, use of narcotics, need for  xxxd3210xxx  and febrile neutropenia. based on these results,  xxxd2829xxx  became the first drug that has been approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) to decrease the incidence and duration of severe oral mucositis in patients with hematological malignancies receiving high-dose chemotherapy requiring hematopoietic stem cell support. the development of mucositis is also a problem for patients receiving treatment for nonhematological tumors. in clinical trials, mucositis has been reported in over 75% of patients receiving combined chemo-/radiotherapy for head and neck cancer or fluorouracil for metastatic colon cancer. initial phase i and ii clinical trials of  xxxd2829xxx  have demonstrated a benefit in patients receiving chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy for solid tumors; however, large phase iii trials need to be completed before  xxxd2829xxx  can gain fda approval for this indication.