molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

review

mechanisms of killing by anti-cd20 monoclonal antibodies
martin j. glennie a,∗ , ruth r. french a , mark s. cragg a , ronald p. taylor b
a

tenovus research laboratory, cancer sciences division, southampton university school of medicine,
general hospital, southampton so16 6yd, uk
b department of biochemistry and molecular genetics, university of virginia health sciences center,
p.o. box 800733, charlottesville, va 22908-0733, usa
received 30 may 2007

abstract
cd20 is a cell-surface marker expressed on mature b cells and most malignant b cells, but not stem or plasma cells. it is an ideal target for
monoclonal antibodies (mab), such as rituximab and  xxxd2771xxx , as it is expressed at high levels on most b-cell malignancies, but does not become
internalized or shed from the plasma membrane following mab treatment. this allows mab to persist on the cell surface for extended periods and
deliver sustained immunological attack from complement and fcr-expressing innate effectors, particularly macrophages. cd20 can also generate
transmembrane signals when engaged by certain mab which, although unproven, might provide an important element of the therapeutic success
of anti-cd20 mab. these favourable characteristics have led to anti-cd20 mab being developed and exploited for use in immunotherapy, where
they have proven remarkably efficacious in both the treatment of malignant disease and autoimmune disorders by deleting malignant or normal b
cells, respectively. in this review, we discuss how these mab have driven research in the immunotherapy field over the last decade, detail their likely
modes of action and their limitations in terms of effector exhaustion, and explore ways in which they might be enhanced and further exploited in
the future.
© 2007 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
keywords: cd20; monoclonal antibody; cdc; adcc; pcd; b cell; immunotherapy; effector exhaustion; the shaving reaction

1. introduction
the chimeric anti-cd20 mab rituximab was approved for
use in relapsed or refractory low-grade or follicular b-cell nonhodgkin’s lymphoma (nhl) in 1997. it has since become a
major element in the management of many b-cell malignancies
and provided important impetus to the biotechnology industry
in its search for mab-based drugs. most lymphoma patients
now receive rituximab at some point in their treatment. as a
single agent, it produces objective, mostly partial, responses in
approximately half the cases of relapsed nhl (mclaughlin et
al., 1998; coiffier, 2006). however, its full worth is seen only
when combined with conventional chemotherapy such as chop
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone),
where responses are significantly improved with a high proporabbreviations: mac, membrane attack complex; mab, monoclonal antibody; pcd, programmed cell death
∗ corresponding author. tel.: +44 23 80320103; fax: +44 23 80704061.
e-mail address: mjg@soton.ac.uk (m.j. glennie).
0161-5890/$ – see front matter © 2007 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2007.06.151

tion of cases achieving long-term survival (cheung et al., 2007).
such combinations have had most impact in the more aggressive
diffuse large b-cell lymphoma where rituximab combined with
chop is now considered as the standard for certain patients
(feugier et al., 2005; coiffier, 2006). despite such advances
there are many unanswered questions, particularly concerning
the optimal treatment dose of rituximab and how long it should
be continued for patients who might benefit from maintenance
therapy. one of the major benefits of most mab drugs such as
rituximab, is their lack of long-term toxicity and the fact that
any short-term adverse effects associated with infusion do not
overlap with those from chemotherapy; thus, the gains in efficacy from combination therapy do not come at the expense of
increased toxicity.
in addition to b-cell malignancies, there is a growing interest in the use of rituximab for the treatment of autoimmune
conditions and in particular rheumatoid arthritis (edwards and
cambridge, 2006). in a recent randomized, double-blind, controlled study, it was concluded that ‘in patients with active
rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate treatment, a single

3824

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

course of two infusions of rituximab, alone or in combination with either cyclophosphamide or continued methotrexate,
provided significant improvement in disease symptoms at both
weeks 24 and 48 (edwards et al., 2004). in fact, the results
showed that when rituximab was added to these chemotherapies,
disease improved by at least 50% in more than 40% of patients,
compared with a similar improvement in only 13% of those
on methotrexate alone. the impressive ability of rituximab to
deplete normal b cells has revealed their previously unappreciated importance in many autoimmune conditions. as with b-cell
lymphoma, optimal results are achieved only when rituximab is
combined with chemotherapy, allowing sustained depletion of
circulating b cells which can last in excess of 6 months. during
this time the patients appear well, with surprisingly modest loss
of normal immunoglobulins, the levels of which rarely fall outside the normal range. this maintenance of immunoglobulins
in all types of patients has been an important lesson from rituximab treatment, underlining the ability of long-lived, cd20−,
plasma cells to sustain humoral immunity (hoyer et al., 2004,
2005; martin and chan, 2004).
compared with rituximab, other potential anti-lymphoma
treatments, such as mab against  xxxg375xxx  and cd37, have been
disappointing to date, producing only modest responses in pilot
clinical trials, and this has resulted in a general lack of enthusiasm for taking such reagents through to full clinical development
(reff et al., 1994; pescovitz, 2006). in some cases, such as anticd22, anti-cd23 and anti- xxxg396xxx , mab have been developed
and tested more extensively, but their performance when used
as monotherapy has also been unexceptional and most are now

being explored in combination with other treatments, especially
with rituximab, in the hope that some unexpected additive benefit
might be revealed (czuczman et al., 2005; fanale and younes,
2007; leonard et al., 2007). in the case of anti- xxxg378xxx  mab,
which is internalized very efficiently into the endosome of target
cells (chan et al., 1998; carnahan et al., 2003), the main hope
is that it can be linked to a suitable toxin (meng et al., 2004;
kreitman and pastan, 2006; pastan et al., 2007). the only other
mab which have shown anything like similar potency are the
logistically impractical anti-idiotype mab tailor-made for individual cases of follicular lymphoma (davis et al., 1998), and the
humanized mab alemtuzumab (anti- xxxg393xxx ) approved for treatment resistant chronic lymphoid leukaemia (cll) (keating et
al., 2003; byrd et al., 2006).
in addition to their potency in human lymphoma and
xenograft models (clynes et al., 2000; di gaetano et al., 2003;
cragg and glennie, 2004; golay et al., 2006), more recently,
anti-cd20 mab have been confirmed to perform well at depleting b cells in mice carrying a human cd20 transgene (gong
et al., 2005). however, perhaps the most convincing evidence
of the potency of anti-cd20 mab comes from the recent work
of tedder et al. (2006), showing that a panel of mouse antimouse cd20 mab have outstanding efficacy at depleting b
cells in wild-type mice. this is important because, until this
point, almost all other anti-b-cell mab specificities tested in
mice, including many of the same mab tested in humans, such
as anti- xxxg375xxx  and anti- xxxg378xxx , had failed to give efficient depletion of normal or malignant b cells (krop et al., 1996). the
recent work from yazawa et al. (2005) comparing the depletion

fig. 1. schematic illustrating the multiple levels of target cell regulation available to mab. after mab binding, fc domains can cluster to provide an optimal platform
for the binding of c1q, resulting in the activation of the classical complement pathway. activation results in the release of anaphylatoxins ( xxxg282xxx ,  xxxg283xxx  and c5a), as
well as opsonins which derive from c3 (i.e. c3b). these products of complement activation promote phagocytosis and enhance the activation status of effector cells.
in certain contexts, complement activation can also lead to the generation of membrane attack complexes that can enter the target cell membrane and cause lysis.
finally, binding of the target antigen can also initiate intracellular signals in the target cell, potentially resulting in programmed cell death. intriguingly it appears that
for anti-cd20 mab, different mab might utilize different effector mechanisms: type i anti-cd20 mab, such as rituximab, appear to operate through the activation
of complement and effector cell mechanisms whereas type ii mab, such as b1 and  xxxd2765xxx , appear to operate independently of complement activation and likely
function through a combination of effector cell activation and pcd induction.

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

of normal b cells in mice with different anti-cd20 and anticd19 mab underlines this difference in efficiency. here 2 ␮g
of anti-cd20 mab depleted circulating cd20+ cells for more
than 7 days, while a similar dose of anti- xxxg375xxx  mab of the same
isotype caused little more than a transient reduction. thus, we
can confidently say that cd20 holds a very special position as
a target for mab in the depletion of normal and malignant b
cells. here we will discuss the effector mechanisms used by
anti-cd20 mab to try to give some insight into such activity
(fig. 1).
2. the potency of anti-cd20 mab
explaining why anti-cd20 mab have been so successful in
eradicating unwanted b cells has proved difficult. as we will
discuss, anti-cd20 mab such as rituximab do not seem to mediate any unique function that we can measure in vitro to explain
their potency, more likely it is due to a combination of factors. for example, cd20 is usually expressed at high levels on
b cells compared with most targets, often more than 250,000
molecules per cell, allowing dense accumulation of the mab
on the plasma membrane. this appears important, particularly
for complement-dependent cytotoxicity (cdc) and golay et al.
(2000) have shown that cd20 density provides the best correlation with cdc, which may be important for outcome. the cd20
molecule is also resistant to internalization and remains on the
cell surface with its bound mab for extended periods of hours,
and perhaps days (johnson and glennie, 2003; press et al., 1989;
mclaughlin et al., 1998). this is important because unlike other
b-cell targets, such as  xxxg378xxx , it probably allows anti-cd20 mab
to sustain the recruitment of natural effectors and thereby maintain any immunological attack for as long as the effectors are
available. lack of internalization also reduces the consumption
of the mab by the target cells. it is likely that we often underestimate the capacity of tumours to consume mab as a result of
target turnover in the membrane. one of the features of rituximab
treatment that probably contributes to its success is its persistence in the patients. cd20 is a multi-transmembrane molecule
with four predicted hydrophobic motifs that cross the membrane
and two extracellular loops, the larger of which provides most
of the epitopes recognized by mab (cragg et al., 2005). such
loops do not extend far from the target membrane and allow
any bound anti-cd20 mab to be held close to the cell surface,
a factor which may be important for recruiting certain types of
effector, particularly complement for cdc (teeling et al., 2006).
it is perhaps more than coincidence that the other effective antib-cell mab, alemtuzumab, approved for cll treatment, also
has a small extracellular motif consisting of only 12 glycosylated amino acids and will also hold any bound igg close to the
membrane (ermini et al., 2005). finally, although poorly defined
at this stage, there is the potentially important ability of cd20
to act as a signalling molecule to trigger programmed cell death
(pcd) when engaged by certain types of mab (see below). it is
likely that all these properties are important, with their relative
contributions being dependent on factors such as the nature and
location of the target cells and the type of anti-cd20 mab being
used.

3825

to add further complexity to the situation, we have also
shown that anti-cd20 mab are of two distinct types: type i,
or rituximab-like, which activate complement and are relatively
poor at mediating pcd unless extensively cross-linked by antiantibody; and a rarer type ii, or bexxar-like, which are relatively
inactive in complement activation but tend to promote more pcd
as igg or f(ab )2 molecules (chan et al., 2003; cragg et al.,
2003; cragg and glennie, 2004). both types of mab are equally
potent in antibody-mediated cellular cytotoxicity (adcc) with
fcr-bearing myeloid effectors. in terms of their biophysical
properties, these two types are distinguished by their ability to
reorganize cd20 molecules into different phases of the plasma
membrane called ‘microdomains’ or lipid ‘rafts’. microdomains
can be isolated by membrane fractionation on the basis of differential solubility in detergents such as triton x (deans et al.,
1998). type i mab are able to efficiently shift cd20 complexes
into detergent-insoluble microdomains, but the rare type ii mab
are not. this translocation of cd20:anti-cd20 mab complexes
into microdomains appears important for the ability of type i
mab to bind c1q and activate complement, probably because
the process concentrates the mab fc regions in such a way that
they very efficiently engage multiple globular heads of the c1q
molecules, thereby initiating the classical complement pathway
(cragg and glennie, 2004; teeling et al., 2004, 2006). despite
having such distinct functional properties, we do not understand
what aspect of their binding causes such differences. for example, in the case of rituximab and b1, the prototypical type i and
ii mab, both bind to the same region of the extracellular loop
of cd20 and in both cases a point mutation that converts proline 172 to alanine will ablate almost all binding for both mab
(polyak and deans, 2002; teeling et al., 2004; perosa et al.,
2005). furthermore, it is not simply a difference in the ability of
these mab to cross-link cd20 molecules since the same properties of cd20 translocation to microdomains are retained by
their univalent fab fragments (unpublished observation). one
of the most interesting recent observations concerning the differences between these mab comes from the work of umana et al.
(2006) working with a new anti-cd20 mab,  xxxd2765xxx .  xxxd2765xxx  is
a humanized type ii cd20 igg1 mab engineered for enhanced
adcc (through a fucosylated fc region) and direct induction
of pcd. it was developed from a mouse mab, bly-1, which
appeared to have the properties of a typical type i cd20 mab and
was therefore unable to initiate pcd efficiently. interestingly,
however, after making an unspecified change to the sequence of
the framework during the humanization process,  xxxd2765xxx  converted to a type ii mab with enhanced ability to initiate pcd
of a wide range of cd20+ targets, including those in fresh
biopsy material. furthermore, the prospects for developing this
reagent as a clinical product are encouraging, since the advantages were translated in vivo using a range of nhl xenograft
models, including aggressive diffuse large b-cell lymphoma and
myeloid cell leukaemia. finally, for unknown reasons, we also
find that at saturation, the number of type i mab bound to each b
cell is twice that observed for type ii mab (teeling et al., 2004).
a number of workers have reported that cd20 exists as complexes in the plasma membrane containing at least a tetramer of
cd20 (bubien et al., 1993; polyak and deans, 2002), and one

3826

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

possible explanation for these differences in binding stoichiometry may be that type ii mab engage two adjacent extracellular
loops within a complex while the type i mab bind only one.
while this explanation might satisfy the observed 2:1 binding
ratio, it would not explain differences in the induction of cd20
translocation between type i and ii mab.
in vivo data from both lymphoma xenografts and depletion
of normal b cells (transgenic for human cd20) suggest that
type ii mab, despite being less efficient at engaging complement, are more potent than their type i counterparts (cragg and
glennie, 2004; umana et al., 2006; beers et al., unpublished).
this is perhaps surprising given that they saturate their targets
with half the number of igg molecules, and would suggest that
either complement is actually detrimental to immunotherapy,
a suggestion which has recently been proposed (wang et al.,
2006), or that their increased ability to mediate pcd is important.
we favour the latter explanation since at least two reports have
shown that f(ab )2 fragments are capable of inducing pcd and
in one case these fc-deficient fragments gave appreciable therapeutic activity against a cd20+ xenograft (cragg and glennie,
2004).
3. mechanisms of action of anti-cd20 mab
given the unusual clinical efficacy of rituximab and the
other anti-cd20 mab now under development, we might have
expected some outstanding activity in one or more in vitro effector assays to point to how these mab work in vivo. generally,
this has not been the case and most workers in the field feel
that in vitro assays, using anti-cd20 and other specificities, do
not help predict clinical success. certainly this has been true for
adcc assays, where the majority of mab, provided they are
not internalized too rapidly by the target cell (e.g. anti- xxxg378xxx 
mab), are cytotoxic in vitro. similarly, most histological types of
cd20+ lymphoma are sensitive to rituximab-mediated adcc,
regardless of whether they are responsive to rituximab treatment
(manches et al., 2003). in contrast, we find that the requirements
for cdc are more stringent and relatively few mab are able to
support cdc (bindon et al., 1988a,b; xia et al., 1993; cragg and
glennie, 2004; teeling et al., 2004, 2006). this appears to reflect
the high density of non-modulating mab required at the cell surface to support cdc and the preference for target molecules
which hold the mab close to the plasma membrane. in this
regard, we find that type i anti-cd20 mab are especially efficacious and provide some of the most cytotoxic reagents available,
partly because of the surface density of cd20, but mainly due
to their unusual ability to reorganize into dense clusters in the
membrane microdomains (cragg and glennie, 2004; teeling et
al., 2004). whether such activity is important for therapeutic
potency, or simply an explanation for some of their infusionassociated toxicity, remains controversial (below). however, it
is interesting and perhaps more than a coincidence that the only
two unconjugated mab approved for treating b-cell malignancies, rituximab and alemtuzumab, are both outstanding in cdc
(xia et al., 1993). the other potential therapeutic mechanism
which continues to generate considerable interest, despite relatively little supportive evidence, especially in vivo, is that of

pcd (chan et al., 2003; cragg and glennie, 2004; cragg et al.,
2005). here we will consider adcc, cdc and pcd, so that
we might analyse their relative contributions to b-cell depletion
and help explain the limitations of anti-cd20 mab therapy and
how it might be improved (fig. 1).
3.1. fcr-mediated killing mechanisms in immunotherapy
3.1.1. antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
growing evidence points toward the ability of mab to recruit
innate effector cells via fc:fc␥r interaction as being critical to
therapeutic potency for a range of mab including anti-cd20
(hamaguchi et al., 2006; kaneko et al., 2006; nimmerjahn and
ravetch, 2007). fc␥r are expressed on a wide range of effector
cells, such as macrophages, neutrophils and nk cells, and can
be broadly divided into two types: activating receptors (human:
fc␥ri, fc␥riia and fc␥riiia; mouse: fc␥ri, fc␥riiia and
fc␥riv) that signal via an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (itam), and an inhibitory receptor (human and
mouse: fc␥riib) that signal via an immunoreceptor tyrosinebased inhibitory motif (itim). triggering of effectors such as
monocytes/macrophages via their fc␥r initiates a series of signalling pathways leading to the release of a variety of immune
modulators which are either inflammatory or cytotoxic or both,
including cytokines, chemokines, proteases and reactive oxygen
species. if the effectors are recruited via igg bound to cellular
targets such as erythrocytes or in the case of anti-cd20 mab,
b cells, then the targets may be internalized by phagocytosis
as part of the adcc process. work from ravetch and bolland
(2001), nimmerjahn and ravetch (2005) and nimmerjahn and
ravetch (2006) suggests that the signalling threshold is set by
the balance of activating and inhibitory fc␥r expressed by the
individual effector cells. clearly the ratio of mab binding to
the two types of fc␥r will be determined first by their levels of expression at the effector cell surface, and second by the
relative affinity of any particular mab isotype for the various
fc␥r. interestingly, this balance of expression for fc␥r is controlled by the activation status of the effector cells, with fc␥riib
being dominant on resting cells but being replaced by activating
fc␥r following activation. although outside the scope of this
review, it appears that dendritic cells are particularly influenced
by the fc␥r balance, which seems to determine how they process immune complexes to drive acquired immune responses
(bergtold et al., 2005; desai et al., 2007). importantly, recent
analysis of the relative binding affinity of igg isotypes to the
different fc␥r shows that the ratio of binding of activating and
inhibitory fc␥r closely matches the observed activity of mab
in vivo (nimmerjahn and ravetch, 2005).
in mouse models, the therapeutic activity of a range of anticancer mab correlates with their isotypes and ability to bind
to fc␥r (kipps et al., 1985; kaminski et al., 1986; uchida
et al., 2004; hamaguchi et al., 2006; tedder et al., 2006).
thus, for example, those isotypes that bind more strongly to
the activating fc␥r, such as fc␥riv and fc␥ri, are particularly potent (nimmerjahn and ravetch, 2005; bevaart et al.,
2006). furthermore, removing all activating fc␥r by genetic
deletion of the common signalling gamma chain eliminates

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

almost all the therapeutic activity of most anti-cancer mab,
including that of rituximab, at least in subcutaneous xenograft
models (clynes et al., 2000). conversely, deleting the inhibitory
fc␥riib promotes mab therapeutic activity, an observation
which supports the role of non-nk cells in the therapeutic
process, since nk cells do not express fc␥riib and their
signalling threshold should not be influenced by its deletion
(fossati-jimack et al., 2000). thus, there is little doubt that
fc␥r play a central role in controlling mab effectors. it also
appears that in mice, the phagocytic network provided by monocytes/macrophages (part of the mononuclear phagocytic system,
mps) are the most important effectors for eliminating mab
coated targets since mice rendered macrophage-deficient using
liposome-encapsulated  xxxd1721xxx  are much less amenable to
treatment with mab, while removal of nk cells or neutrophils
has little measurable impact on immunotherapy (van rooijen
and sanders, 1996; uchida et al., 2004; gong et al., 2005). one
of the most informative recent papers came from gong et al.
(2005) showing that the ‘circulatory dynamics of b cells and
survival factors from the microenvironment are critical regulators that determine the mechanistic basis for immunodepletion’.
in this work, they used a human cd20 transgenic mouse and type
i mab to study b-cell depletion in various tissue compartments.
the work suggested that there are at least two types of b-cell
elimination: rapid and efficient clearance of circulating b cells
via the mps, and a slower less efficient removal of b cells in the
tissues, including splenic follicles, payer’s patches, lymph nodes
and the peritoneal cavity. they make the interesting suggestion
that b cells in these latter compartments are depleted slowly,
partly because of a lack of resident effectors capable of destroying the targets and because of the time required for such cells to
gain entry into the vasculature where they can be cleared via the
mps. such a mechanism would explain the longer time needed
to clear b cells from certain regions of the lymph nodes and from
the peritoneum, since they are known to circulate very rarely. in
support of this suggestion, tedder and co-workers have also
reported that the peritoneal cavity is a protected site for cd20
mab coated b cells with only 30–43% of b1 cells and 43–78%
of b2 cells being depleted following 7 days of cd20 mab
treatment. however, these cells were not inherently resistant to
killing and were effectively removed following thioglycolateinduced recruitment of activated monocytes into this otherwise
privileged niche (hamaguchi et al., 2005). collectively these
results indicate that the level of activated effectors in various
tissues is an important limitation to the effectiveness of mab
treatment and that without providing external pro-inflammatory
agents, the main source of effectors is the mps of the liver and
spleen where circulating cells can be quickly killed.
in humans, most therapeutic mab are of the igg1 isotype which has been selected to efficiently engage effectors.
evidence that fc␥r play an important role in humans is understandably less extensive than in the mouse models. however, a
number of groups have now shown an important relationship
between certain fc␥r polymorphisms and response to mab
immunotherapy of malignant and autoimmune disease (cartron
et al., 2002; anolik et al., 2003; weng and levy, 2003). in particular, fc␥riiia appears to be a critical determinant in that allelic

3827

variants of this receptor can impact on the therapeutic activity
of rituximab. thus, fc␥riiia containing a valine at position
158 has a higher affinity for igg1 than does that with a phenylalanine at this position, and patients with the former allele are
also more likely to respond to treatment. similar observations
have been made concerning variants of fc␥riia with patients
expressing either high (histidine 131) or low (arginine 131) affinity fc␥riia for igg2 (weng and levy, 2003). it is not clear why
this latter polymorphism should influence a rituximab-mediated
response, since it is an igg1 mab and should not be influenced
by this allelic difference (parren et al., 1992). however, allelic
polymorphism need not just affect affinity, but may also be linked
to phenotypic differences as shown by recent work from treon
and co-workers; in this case, the valine158 variant of fc␥riiia
is also associated with higher receptor expression (hatjiharissi
et al., 2007).
thus, while it is clear that fc␥r play a critical role in human
mab therapy, presumably due to the recruitment of effectors for
adcc, we know much less about which cells are responsible
for mediating such effects. there has been a tendency within the
field to believe that nk cells are the most potent effectors, but
this suggestion stems largely from the use of pbmc in adcc
assays where nk cells are the main effectors. in vivo, perhaps
macrophages and kupffer cells are much more important (see
below).
3.1.2. complement-dependent cytotoxicity
the role for complement in mab therapy remains controversial and in the case of animal studies is very model dependent.
our group and others have shown that in various xenograft models the classical complement system is required for tumour cell
depletion. thus, we found that treatment of scid mice with
cobra venom factor to inactivate complement markedly reduced
the therapeutic activity of type i anti-cd20 mab (cragg and
glennie, 2004). similarly, golay and co-workers showed that
rituximab was effective in a syngeneic lymphoma transduced
with human cd20 only if the mice expressed a full complement
system, and that activity was ablated in c1q-deficient mice (di
gaetano et al., 2003; golay et al., 2006). the work of gong
et al. (2005) showed that the complement system promoted the
depletion of certain b-cell subsets following anti-cd20 mab
treatment. in particular, they noted that b cells in the marginal
zone compartment, which had a reduced tendency to enter the
circulation through the mps, demonstrated a greater dependency on the complement system rather than cellular effectors
for their depletion. however, a number of groups have found no
requirement for complement in a range of rodent models, mainly
using c3 or c4-deficient mice (uchida et al., 2004; hamaguchi
et al., 2005; nimmerjahn and ravetch, 2006). the explanation
for the discrepancies between these models is likely to be complex, and dependent upon a number of factors. most tumours
are heavily protected by complement defence molecules which
generally resist direct lysis by membrane attack complex. however, even disregarding such resistance to lysis, relatively few
anti-cancer mab are able to promote complement activation to
levels capable of lysing tumour cells, although clearly type i  xxxd3132xxx  mab are an exception (cragg and glennie, 2004; teeling

3828

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

et al., 2004, 2006). finally, the primary outcome of complement
activation may not be lysis, but rather an inflammatory cascade
leading to activation of innate immune cells, target opsonization
for recognition by phagocytes, and promotion of acquired immunity. most tumour models are designed such that a small tumour
inoculum, often given subcutaneously where complement may
be less available, is treated before it is fully established and at
a point when the innate immune effectors are given the greatest
opportunity to prevent or slow tumour growth. it is not unreasonable to believe that, with the odds stacked in favour of mab
controlling the tumour in this way, complement cannot be shown
to have a major role.
in contrast to the situation in mouse models, in cancer
patients, where tumours have become established over an
extended period and caused suppression of immune effectors, promoting complement activation may provide a useful
advantage for mab therapy, particularly for activating immune
effectors which have become suppressed by the tumour environment. the evidence that complement is activated by mab such as
rituximab and alemtuzumab is strong. for example, complement
consumption can readily be demonstrated following treatment of
cll patients with rituximab. in fact, in vitro calibrations demonstrate that at high b-cell densities (∼20,000–100,000 cells/␮l)
adding rituximab at even moderate concentrations substantially
consumes complement (kennedy et al., 2004). this in vitro
result is replicated clinically where we find that complement
consumption can be readily demonstrated following treatment of
cll patients with rituximab, and in certain cases pre-rituximab
complement titers are not restored until several weeks after the
therapy is completed. furthermore, van der kolk et al. (2001)
have shown that some of the toxicity associated with mab treatment, particularly the first infusion, is probably the result of
complement activation. in support of a role in immunotherapy,
manches et al. (2003) have observed an interesting correlation
between the sensitivity to cdc of different histological types
of b-cell tumours and their readiness to respond to rituximab
treatment. thus, as a general observation, tumours such as follicular lymphoma which respond to rituximab tend to by lysed
by complement in vitro, while others such as mantle cells are
much less susceptible to lysis and tend not to respond to this
mab. interestingly, in this study all histological types of tumour
investigated were equally sensitive to adcc mediated by rituximab and cellular effectors. finally, there have been sporadic
reports of tumour cells returning after immunotherapy expressing higher levels of complement defence molecules than those
circulating before rituximab was given (treon et al., 2001).
however, there have been a similar number of reports not
supporting a role for complement. for example, generally there
is no relationship between expression of complement defence
molecules and the therapeutic response to rituximab (weng and
levy, 2001). in addition, one of the clearest demonstrations that
complement alone did not protect against tumour in patients
comes from work performed by waldmann and co-workers who
demonstrated that an igm variant of the anti- xxxg393xxx  mab, campath 1 (parental mab of alemtuzumab), showed little efficacy in
a patient despite being highly potent in cdc, while subsequent
treatment of the same patient with an igg variant of this mab

gave impressive tumour clearance (dyer et al., 1989). thus, it
appears that complement as a single effector is rarely able to
mediate mab cancer therapy.
the question of whether a mab could be engineered to provide sufficient complement activation to directly lyse tumour
cells has been considered by a number of groups (idusogie et
al., 2000). for example, rituximab has been modified to increase
its potency for cdc, but this variant has yet to be tested in
humans (idusogie et al., 2001). a new anti-cd20 mab, humax
cd20 ( xxxd2771xxx ), has recently been developed from human
ig transgenic mice (teeling et al., 2004, 2006). in addition to
having the advantage of being fully human and therefore potentially less immunogenic, this type i mab showed outstanding
potency in cdc and was able to activate complement and lyse
fresh cll in whole blood. such lytic activity was not seen with
rituximab. the explanation for the increased potency of  xxxd2771xxx  may come either from its very slow off rate compared
with other anti-cd20 mab, or the fact that it recognizes a unique
epitope outside the motif seen by other anti-cd20 mab. the
slow off-rate would provide very stable binding which might
favour recruitment of c1q molecules. this explanation is consistent with the observed increase in c1q capture by  xxxd2771xxx 
compared to rituximab onto the target cells. one of the proposed
explanations for such stable binding is that the unique epitope
holds the igg1 molecules in such a way that it encourages
fc:fc interactions which might stabilize binding by encouraging igg polymerization. such multimers are also thought to bind
c1q more efficiently because they provide multiple fc regions
which can simultaneously engage multiple globular heads of
the hexameric c1q (walport, 2001a,b; teeling et al., 2006).
 xxxd2771xxx  is currently being investigated in various clinical
trials treating lymphoma and rheumatoid arthritis. it is also well
advanced in a phase iii trial of cll where early results indicate
a superior response to that recorded in similar patients following
rituximab treatment (coiffier et al., 2005, 2006).
3.1.3. synergy between complement and fcgammar-mediated
cell clearance
as discussed, one of the potentially most critical roles of
complement appears to be its ability to promote inflammation
and change the activation status of innate effectors. the importance of this interface and synergy between the complement
system and fc␥r-expressing monocytes/macrophages has been
revealed in a series of elegant and provocative experiments
reported by the research groups of gessner et al. and ward
et al. (shushakova et al., 2002; schmidt and gessner, 2005;
huber-lang et al., 2006; kumar et al., 2006). in several immune
complex models of inflammatory disease, these workers have
demonstrated that the production of the anaphlyatoxin c5a during complement activation is critical to the activation status of
these effectors and that by engaging the c5a receptor, it can
induce up-regulation of activating fc␥r, and decrease expression of the inhibitory receptor, fc␥riib. the result is that these
effectors become directed toward a more robust inflammatory
response with increased phagocytic activity. it has also been
demonstrated that binding of igg immune complexes to monocytes/macrophages leads to local production of c5a by these

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

cells, even in serum lacking c3 (huber-lang et al., 2006), suggesting the existence of a c5a-generating pathway that bypasses
c3 and that can still promote development of inflammation.
such provocative results, if substantiated, underline the need to
re-examine the results obtained using c3-deficient mice, since
through this c5 pathway, complement activation might still play
an important role (atkinson, 2006). finally, kumar et al. (2006)
have provided compelling evidence demonstrating that binding
of igg-opsonized erythrocytes to macrophages, including kupffer cells, can directly induce production of c5a by the cells in
the absence of exogenous complement. this finding is particularly important because it suggests that a positive feedback
loop can be generated in which the c5a produced by the kupffer cells can then bind in an autocrine fashion to its receptor
on these cells, again modulating fc␥r expression toward an
inflammatory phenotype with increased phagocytic activity. as
noted, research in this area has understandably focused on several mouse models of inflammatory injury mediated by immune
complexes and it has yet to be tested in a mab immunotherapy setting. however, the lessons learned from these studies
may provide new insights into developing strategies to optimize
effector cell-mediated killing of igg-opsonized malignant cells,
based on using c5a to enhance macrophage activity. for example, studies in mouse models that allow for or prevent interaction
between c5a and its receptor may reveal substantial differences
in adcc of igg-opsonized b cells. alternatively, development
of strategies which either up-regulate c5a receptors on effector
cells or perhaps allow for delivery of c5a or a suitable agonist, perhaps in association with an anti-cd20 mab, might be
feasible.
3.1.4. enhancing adcc with a focus on complement
in the presence of complement, binding of anti-cd20 mab to
b cells promotes deposition of a large number of c3b molecules
which are rapidly degraded to ic3b; ross and co-workers pioneered the general strategy of using ic3b fragments on cancer
cells as targets to enhance adcc (ross et al., 1999; gelderman
et al., 2004; hong et al., 2004). in particular, they have focused
on potentiating the action of cr3, the ic3b receptor that is
expressed on a number of effector cells including monocytes,
neutrophils and nk cells. they have found that the use of biological response modifiers such as soluble ␣-1,3-glucans can
enhance adcc of ic3b-opsonized cells. these agents work
by binding to the lectin domain on the ␣ subunit of cr3 and
prime the effector cells to execute cytotoxic degranulation and
subsequent killing of the ic3b-opsonized substrate cells. it is
likely that use of such biological response modifiers to increase
a complement-dependent adcc killing mechanism will effectively synergize with adcc, mediated by fc␥r on effector cells
which are able to directly kill b cells opsonized with anti-cd20
mab (golay et al., 2003; dall’ozzo et al., 2004; bowles et al.,
2006). indeed, modak et al. (2005) have demonstrated that an
orally administered ␣-glucan significantly enhanced the activity of rituximab in both subcutaneous and disseminated mouse
xenograft models of b-cell lymphoma. this paradigm may be
particularly advantageous for the use of anti-cd20 mab in the
treatment of b-cell malignancies such as cll in which the b

3829

cells are quite resistant to rituximab-mediated killing via complement, despite deposition of large numbers of c3b fragments
on the b cells after mab infusion (golay et al., 2001; kennedy
et al., 2004; van meerten et al., 2006).
3.2. saturation of cytotoxic mechanisms
one issue that has not been adequately addressed is the question of what happens when the tumour burden is sufficiently
large to overwhelm or saturate the various effector mechanisms
engaged by anti-cd20 mab. the problem is not simply that
the therapy was initiated too late, and thus the expansion and
growth of the large tumour burden substantially exceeded the
rate at which the immunotherapeutic mab promoted killing of
targeted malignant cells. instead, we address the clinical scenario in which a large and accessible tumour burden is treated
with a dose of mab sufficient to completely saturate antigenic
sites on the targeted malignant cells. we suggest that under these
conditions it is quite likely that the body’s downstream effector functions will become saturated or exhausted, and that until
this situation is remedied, administration of more mab may be
useless, expensive, and in certain instances detrimental.
3.2.1. inﬂuence of complement
an illustration of this phenomenon is the observation that
the activity of the classical pathway of the complement system can be diminished after reaction with high concentrations
of igg-containing immune complexes (ic), including soluble
ic and particulate substrates such as b cells with bound  xxxd3132xxx  mab (edberg et al., 1988; kennedy et al., 2004). thus,
if the challenge presented by soluble antibody–antigen ic or
a large number of b cells opsonized with igg mab is sufficiently large, one or more proteins in the complement pathway
can be depleted, suppressing the complement activation pathway
until more of the consumed complement protein(s) are made
de novo and the complement-consuming agents are cleared.
indeed, igg/dsdna ic efficiently consume complement in vitro
(edberg et al., 1988), and an extensive literature reveals that in
autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, in
which these complexes play an important role in pathogenesis, consumption of one or more complement component(s) is
quite readily observed (aarden et al., 1976; emlen et al., 1986;
edberg et al., 1988; jaekell et al., 2006). measurements which
detect such activation have served as useful diagnostic markers
for disease activity (miniter et al., 1979; swaak et al., 1979,
1986).
in vitro investigations with b-cell lymphoma cell lines have
revealed that at high cell concentrations, comparable with those
often seen in cll patients, binding of rituximab to cd20+ b
cells can lead to virtually complete consumption of complement
lytic activity and depletion of several complement components,
including c2 (kennedy et al., 2004). moreover, measurements
on serum samples taken from cll patients treated with rituximab replicate this finding, and further demonstrate that
replacement of the depleted components with purified complement proteins is necessary and sufficient to restore the cytotoxic
activity of rituximab in these sera. in order to translate this find-

3830

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

ing to the clinic, we suggested that administration of fresh frozen
plasma could therefore enhance the action of rituximab in cll
(kennedy et al., 2004). some support for this idea is provided
by the recent case report of klepfish et al. (2007) who reported
that a cll patient with disease refractory to single agent rituximab showed marked improvement when treated with rituximab
in combination with fresh frozen plasma. it is likely that the
enhanced cytotoxic activity of the infused rituximab was due, in
part, to the reserve of extra complement activity provided by the
fresh frozen plasma. it will be interesting to see if this approach
may also be applied to other immunotherapeutic mab which
make use of complement to kill malignant cells, one particular
example being the anti-cd20 mab  xxxd2771xxx  (teeling et al.,
2004, 2006).
3.2.2. consequences for adcc
as noted previously, several lines of evidence indicate that
effector cells which express fc␥r can kill rituximab-targeted
cells by adcc (cartron et al., 2002; weng and levy, 2003;
dall’ozzo et al., 2004; treon et al., 2005; bowles et al., 2006;
lazar et al., 2006; lefebvre et al., 2006). in vitro investigations
have revealed that nk cells are responsible for most, and probably all, of the cytotoxic action mediated by rituximab that is
observed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (golay et al.,
2003; dall’ozzo et al., 2004), and clinical studies that combine rituximab therapy with il-2 also suggest that nk cells
participate in killing rituximab-targeted malignant b cells in vivo
(lopes de menezes et al., 2007). there is little in vitro evidence
that monocytes participate in killing rituximab-opsonized cells
(lopes de menezes et al., 2007), but proper differentiation of
monocytes to macrophages generates effector cells that, in the
presence of rituximab, promote adcc quite readily, even at low
effector to target cell ratios (lefebvre et al., 2006).
several mouse models, based on targeting normal b cells with
anti-cd20 mab, demonstrate that in order to eliminate iggopsonized b cells from most compartments there is an absolute
requirement for effector cells that express fc␥r (clynes et al.,
2000; gong et al., 2005; teeling et al., 2006), but as discussed
earlier the identity/location of these effector cells is somewhat
uncertain. surprisingly, there is little evidence to support a role
for nk cells in these models, but monocytes/macrophages of
the mps appear to be the key cells that participate in the adcc
of normal and in some cases malignant b cells targeted by  xxxd3132xxx  mab. what is not clear is how much adcc of normal or
malignant b cells occurs in situ due to infiltration of the fc␥rexpressing effector cells into sites that include lymph nodes,
spleen and bone marrow. on the other hand, based on the work
of gong et al. (2005), it is quite likely that circulating b cells are
killed and phagocytosed by liver macrophages (kupffer cells).
in fact, in an analogous mouse model system based on a different
substrate, igg-opsonized erythrocytes (e), the gessner laboratory has demonstrated that infusion of an igg2a anti-e antibody
leads to phagocytosis of e by liver kupffer cells (kumar et al.,
2006). the work of gong and co-workers (above) strongly suggests that most b cells in other compartments are not eliminated
until they have entered the circulation, thus allowing once again
for clearance by liver kupffer cells. the receptors on these cells

in humans include the high affinity receptor fc␥ri, as well as
the lower affinity receptors, fc␥riia, and fc␥riii (ravetch and
bolland, 2001).
it is likely that under conditions of high cell burden, clearance
of igg-opsonized b cells promoted by fc␥r on kupffer cells in
the liver will lead to saturation of phagocytosis and will be manifested in part by down-regulation of one or more fc␥r. studies
in mouse models indicate that fc␥ri and fc␥riii, expressed
on macrophages, both participate in removing igg-opsonized
cells (fossati-jimack et al., 2000; kumar et al., 2006; meyer
et al., 1998). the high affinity receptor fc␥ri may be partially
blocked due to the presence of high concentrations of normal
igg, and fc␥riii appears to play a more important role in clearance. indeed, the lazarus laboratory reported that fc␥riiia is
down-regulated on splenic macrophages after injection of anti-e
antibodies used in a mouse model to treat immune thrombocytopenia (itp) (song et al., 2005). moreover, bowles and weiner
(2005) have found that interaction of nk cells with rituximabopsonized b cells in vitro leads to substantial down-regulation of
fc␥riii on the nk cells, and this reaction appears to occur due
to internalization of the receptor by the nk cells (g. weiner,
personal communication). in principle, the internalized fc␥r
should be recycled to the external cell membrane and/or synthesized de novo, but under conditions of a large burden of
igg-opsonized cells, there is likely to be a considerable period
of time in which nk cells and kupffer cells would simply be saturated and incapable of killing, and/or internalizing additional
igg-opsonized b cells. this condition could severely compromise the efficacy of an anti-cd20 mab, and we therefore suggest
that mouse models which only target normal b cells, and do not
explicitly include substantial burdens of malignant cells, may
not reveal the consequences of mps saturation.
we speculate that rituximab treatment in cll can induce
saturation of the mps as a consequence of the challenge of
large numbers of rituximab-opsonized b cells. saturation will
be accompanied by substantial (but temporary) loss of expression of macrophage fc␥riii, and possibly fc␥riia. fc␥ri plays
a lesser role in clearing these substrates (meyer et al., 1998;
fossati-jimack et al., 2000), but this high affinity fc␥r can still
participate in the shaving reaction (see below) due to its ability
to effectively mediate endocytosis of small igg complexes, followed by its rapid recycling to the extracytoplasmic surface of
the cell (davis et al., 1995; lovdal et al., 2000).
it is obvious that the clearance capacity of the mps is finite
and can be saturated, and in fact, use of the igg anti-e polyclonal
antibody preparation rhogam in immune thrombocytopenia is
based on providing decoy igg-opsonized e that will saturate
fc␥r on cells of the mps, thus sparing the antibody-opsonized
platelets from clearance (song et al., 2005). of key relevance
to the present discussion, one of our laboratories has reported
that in numerous cases intravenous infusion of the first 30 mg of
rituximab (out of a total infusion of ∼750 mg) in cll patients
can rapidly reduce the number of circulating b cells by as much
as ∼50,000 cells/ml, corresponding to a net removal from the
bloodstream of ∼2 × 1011 cells (kennedy et al., 2004; williams
et al., 2006). it is unlikely that the cleared cells are destroyed by
complement, as they often express less cd20 than other malig-

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

nant b cells and, in fact, b cells from most cll patients have
been demonstrated to be quite resistant to rituximab-mediated
killing by complement (golay et al., 2000; van meerten et al.,
2006). based on the classic studies of schreiber and frank
(1972), as well as the report of gong et al. (2005), a large fraction of these rituximab-opsonized cells should be cleared by the
liver. the human liver has roughly 2 × 1010 kupffer cells and it
would therefore seem reasonable that an influx of approximately
10 rituximab-opsonized b cells per effector kupffer cell would
lead to temporary saturation of the clearance capacity of these
cells, lasting about 24–48 h (williams et al., 2006).
3.2.3. the shaving reaction: saturation of cytotoxic
mechanisms due to high burden of circulating mab targets
after infusion of the usual full rituximab dose of ∼750 mg
in cll, the attendant saturation of the clearance capacity of
the kupffer cells would predict that as additional cll cells
re-equilibrate into the bloodstream from the bone marrow and
the lymphatics (cooper et al., 1979), they would be opsonized
by the large excess of circulating rituximab. these rituximabopsonized cells might then simply remain in the circulation and
take their places in a bloodstream queue, waiting for clearance
by the liver after the first pass of cleared cells were digested.
however, rituximab-opsonized b cells do not continue to circulate without consequence; the re-equilibrated cll cells appear
to rapidly lose cd20 and bound rituximab in a process we
have called shaving (kennedy et al., 2004; beum et al., 2006;
williams et al., 2006). observations on more than a dozen
rituximab-treated cll patients indicate that a single infusion
of 100–700 mg is sufficient to generate a condition in which
the first wave of cll cells is cleared from the bloodstream.
the cll cells which subsequently enter the circulation from
other compartments appear to be opsonized by rituximab, but as
they cannot be cleared due to saturation, they are diverted to a
second pathway in which both bound rituximab and cd20 are
shaved from the b cells. acute loss of the cd20 target under
these conditions will allow the malignant cll b cells to survive
and proliferate, despite the presence of rituximab in the circulation. it is likely that shaving may in part explain why single
agent rituximab has had limited success in cll (mclaughlin
et al., 1998; huhn et al., 2001; mclaughlin, 2001). we are now
investigating several paradigms designed to limit shaving while
preserving the cytotoxic action of rituximab (beum et al., 2006;
williams et al., 2006). a reasonable approach is to infuse rituximab several times per week, but limit each infusion to a small
dose (20–40 mg) that promotes clearance of circulating cells and
spares the re-equilibrated cells from opsonization and shaving.
alternatively, large amounts of monomeric  xxxd2207xxx  can bind
to fc␥ri and block shaving (beum et al., 2006; taylor et al.,
2006). it is possible that the enhanced efficacy of rituximab in
cll, promoted by infusion of fresh frozen plasma (klepfish et
al., 2007), was due in part to the extra igg which helped to block
fc␥ri.
based on in vitro findings as well as studies in a mouse model
(mack et al., 2006; taylor et al., 2006), we believe that shaving
closely resembles trogocytosis, a process by which receptors on
acceptor cells bind to ligands on donor cells to form an immuno-

3831

logic synapse in which there is partial merging of the membranes
of the two cells (espinosa et al., 2002; tabiasco et al., 2003;
hudrisier et al., 2007). subsequently the acceptor cell pinches
off pieces of membrane and associated liganded cell-surface
proteins (within the synapse) from the donor cell and then internalizes the transferred material in an endocytic process. in the
present system, our in vitro investigations strongly suggest that
fc␥ri on the acceptor cell recognizes and binds to the fc region
of cell-bound rituximab, and then both the mab and b-cell cd20
are taken up and internalized by the acceptor cell (beum et
al., 2006). human monocytes are likely candidates for acceptor cells, and it is also possible that liver endothelial cells, which
express fc␥ri and are also capable of endocytosis (lovdal et
al., 2000), may participate in the process. a third cell that may
execute trogocytosis after saturation of its phagocytic activity
is the liver kuppfer cell, especially after presumptive internalization and down-regulation of its low affinity fc␥r, conditions
under which fc␥ri should still be available to promote shaving
(davis et al., 1995; lovdal et al., 2000).
in summary, under conditions of high tumour burden,
saturation of the body’s effector functions for eliminating iggopsonized cells, manifested by consumption of complement
and/or reduction in  xxxg772xxx -mediated clearance or killing, can
have serious consequences for cancer immunotherapy. recent
investigations from one of our laboratories (beum and taylor,
unpublished observations) have demonstrated that several other
mab, either fda-approved or examined for possible clinical
applications in cancer, can also mediate shaving of targeted epitopes. we believe that future use of large doses (>100 mg) of
mab in the immunotherapy of cancer will require careful attention to the possibility that this phenomenon may limit overall
therapeutic potential.
4. direct cell killing of b cells by anti-cd20 mab
in addition to the fc-dependent effects detailed above, binding of mab can induce direct effects on tumour cells, leading
to transmission of intracellular signals which trigger cell cycle
arrest and in some cases programmed cell death. the prototype molecule for inducing changes in b-cell growth is the
immunoglobulin receptor for ag (bcr) which, depending on
the maturation state of the b cells, can deliver signals leading
either to proliferation at one extreme or apoptosis at the other.
in the case of cd20, the ability of mab to induce anti-tumour
effects through signalling is much less clear and remains controversial. in support of this ability, tedder et al. (1986), and golay
et al. (1985) and clark and shu (1987) were among the first to
show that different anti-cd20 mab were able to induce changes
in the growth patterns of b cells including growth arrest and
there is evidence that signals generated following cd20 crosslinking can lead to death of certain b-cell lines (shan et al., 2000;
hofmeister et al., 2000; pedersen et al., 2002; cardarelli et al.,
2002; cragg et al., 2002, 2003; johnson and glennie, 2001),
including apoptosis in cll cells following treatment with rituximab in vivo (byrd et al., 2002). however, many other b-cell
lines appear insensitive to such death and the use of diverse culture conditions and experimental strategies makes it difficult to

3832

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

interpret and compare results. for example, incubation of some
b-cell lines or primary lymphoma cells with rituximab, for up to
4 days in media alone, leads to little or no cell killing/apoptosis,
and cell growth is either not affected, or only modestly suppressed (ghetie et al., 2001; golay et al., 2000; kennedy et
al., 2003; manches et al., 2003). therefore, in order to increase
killing, rituximab–cd20 complexes on the opsonized cells are
either cross-linked with secondary reagents or homodimers of
rituximab are prepared (ghetie et al., 2001; pedersen et al.,
2002). importantly, this strategy of secondary cross-linking may
not provide a valid model for the way in which rituximab is
cross-linked in vivo, which presumably occurs through fc␥r on
effector cells. currently, we are unaware of any direct evidence
to show that fc␥r can perform this cross-linking leading to cell
death in vivo.
further controversy exists when the mechanism of cell death
induced by cd20 ligation is considered. many in the field have
reported that death seen following cd20 cross-linking by mab
shows hallmarks of classical apoptosis, including activation of
caspases, cleavage of parp and nucleosomal dna fragmentation lines (shan et al., 2000; hofmeister et al., 2000; pedersen
et al., 2002; deans et al., 2002; shan et al., 1999; mathas et al.,
2000; ghetie et al., 2001). in contrast, we and others, find that
anti-cd20 mab-induced cell death is not classical apoptosis, in
that dna fragmentation is not apparent, the nucleus does not
condense, caspase activity is dispensable and over-expression
of  xxxg250xxx  is only partially able to block the cell death induced by
such mab (chan et al., 2003; cragg and glennie, 2004; rose
et al., 2002; van der kolk et al., 2002; cragg et al., 2005). at
first glance, these data are entirely contradictory and previously
we suggested that it might be explained based upon the extent
of hyper-cross-linking employed in the different experiments
(cragg et al., 2005). however, it is equally likely that different
results arise because of the mab chosen for these studies. most
groups outside ours have generally explored the signalling and
cell death pathway evoked by rituximab and other type i mab,
whereas we have focused on the more potent type ii mab. therefore, our current hypothesis is that type i and ii anti-cd20 mab
may use different pathways to generate programmed cell death.
our rationale for this hypothesis is detailed below.
firstly, results from deans et al. (2002) demonstrate that
rituximab and other type i mab transmit their death signals following movement of the cd20 into lipid microdomains, whereas
we have provided several lines of evidence to indicate that redistribution of cd20 into microdomains may not be necessary for
the transduction of death signals [chan et al., 2003 and reviewed
in cragg et al., 2005]. the type ii mab we used do not cause
redistribution of cd20 to detergent-insoluble microdomains,
as discussed earlier (deans et al., 1998; cragg et al., 2003).
therefore, while this at first appears wholly contradictory, both
supporting signalling within microdomain and suggesting that it
is not needed, it seems more likely that we are simply studying
different death signalling pathways for type i and ii mab. similarly, although several reports have implied that ca2+ influx
may be important in cd20-induced cell death (bubien et al.,
1993; shan et al., 1998, 2000; hofmeister et al., 2000), our
recent data clearly indicate that only type i mab evoke robust

increases in cytosolic ca2+ levels and that this results from an
association between cd20 molecules and the bcr (walshe et
al., submitted for publication). such observations are supported
by data from petrie and deans (2002) showing that cd20 and
the bcr become associated in microdomains following crosslinking by type i anti-cd20 mab. thus, we propose that one
pathway by which type i cd20 mab can lead to direct cell death
is to hijack the ca2+ flux and other downstream signals leading
to apoptosis triggered by the bcr. however, whether this pathway is operational in vivo and of importance in the therapeutic
efficacy of rituximab remains to be determined.
in contrast no such association with the bcr is produced
by type ii reagents, in line with their inability to translocate
cd20 into microdomains or evoke ca2+ flux. we do, however,
find this type of mab more active in mediating pcd in cell
lines and in providing fc region independent immunotherapy
of xenografts. indeed, our very recent unpublished experiments
indicate that type ii anti-cd20 mab may act via an autophagic
pathway of cell destruction. this is evident by the presence of
autophagic vesicles in the cytoplasm of the dying cells and the
lack of classical chromosome condensation, which is the reverse
of the situation seen in cells treated with ␥-irradiation or antibcr mab. autophagy is a highly conserved process, whereby
cytoplasmic material (including organelles) becomes enveloped
in double membraned vesicles and targeted for degradation and
recycling of the constituent material (reviewed in dunn, 1994;
codogno and meijer, 2005). although long viewed as a cellular survival mechanism, more recently cell death resulting from
autophagy has been confirmed and classified as type ii cell death,
as an alternative to classical, apoptotic type i death (meijer and
codogno, 2004) and induced by a variety of stimuli such as
caspase inhibition and etoposide treatment (kim et al., 2005).
while apoptosis is regulated by the caspase,  xxxg250xxx  family and
inhibitor of apoptosis genes among others, autophagy is controlled by a completely separate family of autophagy or atg
genes (ohsumi, 2001). therefore, although the processes of
apoptosis and autophagy are in some manner co-regulated in
cells, the proteins involved remain obscure. however, as apoptosis is commonly impaired in tumour cells, autophagy, with its
own distinct regulators, represents a novel alternative pathway
of tumour destruction, which may be exploited by type ii mab.
indeed, circumstances where apoptosis is heavily inhibited by
 xxxg250xxx  or bclxl over-expression may even directly sensitize these
cells to autophagy (shimizu et al., 2004).
such a death mechanism may also have important implications for combination therapy with radiation or chemotherapy,
such as chop, which operate by evoking dna damage. importantly, these combinations significantly improve therapeutic
efficacy, although we remain largely ignorant of the mechanisms
involved. potentially, they involve an additive or synergistic
effect on the induction of pcd through apoptosis, autophagy
or both. indeed, our recent work treating cells with b1 and radiation has shown synergistic cell death responses which appear to
be achieved through a combination of both apoptotic and nonapoptotic cell death mechanisms (ivanov et al., submitted for
publication). whether these non-apoptotic death programs are
important for the therapeutic efficacy of type ii mab in vivo

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

remains to be seen and is the subject of our current work. however, as fc-lacking f(ab )2 fragments of b1 are able to evoke
some therapeutic effects in xenograft models, we remain optimistic that this is the case.
5. summary and future developments
monoclonal ab are now established clinical drugs with
potential for improvement either via engineering or in the way
they are used (carter, 2001, 2006; johnson and glennie, 2003;
scallon et al., 2006). in this regard, cd20 mab lead the way with
rituximab the most successful anti-cancer mab to date and with
a range of second and third generation products on the way (e.g.
 xxxd2765xxx ,  xxxd2771xxx  (humax cd20), ocrlizumab (vugmeyster
et al., 2005), tru-015, ha20 (immu-106)). these new reagents
include mab which have been humanized, those which are fully
human from transgenic mice, and those which have been engineered or selected to improve their ability to mediate cdc,
adcc and pcd. over the next 5–10 years we will learn which
of these strategies proves successful and hopefully be left with
a number of highly potent drugs for treating various b-cell diseases. the competition between these reagents may also help to
reduce their cost to the health service.
one of the most advanced of the new anti-cd20 mab is
 xxxd2771xxx  which is currently in the advanced stages of clinical development for cll and lymphoma, and is also being
investigated in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. this is
a fully human mab with potentially reduced immunogenicity
compared with the other products which will be particularly
helpful in autoimmune disease where 30–50% of patients have
responded to rituximab with the development of an anti-ab
response (haca) (eisenberg and looney, 2005). the other
major feature and potential advantage for this mab is its unusual
ability to activate complement. for example,  xxxd2771xxx  will
lyse rituximab-resistant cll in whole blood assays simply as a
result of its unusual potency in cdc (teeling et al., 2004). the
other exciting anti-cd20 mab which, although only at the preclinical stage, will teach us much about therapeutic mechanism
and hopefully provide an excellent drug, is  xxxd2765xxx . not only
is this a type ii mab with an enhanced ability to initiate pcd,
it also has a sugar modified fc which increases adcc 10- to
100-fold (umana et al., 2006). hence, it appears that the field
of b-cell disease will be well served with interesting new mab
for the foreseeable future.
an additional exciting area of mab development will come
from combination therapy, particularly looking at ways of
enhancing the cytotoxic potential of innate effector cells such as
monocytes/macrophages and possibly nk cells. in this regard,
the recent appreciation of how the balance of activating and
inhibiting fc␥r controls ab-mediated function is a critical area
of investigation. presumably we will soon be seeing reagents
engineered to bind more strongly to activating fcr and more
weakly to inhibitory fcr (lazar et al., 2006), and the development of agents which block either the binding or signalling of
fc␥riib provides a novel and exciting opportunity to modulate
the potency of a range of mab (nimmerjahn and ravetch, 2007).
the  xxxd2765xxx  mab is one of the first mab, with its altered gly-

3833

cosylation and fcr binding profile, to utilize this mechanism.
unfortunately, because it is also the first type ii cd20 mab en
route to the clinic, it will be difficult to unravel exactly which
property of this mab (i.e. its type ii nature or the improved fcr
binding profile) provides any enhanced clinical benefits.
in summary, it is apparent that despite the many disadvantages of mab in terms of their size as drugs and production costs,
their unique specificity, effector functions and flexibility provide
the potential for the generation of a wide variety of new agents in
cancer immunotherapy. the anti-cd20 mab have served as outstanding prototypes for this field; based on the lessons learned
from these mab, it is hoped that in the future mab specific for
other cancer-cell-associated antigens will be developed to have
similar or even higher levels of therapeutic efficacy.
references
aarden, l.a., de groot, e.r., lakmaker, f., 1976. immunology of dnav.
analysis of dna/anti-dna complexes. j. immunol. methods 13, 241–252.
anolik, j.h., campbell, d., felgar, r.e., young, f., sanz, i., rosenblatt, j.,
looney, r.j., 2003. the relationship of  xxxg775xxx  genotype to degree
of b cell depletion by rituximab in the treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus. arthritis rheum. 48, 455–459.
atkinson, j.p., 2006. c5a and fcgamma receptors: a mutual admiration society.
j. clin. invest. 116, 304–306.
bergtold, a., desai, d.d., gavhane, a., clynes, r., 2005. cell surface recycling
of internalized antigen permits dendritic cell priming of b cells. immunity
23, 503–514.
beum, p.v., kennedy, a.d., williams, m.e., lindorfer, m.a., taylor, r.p.,
2006. the shaving reaction: rituximab/cd20 complexes are removed from
mantle cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells by thp-1
monocytes. j. immunol. 176, 2600–2609.
bevaart, l., jansen, m.j., van vugt, m.j., verbeek, j.s., van de winkel, j.g.,
leusen, j.h., 2006. the high-affinity igg receptor, fcgammari, plays a
central role in antibody therapy of experimental melanoma. cancer res. 66,
1261–1264.
bindon, c.i., hale, g., bruggemann, m., waldmann, h., 1988a. human monoclonal igg isotypes differ in complement activating function at the level of
c4 as well as c1q. j. exp. med. 168, 127–142.
bindon, c.i., hale, g., waldmann, h., 1988b. importance of antigen specificity
for complement-mediated lysis by monoclonal antibodies. eur. j. immunol.
18, 1507–1514.
bowles, j.a., wang, s.y., link, b.k., allan, b., beuerlein, g., campbell, m.a.,
marquis, d., ondek, b., wooldridge, j.e., smith, b.j., breitmeyer, j.b.,
weiner, g.j., 2006. anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody with enhanced affinity
for cd16 activates nk cells at lower concentrations and more effectively
than rituximab. blood 108, 2648–2654.
bowles, j.a., weiner, g.j., 2005. cd16 polymorphisms and nk activation
induced by monoclonal antibody-coated target cells. j. immunol. methods
304, 88–99.
bubien, j.k., zhou, l.j., bell, p.d., frizzell, r.a., tedder, t.f., 1993. transfection of the cd20 cell surface molecule into ectopic cell types generates a
ca2+ conductance found constitutively in b lymphocytes. j. cell. biol. 121,
1121–1132.
byrd, j.c., kitada, s., flinn, i.w., aron, j.l., pearson, m., lucas, d., reed,
j.c., 2002. the mechanism of tumor cell clearance by rituximab in vivo
in patients with b-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: evidence of caspase
activation and apoptosis induction. blood 99, 1038–1043.
byrd, j.c., lin, t.s., grever, m.r., 2006. treatment of relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia: old and new therapies. semin. oncol. 33, 210–219.
cardarelli, p.m., quinn, m., buckman, d., fang, y., colcher, d., king, d.j.,
bebbington, c., yarranton, g., 2002. binding to cd20 by anti-b1 antibody
or f(ab )(2) is sufficient for induction of apoptosis in b-cell lines. cancer
immunol. immunother. 51, 15–24.

3834

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

carnahan, j., wang, p., kendall, r., chen, c., hu, s., boone, t., juan, t., talvenheimo, j., montestruque, s., sun, j., elliott, g., thomas, j., ferbas, j., kern,
b., briddell, r., leonard, j.p., cesano, a., 2003.  xxxd2015xxx , a humanized
monoclonal antibody targeting  xxxg378xxx : characterization of in vitro properties.
clin. cancer res. 9, 3982s–3990s.
carter, p., 2001. improving the efficacy of antibody-based cancer therapies. nat.
rev. cancer 1, 118–129.
carter, p.j., 2006. potent antibody therapeutics by design. nat. rev. immunol.
6, 343–357.
cartron, g., dacheux, l., salles, g., solal-celigny, p., bardos, p., colombat, p.,
watier, h., 2002. therapeutic activity of humanized anti-cd20 monoclonal
antibody and polymorphism in igg fc receptor  xxxg775xxx  gene. blood
99, 754–758.
chan, c.h., wang, j., french, r.r., glennie, m.j., 1998. internalization of
the lymphocytic surface protein  xxxg378xxx  is controlled by a novel membrane
proximal cytoplasmic motif. j. biol. chem. 273, 27809–27815.
chan, h.t., hughes, d., french, r.r., tutt, a.l., walshe, c.a., teeling, j.l.,
glennie, m.j., cragg, m.s., 2003. cd20-induced lymphoma cell death is
independent of both caspases and its redistribution into triton x-100 insoluble membrane rafts. cancer res. 63, 5480–5489.
cheung, m.c., haynes, a.e., meyer, r.m., stevens, a., imrie, k.r., 2007. rituximab in lymphoma: a systematic review and consensus practice guideline
from cancer care ontario. cancer treat. rev. 33, 161–176.
clark, e.a., shu, g., 1987. activation of human b cell proliferation through surface  xxxg1445xxx  (cd20) polypeptides or immunoglobulin receptors. j. immunol.
138, 720–725.
clynes, r.a., towers, t.l., presta, l.g., ravetch, j.v., 2000. inhibitory fc
receptors modulate in vivo cytoxicity against tumor targets. nat. med. 6,
443–446.
codogno, p., meijer, a.j., 2005. autophagy and signaling: their role in cell
survival and cell death. cell death differ. 12 (suppl. 2), 1509–1518.
coiffier, b., 2006. monoclonal antibody as therapy for malignant lymphomas.
c.r. biol. 329, 241–254.
coiffier, b., tilly, h., pedersen, l.m., plesner, t., frederiksen, h., van oers,
m.h.j., wooldridge, j., kloczko, j., holowiecki, j., hellmann, a., walewski,
j.j., flensburg, m.f., petersen, j., robak, t., 2005. humax cd20 fully
human monoclonal antibody in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. early results
from an ongoing phase i/ii clinical trial. ash annual meeting abstracts
106, p. 448.
coiffier, b., tilly, h., pedersen, l.m., plesner, t., frederiksen, h., van
oers, m.h.j., wooldridge, j., kloczko, j.s., holowiecki, j., hellmann,
a., walewski, j., flensburg, m., petersen, j., robak, t., 2006. significant correlation between survival endpoints and exposure to  xxxd2771xxx 
( xxxd2771xxx ) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. ash annual meeting
abstracts 108, p. 2842.
cooper, i.a., ding, j.c., adams, p.b., quinn, m.a., brettell, m., 1979. intensive
leukapheresis in the management of cytopenias in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia (cll) and lymphocytic lymphoma. am. j. hematol.
6, 387–398.
cragg, m.s., o’brien, l., tutt, a., chan, h.t.c, anderson, v.a., glennie, m.j.,
2002. opposing properties of cd20 mab. in: leukocyte typing vii. oxford
university press, oxford, pp. 95–97.
cragg, m.s., glennie, m.j., 2004. antibody specificity controls in vivo effector
mechanisms of anti-cd20 reagents. blood 103, 2738–2743.
cragg, m.s., morgan, s.m., cha, h.t., morgan, b.p., filatov, a.v., johnson,
p.w., french, r.r., glennie, m.j., 2003. complement-mediated lysis by
anti-cd20 mab correlates with segregation into lipid rafts. blood 101,
1045–1052.
cragg, m.s., walshe, c.a., ivanov, a.o., glennie, m.j., 2005. the biology of
cd20 and its potential as a target for mab therapy. curr. dir. autoimmun.
8, 140–174.
czuczman, m.s., thall, a., witzig, t.e., vose, j.m., younes, a.,
emmanouilides, c., miller, t.p., moore, j.o., leonard, j.p., gordon, l.i.,
sweetenham, j., alkuzweny, b., finucane, d.m., leigh, b.r., 2005. phase
i/ii study of  xxxd2173xxx , an anti- xxxg396xxx  antibody, for relapsed or refractory
follicular lymphoma. j. clin. oncol. 23, 4390–4398.
dall’ozzo, s., tartas, s., paintaud, g., cartron, g., colombat, p., bardos, p.,
watier, h., thibault, g., 2004. rituximab-dependent cytotoxicity by natural

killer cells: influence of fcgr3a polymorphism on the concentration–effect
relationship. cancer res. 64, 4664–4669.
davis, t.a., maloney, d.g., czerwinski, d.k., liles, t.m., levy, r., 1998.
anti-idiotype antibodies can induce long-term complete remissions in nonhodgkin’s lymphoma without eradicating the malignant clone. blood 92,
1184–1190.
davis, w., harrison, p.t., hutchinson, m.j., allen, j.m., 1995. two distinct
regions of fc gamma ri initiate separate signalling pathways involved in
endocytosis and phagocytosis. embo j. 14, 432–441.
deans, j.p., li, h., polyak, m.j., 2002. cd20-mediated apoptosis: signalling
through lipid rafts. immunology 107, 176–182.
deans, j.p., robbins, s.m., polyak, m.j., savage, j.a., 1998. rapid redistribution of cd20 to a low density detergent-insoluble membrane compartment.
j. biol. chem. 273, 344–348.
desai, d.d., harbers, s.o., flores, m., colonna, l., downie, m.p., bergtold,
a., jung, s., clynes, r., 2007. fc{gamma} receptor iib on dendritic cells
enforces peripheral tolerance by inhibiting effector t cell responses. j.
immunol. 178, 6217–6226.
di gaetano, n., cittera, e., nota, r., vecchi, a., grieco, v., scanziani, e.,
botto, m., introna, m., golay, j., 2003. complement activation determines
the therapeutic activity of rituximab in vivo. j. immunol. 171, 1581–1587.
dunn jr., w.a., 1994. autophagy and related mechanisms of lysosome-mediated
protein degradation. trends cell. biol. 4, 139–143.
dyer, m.j., hale, g., hayhoe, f.g., waldmann, h., 1989. effects of campath1 antibodies in vivo in patients with lymphoid malignancies: influence of
antibody isotype. blood 73, 1431–1439.
edberg, j.c., tosic, l., wright, e.l., sutherland, w.m., taylor, r.p., 1988.
quantitative analyses of the relationship between c3 consumption, c3b capture, and immune adherence of complement-fixing antibody/dna immune
complexes. j. immunol. 141, 4258–4265.
edwards, j.c., cambridge, g., 2006. b-cell targeting in rheumatoid arthritis and
other autoimmune diseases. nat. rev. immunol. 6, 394–403.
edwards, j.c., szczepanski, l., szechinski, j., filipowicz-sosnowska, a.,
emery, p., close, d.r., stevens, r.m., shaw, t., 2004. efficacy of b-celltargeted therapy with rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. n.
engl. j. med. 350, 2572–2581.
eisenberg, r., looney, r.j., 2005. the therapeutic potential of anti-cd20 “what
do b-cells do?”. clin. immunol. 117, 207–213.
emlen, w., pisetsky, d.s., taylor, r.p., 1986. antibodies to dna. a perspective.
arthritis rheum. 29, 1417–1426.
ermini, l., secciani, f., la sala, g.b., sabatini, l., fineschi, d., hale, g.,
rosati, f., 2005. different glycoforms of the human gpi-anchored antigen
 xxxg393xxx  associate differently with lipid microdomains in leukocytes and sperm
membranes. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 338, 1275–1283.
espinosa, e., tabiasco, j., hudrisier, d., fournie, j.j., 2002. synaptic transfer
by human gamma delta t cells stimulated with soluble or cellular antigens.
j. immunol. 168, 6336–6343.
fanale, m.a., younes, a., 2007. monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of
non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. drugs 67, 333–350.
feugier, p., van hoof, a., sebban, c., solal-celigny, p., bouabdallah, r., ferme,
c., christian, b., lepage, e., tilly, h., morschhauser, f., gaulard, p., salles,
g., bosly, a., gisselbrecht, c., reyes, f., coiffier, b., 2005. long-term
results of the r-chop study in the treatment of elderly patients with diffuse
large b-cell lymphoma: a study by the groupe d’etude des lymphomes de
l’adulte. j. clin. oncol. 23, 4117–4126.
fossati-jimack, l., ioan-facsinay, a., reininger, l., chicheportiche, y., watanabe, n., saito, t., hofhuis, f.m., gessner, j.e., schiller, c., schmidt, r.e.,
honjo, t., verbeek, j.s., izui, s., 2000. markedly different pathogenicity of
four immunoglobulin g isotype-switch variants of an antierythrocyte autoantibody is based on their capacity to interact in vivo with the low-affinity
fcgamma receptor iii. j. exp. med. 191, 1293–1302.
gelderman, k.a., tomlinson, s., ross, g.d., gorter, a., 2004. complement
function in mab-mediated cancer immunotherapy. trends immunol. 25,
158–164.
ghetie, m.a., bright, h., vitetta, e.s., 2001. homodimers but not monomers of
rituxan (chimeric anti-cd20) induce apoptosis in human b-lymphoma cells
and synergize with a chemotherapeutic agent and an immunotoxin. blood
97, 1392–1398.

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837
golay, j., cittera, e., di gaetano, n., manganini, m., mosca, m., nebuloni, m.,
van rooijen, n., vago, l., introna, m., 2006. the role of complement in the
therapeutic activity of rituximab in a murine b lymphoma model homing in
lymph nodes. haematologica 91, 176–183.
golay, j., lazzari, m., facchinetti, v., bernasconi, s., borleri, g., barbui, t.,
rambaldi, a., introna, m., 2001. cd20 levels determine the in vitro susceptibility to rituximab and complement of b-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia:
further regulation by  xxxg394xxx  and cd59. blood 98, 3383–3389.
golay, j., manganini, m., facchinetti, v., gramigna, r., broady, r., borleri, g.,
rambaldi, a., introna, m., 2003. rituximab-mediated antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity against neoplastic b cells is stimulated strongly by
interleukin-2. haematologica 88, 1002–1012.
golay, j., zaffaroni, l., vaccari, t., lazzari, m., borleri, g.m., bernasconi,
s., tedesco, f., rambaldi, a., introna, m., 2000. biologic response of
b lymphoma cells to anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody rituximab in vitro:
 xxxg394xxx  and cd59 regulate complement-mediated cell lysis. blood 95, 3900–
3908.
golay, j.t., clark, e.a., beverley, p.c., 1985. the cd20 ( xxxg1445xxx ) antigen is
involved in activation of b cells from the g0 to the g1 phase of the cell
cycle. j. immunol. 135, 3795–3801.
gong, q., ou, q., ye, s., lee, w.p., cornelius, j., diehl, l., lin, w.y., hu, z., lu,
y., chen, y., wu, y., meng, y.g., gribling, p., lin, z., nguyen, k., tran, t.,
zhang, y., rosen, h., martin, f., chan, a.c., 2005. importance of cellular
microenvironment and circulatory dynamics in b cell immunotherapy. j.
immunol. 174, 817–826.
hamaguchi, y., uchida, j., cain, d.w., venturi, g.m., poe, j.c., haas, k.m.,
tedder, t.f., 2005. the peritoneal cavity provides a protective niche for b1
and conventional b lymphocytes during anti-cd20 immunotherapy in mice.
j. immunol. 174, 4389–4399.
hamaguchi, y., xiu, y., komura, k., nimmerjahn, f., tedder, t.f., 2006.
antibody isotype-specific engagement of fcgamma receptors regulates b
lymphocyte depletion during cd20 immunotherapy. j. exp. med. 203,
743–753.
hatjiharissi, e., xu, l., santos, d.d., hunter, z.r., ciccarelli, b.t., verselis, s.,
modica, m., cao, y., manning, r.j., leleu, x., dimmock, e.a., kortsaris,
a., mitsiades, c., anderson, k.c., fox, e.a., treon, s.p., 2007. increased
natural killer cell expression of cd16, and augmented binding and adcc
activity to rituximab among individuals expressing the fc{gamma}riiia158 v/v and v/f polymorphism. blood, in press.
hofmeister, j.k., cooney, d., coggeshall, k.m., 2000. clustered cd20 induced
apoptosis: src-family kinase, the proximal regulator of tyrosine phosphorylation, calcium influx, and  xxxg341xxx -dependent apoptosis. blood cells mol.
dis. 26, 133–143.
hong, f., yan, j., baran, j.t., allendorf, d.j., hansen, r.d., ostroff, g.r.,
xing, p.x., cheung, n.k., ross, g.d., 2004. mechanism by which orally
administered beta-1,3-glucans enhance the tumoricidal activity of antitumor
monoclonal antibodies in murine tumor models. j. immunol. 173, 797–806.
hoyer, b.f., manz, r.a., radbruch, a., hiepe, f., 2005. long-lived plasma
cells and their contribution to autoimmunity. ann. n. y. acad. sci. 1050,
124–133.
hoyer, b.f., moser, k., hauser, a.e., peddinghaus, a., voigt, c., eilat, d.,
radbruch, a., hiepe, f., manz, r.a., 2004. short-lived plasmablasts and
long-lived plasma cells contribute to chronic humoral autoimmunity in
nzb/w mice. j. exp. med. 199, 1577–1584.
huber-lang, m., sarma, j.v., zetoune, f.s., rittirsch, d., neff, t.a., mcguire,
s.r., lambris, j.d., warner, r.l., flierl, m.a., hoesel, l.m., gebhard, f.,
younger, j.g., drouin, s.m., wetsel, r.a., ward, p.a., 2006. generation of
c5a in the absence of c3: a new complement activation pathway. nat. med.
12, 682–687.
hudrisier, d., aucher, a., puaux, a.l., bordier, c., joly, e., 2007. capture of
target cell membrane components via trogocytosis is triggered by a selected
set of surface molecules on t or b cells. j. immunol. 178, 3637–3647.
huhn, d., von schilling, c., wilhelm, m., ho, a.d., hallek, m., kuse, r.,
knauf, w., riedel, u., hinke, a., srock, s., serke, s., peschel, c., emmerich,
b., 2001. rituximab therapy of patients with b-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. blood 98, 1326–1331.
idusogie, e.e., presta, l.g., gazzano-santoro, h., totpal, k., wong, p.y.,
ultsch, m., meng, y.g., mulkerrin, m.g., 2000. mapping of the c1q bind-

3835

ing site on rituxan, a chimeric antibody with a human igg1 fc. j. immunol.
164, 4178–4184.
idusogie, e.e., wong, p.y., presta, l.g., gazzano-santoro, h., totpal, k.,
ultsch, m., mulkerrin, m.g., 2001. engineered antibodies with increased
activity to recruit complement. j. immunol. 166, 2571–2575.
ivanov, a., krysov, s., cragg, m.s., illidge, t., radioimmunotherapy with b1
anti-cd20 mab initiates cell death that overcomes resistance to apoptosis.
blood, submitted for publication.
jaekell, h.p., trabandt, a., grobe, n., werle, e., 2006. anti-dsdna antibody
subtypes and anti-c1q antibodies: toward a more reliable diagnosis and
monitoring of systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis. lupus 15,
335–345.
johnson, p., glennie, m., 2003. the mechanisms of action of rituximab in the
elimination of tumor cells. semin. oncol. 30, 3–8.
johnson, p.w., glennie, m.j., 2001. rituximab: mechanisms and applications.
br. j. cancer 85, 1619–1623.
kaminski, m.s., kitamura, k., maloney, d.g., campbell, m.j., levy, r., 1986.
importance of antibody isotype in monoclonal anti-idiotype therapy of a
murine b cell lymphoma. a study of hybridoma class switch variants. j.
immunol. 136, 1123–1130.
kaneko, y., nimmerjahn, f., ravetch, j.v., 2006. anti-inflammatory activity of
immunoglobulin g resulting from fc sialylation. science 313, 670–673.
keating, m.j., chiorazzi, n., messmer, b., damle, r.n., allen, s.l., rai, k.r.,
ferrarini, m., kipps, t.j., 2003. biology and treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. hematol. am. soc. hematol. educ. program, 153–175.
kennedy, a.d., beum, p.v., solga, m.d., dilillo, d.j., lindorfer, m.a., hess,
c.e., densmore, j.j., williams, m.e., taylor, r.p., 2004. rituximab infusion promotes rapid complement depletion and acute cd20 loss in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. j. immunol. 172, 3280–3288.
kennedy, a.d., solga, m.d., schuman, t.a., chi, a.w., lindorfer, m.a.,
sutherland, w.m., foley, p.l., taylor, r.p., 2003. an anti-c3b(i) mab
enhances complement activation, c3b(i) deposition, and killing of cd20+
cells by rituximab. blood 101, 1071–1079.
kim, r., emi, m., tanabe, k., 2005. caspase-dependent and -independent cell
death pathways after dna damage (review). oncol. rep. 14, 595–599.
kipps, t.j., parham, p., punt, j., herzenberg, l.a., 1985. importance of
immunoglobulin isotype in human antibody-dependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity directed by murine monoclonal antibodies. j. exp. med. 161, 1–17.
klepfish, a., schattner, a., ghoti, h., rachmilewitz, e.a., 2007. addition of
fresh frozen plasma as a source of complement to rituximab in advanced
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. lancet oncol. 8, 361–362.
kreitman, r.j., pastan, i., 2006. immunotoxins in the treatment of refractory
hairy cell leukemia. hematol. oncol. clin. n. am. 20 (1137-1151), viii.
krop, i., de fougerolles, a.r., hardy, r.r., allison, m., schlissel, m.s., fearon,
d.t., 1996. self-renewal of b-1 lymphocytes is dependent on  xxxg375xxx . eur. j.
immunol. 26, 238–242.
kumar, v., ali, s.r., konrad, s., zwirner, j., verbeek, j.s., schmidt, r.e.,
gessner, j.e., 2006. cell-derived anaphylatoxins as key mediators of
antibody-dependent type ii autoimmunity in mice. j. clin. invest. 116,
512–520.
lazar, g.a., dang, w., karki, s., vafa, o., peng, j.s., hyun, l., chan, c., chung,
h.s., eivazi, a., yoder, s.c., vielmetter, j., carmichael, d.f., hayes, r.j.,
dahiyat, b.i., 2006. engineered antibody fc variants with enhanced effector
function. proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a. 103, 4005–4010.
lefebvre, m.l., krause, s.w., salcedo, m., nardin, a., 2006. ex vivo-activated
human macrophages kill chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in the presence
of rituximab: mechanism of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and
impact of human serum. j. immunother. 29, 388–397.
leonard, j., friedberg, j., younes, a., fisher, d., gordon, l., moore, j., czuczman, m., miller, t., stiff, p., cheson, b., forero-torres, a., chieffo, n.,
mckinney, b., finucane, d., molina, a., 2007. a phase i/ii study of  xxxd2173xxx  (an anti- xxxg396xxx  monoclonal antibody) in combination with rituximab
for relapsed or refractory, follicular lymphoma. ann. oncol., in press.
lopes de menezes, d.e., denis-mize, k., tang, y., ye, h., kunich, j.c., garrett, e.n., peng, j., cousens, l.s., gelb, a.b., heise, c., wilson, s.e.,
jallal, b., aukerman, s.l., 2007. recombinant interleukin-2 significantly
augments activity of rituximab in human tumor xenograft models of b-cell
non-hodgkin lymphoma. j. immunother. 30, 64–74.

3836

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837

lovdal, t., andersen, e., brech, a., berg, t., 2000. fc receptor mediated endocytosis of small soluble immunoglobulin g immune complexes in kupffer
and endothelial cells from rat liver. j. cell. sci. 113, 3255–3266.
manches, o., lui, g., chaperot, l., gressin, r., molens, j.p., jacob, m.c.,
sotto, j.j., leroux, d., bensa, j.c., plumas, j., 2003. in vitro mechanisms of
action of rituximab on primary non-hodgkin lymphomas. blood 101, 949–
954.
mack, d.a., beum, p.v., lindorfer, m.a., pawluczkowycz, a.w., taylor, r.p.,
2006. the shaving reaction is facilitated through trogocytosis: concerted transfer of both rituximab (rtx) and the membrane dye pkh26
from b lymphocytes to macrophages is demonstrable by flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, and high resolution digital imaging in
a flow cytometric environment. ash annual meeting abstracts 108,
2096.
martin, f., chan, a.c., 2004. pathogenic roles of b cells in human autoimmunity;
insights from the clinic. immunity 20, 517–527.
mathas, s., rickers, a., bommert, k., dorken, b., mapara, m.y., 2000.
anti-cd20- and b-cell receptor-mediated apoptosis: evidence for shared
intracellular signaling pathways. cancer res. 60, 7170–7176.
mclaughlin, p., 2001. rituximab: perspective on single agent experience, and
future directions in combination trials. crit. rev. oncol. hematol. 40, 3–16.
mclaughlin, p., grillo-lopez, a.j., link, b.k., levy, r., czuczman, m.s.,
williams, m.e., heyman, m.r., bence-bruckler, i., white, c.a., cabanillas, f., jain, v., ho, a.d., lister, j., wey, k., shen, d., dallaire, b.k., 1998.
rituximab chimeric anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody therapy for relapsed
indolent lymphoma: half of patients respond to a four-dose treatment program. j. clin. oncol. 16, 2825–2833.
meijer, a.j., codogno, p., 2004. regulation and role of autophagy in mammalian
cells. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 36, 2445–2462.
meng, r., smallshaw, j.e., pop, l.m., yen, m., liu, x., le, l., ghetie, m.a.,
vitetta, e.s., ghetie, v., 2004. the evaluation of recombinant, chimeric,
tetravalent antihuman  xxxg378xxx  antibodies. clin. cancer res. 10, 1274–1281.
meyer, d., schiller, c., westermann, j., izui, s., hazenbos, w.l., verbeek,
j.s., schmidt, r.e., gessner, j.e., 1998. fcgammariii (cd16)-deficient
mice show igg isotype-dependent protection to experimental autoimmune
hemolytic anemia. blood 92, 3997–4002.
miniter, m.f., stollar, b.d., agnello, v., 1979. reassessment of the clinical
significance of native dna antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus.
arthritis rheum. 22, 959–968.
modak, s., koehne, g., vickers, a., o’reilly, r.j., cheung, n.k., 2005. rituximab therapy of lymphoma is enhanced by orally administered (1→3)
(1→4)-d-beta-glucan. leuk. res. 29, 679–683.
nimmerjahn, f., ravetch, j.v., 2005. divergent immunoglobulin g subclass
activity through selective fc receptor binding. science 310, 1510–1512.
nimmerjahn, f., ravetch, j.v., 2006. fcgamma receptors: old friends and new
family members. immunity 24, 19–28.
nimmerjahn, f., ravetch, j.v., 2007. antibodies fc receptors and cancer. curr.
opin. immunol. 19, 239–245.
ohsumi, y., 2001. molecular dissection of autophagy: two ubiquitin-like systems. nat. rev. mol. cell. biol. 2, 211–216.
parren, p.w., warmerdam, p.a., boeije, l.c., arts, j., westerdaal, n.a., vlug,
a., capel, p.j., aarden, l.a., van de winkel, j.g., 1992. on the interaction of
igg subclasses with the low affinity fc gamma riia (cd32) on human monocytes, neutrophils, and platelets. analysis of a functional polymorphism to
human igg2. j. clin. invest. 90, 1537–1546.
pastan, i., hassan, r., fitzgerald, d.j., kreitman, r.j., 2007. immunotoxin
treatment of cancer. annu. rev. med. 58, 221–237.
pedersen, i.m., buhl, a.m., klausen, p., geisler, c.h., jurlander, j., 2002. the
chimeric anti-cd20 antibody rituximab induces apoptosis in b-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells through a p38 mitogen activated protein-kinasedependent mechanism. blood 99, 1314–1319.
perosa, f., favoino, e., caragnano, m.a., dammacco, f., 2005. generation of biologically active linear and cyclic peptides has revealed a
unique fine specificity of rituximab and its possible cross-reactivity with
acid sphingomyelinase-like  xxxg1696xxx  precursor. blood 107,
1070–1077.
pescovitz, m.d., 2006. rituximab, an anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody: history
and mechanism of action. am. j. transplant. 6, 859–866.

petrie, r.j., deans, j.p., 2002. colocalization of the b cell receptor and cd20 followed by activation-dependent dissociation in distinct lipid rafts. j. immunol.
169, 2886–2891.
polyak, m.j., deans, j.p., 2002. alanine-170 and proline-172 are critical determinants for extracellular cd20 epitopes; heterogeneity in the fine specificity
of cd20 monoclonal antibodies is defined by additional requirements
imposed by both amino acid sequence and quaternary structure. blood 99,
3256–3262.
press, o.w., farr, a.g., borroz, k.i., anderson, s.k., martin, p.j., 1989. endocytosis and degradation of monoclonal antibodies targeting human b-cell
malignancies. cancer res. 49, 4906–4912.
ravetch, j.v., bolland, s., 2001. igg fc receptors. annu. rev. immunol. 19,
275–290.
reff, m.e., carner, k., chambers, k.s., chinn, p.c., leonard, j.e., raab, r.,
newman, r.a., hanna, n., anderson, d.r., 1994. depletion of b cells in
vivo by a chimeric mouse human monoclonal antibody to cd20. blood 83,
435–445.
rose, a.l., smith, b.e., maloney, d.g., 2002. glucocorticoids and rituximab
in vitro: synergistic direct antiproliferative and apoptotic effects. blood 100,
1765–1773.
ross, g.d., vetvicka, v., yan, j., xia, y., vetvickova, j., 1999. therapeutic intervention with complement and beta-glucan in cancer. immunopharmacology
42, 61–74.
scallon, b.j., snyder, l.a., anderson, g.m., chen, q., yan, l., weiner, l.m.,
nakada, m.t., 2006. a review of antibody therapeutics and antibody-related
technologies for oncology. j. immunother. 29, 351–364.
schmidt, r.e., gessner, j.e., 2005. fc receptors and their interaction with complement in autoimmunity. immunol. lett. 100, 56–67.
schreiber, a.d., frank, m.m., 1972. role of antibody and complement in the
immune clearance and destruction of erythrocytes. ii. molecular nature of
igg and igm complement-fixing sites and effects of their interaction with
serum. j. clin. invest. 51, 583–589.
shan, d., ledbetter, j.a., press, o.w., 1998. apoptosis of malignant human b
cells by ligation of cd20 with monoclonal antibodies. blood 91, 1644–1652.
shan, d., ledbetter, j.a., press, o.w., 2000. signaling events involved in  xxxd3132xxx -induced apoptosis of malignant human b cells. cancer immunol.
immunother. 48, 673–683.
shan, d., press, o.w., tsu, t.t., hayden, m.s., ledbetter, j.a., 1999. characterization of scfv-ig constructs generated from the anti-cd20 mab
1f5 using linker peptides of varying lengths. j. immunol. 162, 6589–
6595.
shimizu, s., kanaseki, t., mizushima, n., mizuta, t., arakawa-kobayashi, s.,
thompson, c.b., tsujimoto, y., 2004. role of bcl-2 family proteins in a
non-apoptotic programmed cell death dependent on autophagy genes. nat.
cell biol. 6, 1221–1228.
shushakova, n., skokowa, j., schulman, j., baumann, u., zwirner, j., schmidt,
r.e., gessner, j.e., 2002.  xxxg285xxx  is a major regulator of activating versus inhibitory fcgammars in immune complex-induced lung disease.
j. clin. invest. 110, 1823–1830.
song, s., crow, a.r., siragam, v., freedman, j., lazarus, a.h., 2005. monoclonal antibodies that mimic the action of anti-d in the amelioration of
murine itp act by a mechanism distinct from that of ivig. blood 105,
1546–1548.
swaak, a.j., aarden, l.a., statius van eps, l.w., feltkamp, t.e., 1979. antidsdna and complement profiles as prognostic guides in systemic lupus
erythematosus. arthritis rheum. 22, 226–235.
swaak, a.j., groenwold, j., bronsveld, w., 1986. predictive value of complement profiles and anti-dsdna in systemic lupus erythematosus. ann.
rheum. dis. 45, 359–366.
tabiasco, j., vercellone, a., meggetto, f., hudrisier, d., brousset, p., fournie,
j.j., 2003. acquisition of viral receptor by nk cells through immunological
synapse. j. immunol. 170, 5993–5998.
taylor, r.p., li, y., lindorfer, m.a., coursar, j.b., williams, m.e., 2006. flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry analyses reveal that rituximab/cd20
complexes are removed (shaved) from mantle cell lymphoma cells (z138)
previously infused intravenously or subcutaneously in a scid mouse model,
and the shaving reaction can be blocked by ivig. ash annual meeting
abstracts 108, p. 2105.

m.j. glennie et al. / molecular immunology 44 (2007) 3823–3837
tedder, t.f., baras, a., xiu, y., 2006. fcgamma receptor-dependent effector
mechanisms regulate  xxxg375xxx  and cd20 antibody immunotherapies for b lymphocyte malignancies and autoimmunity. springer semin. immunopathol.
28, 351–364.
tedder, t.f., forsgren, a., boyd, a.w., nadler, l.m., schlossman, s.f., 1986.
antibodies reactive with the b1 molecule inhibit cell cycle progression but
not activation of human b lymphocytes. eur. j. immunol. 16, 881–887.
teeling, j.l., french, r.r., cragg, m.s., van den brakel, j., pluyter, m., huang,
h., chan, c., parren, p.w., hack, c.e., dechant, m., valerius, t., van de
winkel, j.g., glennie, m.j., 2004. characterization of new human cd20
monoclonal antibodies with potent cytolytic activity against non-hodgkin
lymphomas. blood 104, 1793–1800.
teeling, j.l., mackus, w.j., wiegman, l.j., van den brakel, j.h., beers, s.a.,
french, r.r., van meerten, t., ebeling, s., vink, t., slootstra, j.w., parren,
p.w., glennie, m.j., van de winkel, j.g., 2006. the biological activity of
human cd20 monoclonal antibodies is linked to unique epitopes on cd20.
j. immunol. 177, 362–371.
treon, s.p., hansen, m., branagan, a.r., verselis, s., emmanouilides, c.,
kimby, e., frankel, s.r., touroutoglou, n., turnbull, b., anderson, k.c.,
maloney, d.g., fox, e.a., 2005. polymorphisms in  xxxg775xxx  (cd16)
receptor expression are associated with clinical response to rituximab in
waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia. j. clin. oncol. 23, 474–481.
treon, s.p., mitsiades, c., mitsiades, n., young, g., doss, d., schlossman,
r., anderson, k.c., 2001. tumor cell expression of cd59 is associated
with resistance to cd20 serotherapy in patients with b-cell malignancies. j.
immunother. 24, 263–271.
uchida, j., hamaguchi, y., oliver, j.a., ravetch, j.v., poe, j.c., haas, k.m.,
tedder, t.f., 2004. the innate mononuclear phagocyte network depletes b
lymphocytes through fc receptor-dependent mechanisms during anti-cd20
antibody immunotherapy. j. exp. med. 199, 1659–1669.
umana, p., moessner, e., bruenker, p., unsin, g., puentener, u., suter, t., grau,
r., schmidt, c., gerdes, c., nopora, a., patre, m., moser, s., sondermann,
p., wheat, l., dyer, m.j.s., poppema, s., bauer, s., strein, p., friess, t.,
klein, c., 2006. novel 3rd generation humanized type ii cd20 antibody
with glycoengineered fc and modified elbow hinge for enhanced adcc
and superior apoptosis induction. ash annual meeting abstracts 108, p.
229.
van der kolk, l.e., evers, l.m., omene, c., lens, s.m., lederman, s., van lier,
r.a., van oers, m.h., eldering, e., 2002. cd20-induced b cell death can
bypass mitochondria and caspase activation. leukemia 16, 1735–1744.
van der kolk, l.e., grillo-lopez, a.j., baars, j.w., hack, c.e., van oers, m.h.,
2001. complement activation plays a key role in the side-effects of rituximab
treatment. br. j. haematol. 115, 807–811.

3837

van meerten, t., van rijn, r.s., hol, s., hagenbeek, a., ebeling, s.b., 2006.
complement-induced cell death by rituximab depends on cd20 expression
level and acts complementary to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
clin. cancer res. 12, 4027–4035.
van rooijen, n., sanders, a., 1996. kupffer cell depletion by liposome-delivered
drugs: comparative activity of intracellular  xxxd1721xxx , propamidine, and
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. hepatology 23, 1239–1243.
vugmeyster, y., beyer, j., howell, k., combs, d., fielder, p., yang, j., qureshi,
f., sandlund, b., kawaguchi, l., dummer, w., lowman, h., mckeever, k.,
2005. depletion of b cells by a humanized anti-cd20 antibody pro70769
in macaca fascicularis. j. immunother. 28, 212–219.
walport, m.j., 2001a. complement. first of two parts. n. engl. j. med. 344,
1058–1066.
walport, m.j., 2001b. complement. second of two parts. n. engl. j. med. 344,
1140–1144.
walshe, c.a., beers, s.a., french, r.r., chan, c.h.t., johnson, p.w., packham,
g.k., glennie, m.j., cragg, m.s., induction of cytosolic calcium flux by
cd20 is dependent on the b cell antigen receptor, j. biol. chem., submitted
for publication.
wang, s.y., racila, e., taylor, r.p., weiner, g.j., 2006. the c3b component of
complement inhibits nk cell activation induced by rituximab-coated target
cells. ash annual meeting abstracts 108, p. 2505.
weng, w.k., levy, r., 2001. expression of complement inhibitors cd46,
 xxxg394xxx , and cd59 on tumor cells does not predict clinical outcome after
rituximab treatment in follicular non-hodgkin lymphoma. blood 98, 1352–
1357.
weng, w.k., levy, r., 2003. two immunoglobulin g fragment c receptor polymorphisms independently predict response to rituximab in patients with
follicular lymphoma. j. clin. oncol. 21, 3940–3947.
williams, m.e., densmore, j.j., pawluczkowycz, a.w., beum, p.v., kennedy,
a.d., lindorfer, m.a., hamil, s.h., eggleton, j.c., taylor, r.p., 2006.
thrice-weekly low-dose rituximab decreases cd20 loss via shaving and
promotes enhanced targeting in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. j. immunol.
177, 7435–7443.
xia, m.q., hale, g., lifely, m.r., ferguson, m.a., campbell, d., packman, l., waldmann, h., 1993. structure of the  xxxg393xxx , a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored glycoprotein which is an exceptionally good target for complement lysis. biochem. j. 293, 633–640.
yazawa, n., hamaguchi, y., poe, j.c., tedder, t.f., 2005. immunotherapy using
unconjugated  xxxg375xxx  monoclonal antibodies in animal models for b lymphocyte malignancies and autoimmune disease. proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a.
102, 15178–15183.

