cns drugs 2008; 22 (1): 27-47
1172-7047/08/0001-0027/$48.00/0

review article

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

antiepileptic drugs in
non-epilepsy disorders
relations between mechanisms of action and
clinical efficacy
cecilie johannessen landmark
department of pharmacy, faculty of health sciences, oslo university college, oslo, norway

contents
abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
1. literature search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2. pathophysiology and main targets for antiepileptic drugs (aeds) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3. aeds and neurological disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.1 essential tremor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2 neuropathic pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3 migraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4. aeds and psychiatric disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.1 anxiety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2 schizophrenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3 bipolar disorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5. co-morbidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6. potential use of aeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7. conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

abstract

antiepileptic drugs (aeds) are used extensively to treat multiple non-epilepsy
disorders, both in neurology and psychiatry. this article provides a review of the
clinical efficacy of aeds in non-epilepsy disorders based on recently published
preclinical and clinical studies, and attempts to relate this efficacy to the mechanism of action of aeds and pathophysiological processes associated with the
disorders. some newer indications for aeds have been established, while others
are under investigation. the disorders where aeds have been demonstrated to be
of clinical importance include neurological disorders, such as essential tremor,
neuropathic pain and migraine, and psychiatric disorders, including anxiety,
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
many of the aeds have various targets of action in the synapse and have
several proposed relevant mechanisms of action in epilepsy and in other disorders.
pathophysiological processes disturb neuronal excitability by modulating ion

28

johannessen landmark

channels, receptors and intracellular signalling pathways, and these are targets for
the pharmacological action of various aeds. attention is focused on the glutamatergic and gabaergic synapses.
in psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, aeds
such as valproate, carbamazepine and lamotrigine appear to have clear roles based
on their effect on intracellular pathways. on the other hand, some aeds, e.g.
topiramate, have efficacy for nonpsychiatric disorders including migraine, possibly by enhancing gabaergic and reducing glutamatergic neurotransmission.
aeds that seem to enhance gabaergic neurotransmission, e.g. tiagabine, valproate, gabapentin and possibly  xxxd2466xxx , may have a role in treating neurological disorders such as essential tremor, or anxiety disorders. aeds with effects
on voltage-gated sodium or calcium channels may be advantageous in treating
neuropathic pain, e.g. gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx ,
lamotrigine and valproate.
co-morbid conditions associated with epilepsy, such as mood disorders and
migraine, may often respond to treatment with aeds. other possible disorders
where aeds may be of clinical importance include cancer, hiv infection, drug
and alcohol abuse, and also in neuroprotection.
a future challenge is to evaluate the second-generation aeds in non-epilepsy
disorders and to design clinical trials to study their effects in such disorders in
paediatric patients. differentiation between the main mechanisms of action of the
aeds needs more consideration in drug selection for tailored treatment of the
various non-epilepsy disorders.

antiepileptic drugs (aeds) are extensively used
to treat a wide range of disorders other than epilepsy, including both neurological and psychiatric conditions such as neuropathic pain, migraine and bipolar disorder (see previous reviews[1-7]). furthermore, aeds may be useful for treating anxiety,
essential tremor, schizophrenia, social phobia, myotonia, post-traumatic stress disorder, and alcohol
abuse and withdrawal. the use of aeds in other
conditions is currently being explored.[2]
these disorders are, in general, related to disturbed excitability in the cns, peripheral nervous
system or striated muscle. many of the aeds have
several proposed mechanisms of action, both in
epilepsy and in other disorders. many of the aeds
have primarily been investigated in animal models
for epilepsy, but more recent studies have investi© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

gated their effects in other pathophysiological processes.[8]
the main pharmacodynamic mechanisms responsible for the clinical efficacy of aeds in these
disorders are likely to include modulation of
gabaergic or glutamatergic neurotransmission,
and alteration of voltage-gated ion channels or intracellular signalling pathways.[2] the mechanism of
action of aeds at the molecular level is not completely understood, but some of these mechanisms
of action seem to be similar in epilepsy and in the
various non-epilepsy disorders. current knowledge
indicates that most aeds have more than one mechanism of action, each of which may contribute to its
therapeutic efficacy to a variable extent, depending
on the condition.[9] the approach to treatment is not
mechanism-based, but a congruent pattern is emergcns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

ing where specific actions can be linked to specific
clinical activity profiles.[9] it is also important to
translate results from basic investigations into new
approaches for clinical research, in order to improve
the current understanding in this field.[10]
the purpose of the present review is to relate the
various mechanisms of action of aeds to pathophysiological mechanisms and clinical efficacy in
non-epilepsy disorders. important questions to be
considered are:
• which of the aeds may be of importance for the
various conditions, and which mechanisms of
action are relevant?
• is it reasonable to differentiate between relevant
mechanisms of action related to various pathophysiological mechanisms, or do they share common pathways?
these questions will be addressed by relating
mechanisms of action to clinical efficacy, as demonstrated in preclinical and clinical studies.
1. literature search
this review is based on recent pubmed publications on the activity of carbamazepine,  xxxd2090xxx ,
gabapentin, lamotrigine,  xxxd2466xxx ,  xxxd2809xxx , phenytoin, pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, valproate, vigabatrin and  xxxd3564xxx  in nonepilepsy disorders. in addition, the following newer
aeds, which are second-generation to existing
aeds, will be mentioned: eslicarbazepine, fluorofelbamate, the  xxxd2466xxx  analogues brivaracetam and seletracetam, and the valproate amide analogues valnoctamide, valrocemide and their analogues. the non-epilepsy disorders include anxiety,
essential tremor, neuropathic pain, migraine, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, myotonia, speech, neuroprotection, social phobia and post-traumatic stress
disorder. the potential for future use of aeds
outside of the cns area in the treatment of cancer,
hiv and bronchial asthma is also discussed.
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

29

relevant published papers in peer-reviewed, recognized, creditable, international, english language
journals were considered. searches were conducted
of published papers from january 1983 to march
2007, but papers published in recent years were
preferred, with the large majority of the included
articles being published from the year 2000 onwards. primary sources were preferred, but relevant
review articles were also included. randomized
clinical trials, open-label trials and case reports were
included, and abstracts, unpublished articles, nonenglish language articles and articles of limited
value, with out-of-date results or with poor methodology, were excluded.
2. pathophysiology and main targets for
antiepileptic drugs (aeds)
the pathophysiological processes related to the
synapse and regulating neuronal excitability may be
divided into four main categories. aeds may affect
these processes by:
• increasing gabaergic inhibitory neurotransmission;
• decreasing glutamatergic excitatory neurotransmission;
• blocking voltage-dependent sodium or calcium
channels;
• affecting intracellular signalling pathways.
targets for the action of aeds in the gabaergic
and glutamatergic synapse are summarized in figure
1. the possible mechanisms of action of aeds
relating to the main pathophysiological processes in
neurological and psychiatric disorders are summarized in table i. in addition, indirect mechanisms
may be involved, such as modulation of other neurotransmitters, including the monoamines. conclusive
evidence of the importance of the effects of aeds
on other neurotransmitter systems is, however, lacking. one study describes changes in monoamine
levels and metabolites with lamotrigine, carbamazepine and phenytoin.[11] valproate is one of the
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

30

johannessen landmark

inhibitory synapse

excitatory synapse

gaba synthesis
and inhibition of metabolism

inhibition of
glutamate release

inhibition of
voltage-gated
ca2+-channels
glutamate

inhibition of
gaba reuptake
cl−

na+
ca2+

 xxxg981xxx 
antagonists

gabaa receptor agonists

intracellular
signalling
pathways

ca2+

excitability
inhibition of voltagegated na+ channels
postsynaptic neuron

modulators
of signal
transduction

activation of
voltage-gated
k+ channels

1. targets for the action of antiepileptic drugs (aeds) in the synapse. a common consequence of aeds is that they affect the
excitability in the postsynaptic neuron, directly or indirectly. ampa = alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole  xxxd3029xxx ;
mglu = metabotropic  xxxg981xxx  2; nmda = n-methyl-d-aspartate.

most thoroughly studied aeds and its effects on
other neurotransmitters have been reviewed by
löscher.[12] approved and investigational clinical
use of aeds, in european countries or in the us, in
both neurological and psychiatric disorders is summarized in table ii. evidence to support the efficacy
and tolerability of aeds, particularly the newer
compounds, is still inadequate for many of these
disorders. therefore, there is a need for controlled
studies in larger numbers of patients with homogeneity of diagnosis, to establish efficacy of the individual aeds.[1] bipolar disorder and neuropathic
pain are the two disorders where aeds have been
most thoroughly investigated. co-morbidity between epilepsy and other disorders is discussed
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

in section 5. potential targets in the synapse for
aeds, and their potential future use are discussed in
section 6.
3. aeds and neurological disorders
3.1 essential tremor

essential tremor is a progressive neurological
disorder. action tremor with alternating activity is
uncommon in essential tremor, but a more common
pattern is the synchronous activation of antagonistic
muscles.[82] moreover, essential tremor is defined as
a rhythmical, involuntary oscillatory movement
caused by alternative contraction of agonist and
antagonist muscles.[1] essential tremor may be
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

 xxxd2809xxx 

(camp, atp, pkc, ip3,

possible involvement in a specific mechanism of action.

felbamatea

 xxxd3564xxx ,a

topiramate,

lamotrigine,

valproatea

lamotrigine

 xxxd2809xxx ,
valproate,

topiramate,

gapapentin,

valproate,a

 xxxd2466xxx 

topiramate,

topiramate

valproate,

migraine

carbamazepine,

pregabalin,

gabapentin,

topiramate

 xxxd2090xxx ,a

tiagabine

topiramate,

neuropathic pain

12,17,36-46

28-35

25-27

15-24

references

kinase c.

atp =  xxxd83xxx ; camp =  xxxd1773xxx ; ip3 = inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate; marcks = myristoylated alanine-rich c-kinase; pkc = beta-protein

a

marcks)

carbamazepine,a

valproate,a

carbamazepine

lamotrigine,

valproate

valproate

bipolar disorder

intracellular mediators

valproatea

carbamazepine,

interference with

gabapentin

lamotrigine,

topiramate

valproate,

valproatea

pregabalin

sodium and calcium

 xxxd3564xxx ,

levetiracetama

channels

gabapentin,

topiramate

inhibition of voltage-gated

excitotoxicity

neurotransmission and

decrease in glutamatergic

gabapentin,

valproate
zonisamidea

topiramate,

pregabalin, tiagabine,

neurotransmission

valproate

tiagabine,a

gabapentin,

increase in gabaergic

schizophrenia

essential tremor

anxiety

potential mechanisms
of aeds

table i. possible relevant mechanisms of action of antiepileptic drugs (aeds) and their efficacy in several non-epilepsy disorders, based on preclinical findings[1,2,4-7,9,10,13,14]

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders
31

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

a = approved for use in this indication or general acceptance of utility; i = investigational/preliminary use in this indication; na = not applicable.

81

62,72,75-80
a
i
na
na

na

valproate

 xxxd3564xxx 

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

na

a
i
topiramate

i

a

i

i

na

i

67-74
i
i
i

a

49

66
i

na
a

i

na

i

na

na

na

na

a

i

pregabalin

tiagabine

47,63-65
na
i
na
phenytoin

na

na

a

55-60

61,62
na

i
a

a

i

i

na

i

i
na

na

 xxxd2466xxx 

 xxxd2809xxx 

na
na
lamotrigine

i
i
gabapentin

na

51-54
i
a
i

a

48-50
a
na
na

a

na

migraine

a

neuropathic pain
bipolar disorder
schizophrenia

i
na
na
carbamazepine

essential tremor
anxiety
drug

table ii. antiepileptic drugs (aeds) and their clinical use in non-epilepsy disorders[1,2,4-7,9,10,13,14]

a

references

johannessen landmark

47

32

caused by a deficiency in the alpha1-subunit of the
gabaa receptor, as demonstrated in a knockout
model in mice.[19] this mechanism elucidates that a
dysfunction in the gabaergic system in the major
motor pathway is a potential target for pharmacotherapy, and the fact that the benzodiazepines,
which are gabaa receptor agonists, may be effective in essential tremor.[19-21] this animal model
overlaps, in some clinical characteristics, with essential tremor in humans, and it seems likely that the
model reflects the inherited pathophysiological processes, where there is a loss of inhibitory neurotransmission by cerebellar purkinje cells, without actual
degeneration of these cells.[20] moreover, it has been
reported that diazepam had no effect on essential
tremor, whereas dizocilpine reduced tremor, reflecting that functionality and pharmacological sensitivity may be altered in the genetic model, and that
impairment of glutamatergic neurotransmission
contributes to essential tremor.[19,21] based on their
mechanisms of action, all aeds that enhance
gabaergic neurotransmission could be effective in
the treatment of essential tremor. drugs with this
potential include tiagabine, vigabatrin, valproate,
gabapentin, pregabalin and topiramate.
the effect of topiramate in essential tremor has
been documented in several trials.[21,69] this effect
could be explained by one of the proposed mechanisms of action of topiramate, such as modulation of
gabaa receptors.[68] gabapentin, which may also
facilitate gabaergic function, has also demonstrated efficacy in essential tremor.[50] the positive effect of  xxxd3564xxx  on essential tremor has also been
reported.[81] although modulation of voltage-gated
ion channels is thought to be the main mechanism of
action of  xxxd3564xxx , the drug has also been reported to enhance gaba release, to downregulate
the number of gaba reuptake transporter proteins
and to upregulate the glutamate transporter  xxxg2102xxx .[13,29,83]
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

the effect of  xxxd2466xxx  in both essential and
cerebellar tremor seems to be promising and needs
to be investigated in larger patient groups.[55-58] the
primary site of action of  xxxd2466xxx  is thought to
be the synaptic vesicle protein 2a ( xxxg2233xxx ). stimulation of presynaptically located  xxxg2233xxx  possibly inhibits neurotransmitter release.  xxxd2466xxx  has
also been demonstrated to enhance chloride currents
in the gabaa receptor.[84,85] it has been suggested
that exocytosis of the excitatory neurotransmitter
glutamate is inhibited by  xxxd2466xxx , and this
may explain its clinical efficacy in essential tremor,
since enhancement of gabaergic neurotransmission and a decrease in glutamatergic neurotransmission seem to be advantageous in reducing essential
tremor.[19]
3.2 neuropathic pain

neuropathic pain is chronic pain caused by injury
to, or disease of, the central and peripheral nervous
systems, occurring as a result of a cascade of neurobiological processes, which lead to hyperexcitability
in conducting pathways of somatosensory neurons.
molecular changes occur in the brain, peripheral
nociceptors, dorsal root ganglia, and in the dorsal
horns of the spinal cord.[1] neuropathic pain results
from injury to sensory neurons, leading to axonal
sprouting and marked changes in the expression of
genes encoding both sodium and calcium channels
and, thus, changing the distribution and composition
of specific subunits.[2] it is now recognized that
hyperalgesia and allodynia develop as a result of the
pathological plasticity of these ion channels in several areas in the peripheral and spinal cord afferent
pain pathways.[2] a pharmacological finding supporting this hypothesis is that gabapentin and pregabalin, which both have potent analgesic effects in
neuropathic pain, possess a selective inhibitory effect on the alpha2delta1-subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel.[13,28,86] in addition, other mechanisms
involved in neuropathic pain include increased ac© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

33

tivity in glutamate receptors and changes in gabamediated inhibition, as well as alteration of calcium
influx into cells.[1]
aeds were the first drugs trialled in the treatment of neuropathic pain, since hyperexcitability is
also the hallmark of epileptic activity, and aeds
remain the treatment of choice in the clinical management of neuropathic pain.[30] as indicated in
table ii, several aeds are effective in treating
neuropathic pain. aeds have demonstrated efficacy
in peripheral neuropathies, particularly in diabetic
neuropathy and post-herpetic neuropathy, as well as
in trigeminal neuralgia.[1,87] clinical trials indicate
that aeds, including carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx , valproate, phenytoin, lamotrigine, topiramate,  xxxd2466xxx , gabapentin,  xxxd3564xxx  and tiagabine, may all be effective in treating neuropathic
pain (see previous reviews[1,2,14,51,61,63]). however,
only gabapentin and pregabalin are regarded as firstline treatments in peripheral neuropathic pain, based
on evidence-based guidelines documenting their
efficacy and absence of any serious adverse
events.[87] many of these aeds share the common
feature of inhibiting voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels, thus causing a decrease in excitatory
glutamatergic neurotransmission (figure 1). aeds
that inhibit voltage-gated sodium channels increase
the inactivation time for the channel in a use-dependent way, which decreases excessive glutamatergic
neurotransmission. inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channels located presynaptically decreases
glutamatergic neurotransmission by decreasing
glutamate exocytosis. recently, it has been demonstrated that the typical inhibitors of voltage-gated
sodium channels (and to some extent calcium channels), i.e. carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx  and lamotrigine, do not completely share the same mechanism of action.  xxxd2809xxx  differs from carbamazepine by additional inhibition of several types of
voltage-gated calcium channels.[88] lamotrigine has
been demonstrated to selectively reduce action pocns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

34

tential firing from dendritic depolarization through
an increase in the hyperpolarization-activated cation
current (ih), since the dendrites have different electrical properties than the soma in pyramidal cells.[89]
this effect was not detected with carbamazepine
and phenytoin.[89] the differences in their target of
action could therefore play different roles in the
control of excitability.
nevertheless, it has been suggested that the anticonvulsant and analgesic efficacies of aeds may be
due to different pharmacological mechanisms, since
their effects do not necessarily correlate.[90] mechanisms involving modulation of gaba and glutamate are also important, as both neurotransmitters
are mediators in the spinal cord and are responsible
for somatosensory neuronal activity by excitatory
and interneuronal inhibitory transmission, respectively. the descending inhibitory pathway where
monoamines are involved in pain sensation may also
be pharmacologically modulated.
valproate has been shown to block neurogenic
inflammation via gabaa receptor-mediated inhibition, possibly by modulation of trigeminal nociceptive neurons innervating the meninges.[22] in a double-blind, randomized trial, valproate was effective
against painful diabetic neuropathy compared with
placebo.[76] valproate may also alter serotonergic
neurotransmission, as demonstrated in animal models.[12] it is possible that valproate modulates the
descending inhibitory pathways, thus decreasing
neuropathic pain. this could also be consistent with
the recent finding that long-term administration of
valproate increases the expression and signalling of
 xxxg1590xxx , an endogenous modulator involved
in excitability and pain neurotransmission.[91] the
anti-allodynic activity of valproate and several of its
amide derivatives has recently been assessed, in
comparison with gabapentin, in the rat spinal nerve
ligation model for neuropathic pain (chung
model).[92,93] the corresponding amide of valproate,
valpromide, and its constitutional isomers,  xxxd2047xxx © 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

johannessen landmark

tamide, diisopropylacetamide and propylisopropyl
 xxxd63xxx , were more potent than valproate, and
were equipotent to gabapentin, the favoured drug in
the treatment of neuropathic pain.[92,94] it has been
postulated that valproate, valpromide, valnoctamide, propylisopropyl  xxxd63xxx  and diisopropylacetamide activate one or more of their presumed
targets with higher affinity than valproate.[92] another possible explanation for the higher potency of
amide derivatives of valproate and its isomers may
be their favourable disposition kinetics, with higher
brain to plasma ratios.
recently, it has been suggested that gabapentin
reduces glutamate release and reduces the enhanced
noxious stimulus-induced spinal release of glutamate seen in neuropathic rats.[31] additionally,
gabapentin inhibits subthreshold membrane potential oscillation, which may explain its antinociceptive action by direct suppression of the nociceptive
afferent input to the spinal cord.[32] it remains to be
determined whether the selective inhibitory effect of
gabapentin and pregabalin on the alpha2delta1-subunit on
the voltage-gated calcium channel is sufficient to
account for the broad-spectrum clinical effects seen
with these two drugs.[14,49] a recent review concluded that it is very likely that these subunits on the
calcium channel are responsible for the analgesic
action of gabapentin.[33]
 xxxd3564xxx  demonstrated centrally mediated
antihyperalgesic and antihyperallodynic effects,
partly via the blockade of  xxxd2738xxx  synthesis in a
mouse model following partial nerve injury.[34]
 xxxd2090xxx  is another newer aed that may have
analgesic properties in peripheral neuropathy.[35]
 xxxd2090xxx  is regarded as a broad-spectrum aed
with several proposed mechanisms of action, including antagonism at the glutamatergic n-methyl-daspartate (nmda) receptor at the nr2 subunit, in
clinically relevant concentrations, in addition to inhibition of voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels.[3] after serious adverse events in a small numcns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

ber of patients, including aplastic anaemia and liver
failure (caused by production of a reactive metabolite of  xxxd2090xxx ), the clinical use of  xxxd2090xxx  is
now limited.[14]
3.3 migraine

the development of migraine involves multiple
and complementary mechanisms: inflammation, vasodilation and altered pain sensation. all main
mechanisms related to altered excitability in the
synapse are probably involved in the pathophysiology of migraine, and hyperexcitability is a common
result in both migraine and epilepsy. there is an
increasing recognition of the role that cortical hyperexcitability, an imbalance between gabaergic inhibition and glutamatergic excitation, may play in
the pathophysiology of migraine.[1] the aeds with
demonstrated efficacy in the prevention of migraine
are broad-spectrum drugs with multiple mechanisms
of action, such as valproate and topiramate. in addition, gabapentin and lamotrigine may be useful,
probably because of their inhibitory action on voltage-gated calcium and sodium channels.
the influence of valproate on the balance between gaba and glutamate may be involved in this
drug’s action in the treatment of migraine, since
valproate is likely to modulate the biochemical phenomena of aura, or to affect nociception, by modulation of gaba- and/or glutamate-mediated neurotransmission.[22] it has been suggested that all aeds
used in the treatment of migraine share the common
role of enhancing gaba-mediated inhibition.[95]
the following may contribute to the efficacy of
valproate in the treatment of migraine: turn-off of
serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe via gaba
receptors; suppression of neurogenic factors and
 xxxg2240xxx ; and attenuation of nociceptive neurotransmission.[96]
valproate and topiramate have demonstrated
clinical efficacy in multiple well designed clinical
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

35

trials in migraine treatment, yielding a consistent
pattern of findings, i.e. the effect of the medications
is statistically significant and exceeds the minimum
clinically significant benefit (table ii).[14,72,97]
gabapentin has shown some evidence of efficacy
from randomized clinical trials.[97] in a recent open,
controlled study over 3 years, lamotrigine was effective in reducing the frequency of migraine aura and
attack.[52]  xxxd2466xxx  may also be effective in the
prevention of migraine and resistant headache.[59,60]
the efficacy of  xxxd2466xxx  may be due to its
inhibitory effect on glutamate release, by modulation of  xxxg2233xxx .[84]
topiramate has several proposed mechanisms of
action. it is highly likely that one or more of these
mechanisms may act additively or synergistically to
modify the abnormal neuronal activity that contributes to the initiation of a migraine attack, or to
prevent the clustering of headaches. possible mechanisms include the following: enhanced gabaergic
activity; modified voltage-gated calcium channels;
or modulated ampa (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole)-mediated excitatory neurotransmission.[68,98] by complementary mechanisms of action, topiramate may disrupt the pathophysiological
cycle of migraine by modulating the cortical hyperexcitability that leads to cortical spreading depression (a brief wave of excitation followed by prolonged neuronal depression and reduction in regional blood flow), inhibition of glutamatergic signalling
by trigeminal afferent nerves, and by modulation of
nociceptive signalling through gabaa receptors in
the trigeminal nucleus caudalis or descending brain
stem pathways.[68] the efficacy and tolerability of
topiramate in migraine-preventive therapy was recently demonstrated in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study.[73]
many of the newer aeds need further investigation to establish their possible role in the treatment
of migraine.
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

36

johannessen landmark

4. aeds and psychiatric disorders

4.1 anxiety

dysfunction of gaba transmission has been
implicated in the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders; evidence supporting this initially resulted from
clinical experience with benzodiazepines, and subsequently from the determination of the mechanism
of action of gaba, and from genetic engineering
and neuroimaging studies of the gaba receptor.[15,16] valproate, gabapentin, pregabalin, tiagabine and vigabatrin, which are all known to target
metabolic pathways of gaba or gaba reuptake,
could all possibly possess anxiolytic properties
(table i).[16]
only tiagabine has demonstrated efficacy and
good tolerability in generalized anxiety disorder in
two randomized studies (table ii).[13,14,66] tiagabine
and vigabatrin are mechanism-based drugs. tiagabine inhibits gaba reuptake via the gaba
transporter-1 ( xxxg2143xxx ) receptor, and vigabatrin inhibits gaba metabolism via  xxxg8xxx 
inhibition. consequently, both of these drugs cause
an increase in postsynaptic gaba availability and
can enhance inhibitory gabaergic neurotransmission.[99-101] the use of vigabatrin in epilepsy has
diminished over the last few years since it carries a
risk of the development of serious irreversible visual
field defects, due to possible damage of photoreceptors, in >30% of patients.[102-104] consequently, the
possible clinical use of vigabatrin in disorders other
than epilepsy has not been further explored.
of the newer aeds studied in randomized, controlled trials for the treatment of anxiety disorders,
gabapentin and pregabalin were effective in the
treatment of social phobia; pregabalin was also effective in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder.[49] even though the structure of gabapentin is
similar to gaba, gabapentin and its derivative pregabalin do not seem to affect the gabaa receptor
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

complex.[28] topiramate may also be effective in
social phobia, as demonstrated in one open-label
study.[67] topiramate is a drug with several proposed
mechanisms of action, including modulation of
gabaa and glutamate receptors, inhibition of voltage-gated sodium channels, modulation of voltagegated potassium and calcium channels and inhibition of carbonic anhydrase.[68]
valproate is known to affect several enzymes
related to the synthesis and degradation of
gaba.[12,17,75,105,106] based on their pathophysiological roles, these enzymes could all have positive
clinical effects in anxiety; however, to date, no
studies have demonstrated the efficacy of valproate
in the treatment of anxiety.
since the various gabaa receptor subtypes are
different in their specific regional and cellular localization, they consequently provide distinct neuronal
circuits and functions. new subtype-selective drugs
in development, e.g. modulators of the  xxxg832xxx -subunitcontaining gabaa receptors, could be used in the
treatment of anxiety, insomnia and other psychiatric
disorders and for memory enhancement.[18,107]
further studies with newer aeds would be of
importance for the evaluation of drug treatment alternatives in anxiety, a disease that affects a large
patient population.
4.2 schizophrenia

the main focus of understanding the neurochemical background of schizophrenia has been on the
monoamines, dopamine and serotonin. nevertheless, the amino acid neurotransmitters gaba and
glutamate are also important modulators of monoaminergic neuronal pathways. in the present review,
focus is placed on glutamatergic and gabaergic
neurotransmission, since aeds primarily affect
these neurotransmitter systems. mechanisms affecting excitability in the gabaergic and glutamatergic
synapses may play a role in the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia (table i). both gaba and glutamate
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

contribute to the control of dopaminergic activity in
the brain, and central dopaminergic activity is
thought to be increased in schizophrenia.[23,108] recently, a deficit in the  xxxg832xxx -subunit in gabaa receptors was linked to increased central dopaminergic
function.[23] the glutamate hypothesis, as a basis for
understanding the neurochemical background for
schizophrenia, suggests reduced functioning in
glutamatergic nmda receptors, possibly on critical
gabaergic interneurons.[25].
aeds with proven efficacy in bipolar disorder,
i.e. valproate, lamotrigine and carbamazepine, have
also been investigated in schizophrenia, and may be
efficacious in the treatment of antipsychotic-resistant schizophrenia.[77,109] the use of lamotrigine as
an adjuvant treatment with antipsychotics in schizophrenia may be advantageous, but needs further
investigation.[53] furthermore, preclinical studies
show that valproate may modulate the monoamines,
particularly serotonin, and the amino acid neurotransmitters.[12,17] valproate is a potent inhibitor of
histone deacetylases, which are negative regulators
of gene expression and which could downregulate
reelin, a neuronal migration factor and an isoform of
 xxxg913xxx  ( xxxg849xxx ), the enzyme responsible for the conversion of glutamate to
gaba.[2,36,110] a deficiency in  xxxg849xxx  has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, and
reduced amounts of the enzyme were found in prefrontal areas on postmortem examination in schizophrenic patients.[24,26] an increase in  xxxg849xxx  activity
has also been suggested as a mechanism of action of
valproate, in addition to its effect on other enzymes
related to the synthesis and metabolism of gaba,
such as alpha-ketoglutarate and succinic semialdehyde
dehydrogenase.[12,68,105]
recent data regarding inpatients with mood or
schizoaffective disorders treated with valproate or
 xxxd2809xxx  demonstrated a similar efficacy of
the two drugs.[62]  xxxd2809xxx  seemed, however,
to be more effective than valproate in treating nega© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

37

tive symptoms such as social withdrawal.[62] the
possible effects of valproate on negative symptoms
of schizophrenia will need further study. inhibition
of neuronal excitability by inhibition of voltagegated sodium channels, and modulation of intracellular signalling pathways have also been suggested
as possibly relevant mechanisms of action (see section 3.1).[2,111]
topiramate has been demonstrated to possess
many molecular activities, as previously described,
including selective antagonism at the glutamatergic
kainate receptor.[27,68] recently, in a randomized,
double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled trial,
topiramate was shown to be an effective adjuvant
treatment in reducing general psychopathological
symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia
(table ii).[74] this effect could probably be related to
its antagonistic effect on glutamatergic kainate receptors.[74] valproate, carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx , lamotrigine and topiramate have been investigated in schizophrenia, but further studies of
these drugs, and other newer aeds, as adjuvant
treatments with antipsychotics, are required.
4.3 bipolar disorder

bipolar disorder is a severe, chronic and potentially life-threatening illness with recurrent episodes, i.e. mania, hypomania, depression and mixed
states (concomitant manic and depressive symptoms), and rapid cycling (four or more episodes per
year).[1] it is subdivided into two types: bipolar i
(characterized by classical manic and depressive
phases) and bipolar ii (characterized by hypomanic
and depressive episodes). several pathophysiological mechanisms have been postulated to be involved
in the development of bipolar disorder. dysfunction
of dopaminergic neurons has been implicated in
several neuropsychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder.[112] interference with intracellular
mediators and signalling pathways, and decreased
glutamatergic neurotransmission also seem to be
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

38

important mechanisms in the pathophysiology of
bipolar disorder, and will be focused upon in more
detail in this review. the inositol theory is considered to be of major importance. lithium, the first
drug investigated in bipolar disorder, inhibits the
enzymatic degradation of inositol phosphates to free
intracellular inositol, and a physiological consequence of this effect may be decreased signal transduction and neurotransmission.[2] in addition, evidence now shows that atrophy and glial death are
involved in mood disorders, and that mood-stabilizing agents may exert beneficial actions by attenuating or reversing disease-related impairments in neuronal plasticity, neurogenesis or cell survival.[37,113]
calcium is involved in cellular plasticity, as a reduction of intracellular calcium concentration may be of
major importance in neuroprotection by avoiding
cell destruction and, ultimately, cell death.[111] other
factors involved in cell survival pathways that contribute to neuroprotection are bcl-2, brain-derived
 xxxg1614xxx , mitogen-activated protein kinases and  xxxd1773xxx  (camp)
element-binding protein.[38] astrocytes are also implicated in inositol turnover, and have recently been
implicated as a contributor to the development of
epilepsy.[114,115]
kindling is considered an animal model of
epileptogenesis and, transferred to bipolar disorder,
this mechanism might explain how events trigger
affective episodes; however, patients may relapse in
the absence of any obvious stress factors. many
aeds have demonstrated anti-kindling effects in
vitro, which may explain why they exert efficacy in
both epilepsy and mood disorders.[111] several
aeds exert their action on voltage-gated ion channels and the net effect is in the direction of decreased
excitability (figure 1).[111]
with regard to the effects on intracellular signalling pathways, a common action of mood stabilizers
has been searched for, with valproate, carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx  and lamotrigine being the
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

johannessen landmark

most thoroughly investigated drugs. many target
proteins and signalling pathways have been proposed as being important for their clinical efficacy
in bipolar disorder, even though many of the studies
are preclinical.[36-46] the effects of aeds are usually
comparable to the effects of lithium on inositol
concentrations; a finding regarded as a milestone in
the inositol hypothesis of bipolar disorder.[2]
valproate interferes with several intracellular
signalling pathways. like lithium, it inhibits inositol
signalling through an inositol-depletion mechanism,
inhibiting the rate-limiting step of inositol biosynthesis,  xxxd2360xxx -1-phosphate synthase in vitro.[39,116] patients with bipolar depression seem to
show improvement in symptoms following the addition of inositol to lithium, valproate or lamotrigine,
thus providing a correlate between the clinical presentation of bipolar depression and inositol concentrations.[40,54] valproate causes a decrease in intracellular inositol and inositol-1-phosphate and an
increase in the expression of the rate-limiting
enzyme in the synthesis of inositol. short-term exposure of valproate leads to alterations in phospholipid synthesis.[41] it has been suggested that a common mechanism of action for lithium, carbamazepine and valproate involves neuronal inositol
depletion by inhibition of the collapse of sensory
neuron growth cones, an effect that is reversed by
inositol.[42] since valproate has an effect on the
expression of proteins associated with large dense
core vesicles, altered dynamics of these vesicles
may play a role in modifying biochemical pathways,
leading to the relief of symptoms in bipolar disorder.[117]
another postulated mechanism involved in the
pathophysiology of bipolar disorder is modulation
of the expression of the early inducible genes for cfos and c-jun, which promote the expression of
various intracellular regulatory proteins. valproate,
carbamazepine and lithium affect these effects at the
level of protein kinase c.[43] in addition, valproate
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

dose-dependently inhibits  xxxg2240xxx -induced
interleukin-6 (il-6) synthesis by inhibition of protein kinase c.[43] il-6 is a cytokine that is elevated
during the acute depressive state, and valproate
downregulates the expression of the  xxxg2240xxx 
receptor.  xxxg2240xxx  is hypothesized to be involved
in the aetiology of affective disorders.[44] of the
mechanisms of action proposed to explain the beneficial effect of valproate in bipolar disorder, the
effects of valproate on intracellular inositol and on
protein kinase c seem most plausible.
eleven different genes have been identified
whose expressions are altered following valproate
administration in mice, indicating that valproate regulates a large number of different functional pathways in the brain.[37] the pharmacological effects of
valproate and carbamazepine on these proteins
could explain their neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties that ameliorate impairments of cellular plasticity and resilience underlying the pathophysiology of mood disorders.[45] insight into the
precise mechanisms of action of valproate on intracellular signalling proteins will probably be provided by the use of the modern tools of basic and
clinical neuroscience (genomics, proteomics and
functional brain imaging).[118]
a reduction in cerebral energy metabolism and
excitatory neurotransmission by valproate may also
be important in the treatment of manic episodes.[17,75] in bipolar disorder, oral loading of valproate and  xxxd3485xxx  may offer an early-onset efficacy in the treatment of acute mania.[78,79] only
valproate, carbamazepine and  xxxd2809xxx  have
documented double-blind results for their efficacy
in mania. other aeds lack significant evidence
from large-scale trials, or have failed to demonstrate
efficacy (table ii).[7] their impact on gaba differs
significantly, and this may be a reason why their
efficacy in mania varies greatly.[7] more clinical
studies to investigate the short-term effect of valproate in mania would be useful in order to evaluate
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

39

its efficacy. the effect of valproate in acute mania
may, at least partly, be due to enhancement of
gabaergic transmission.[119]
lamotrigine had no anti-manic activity in placebo-controlled studies, but demonstrated efficacy in
bipolar depression and was effective in the prevention of depressive relapse.[54,120,121] lamotrigine and
carbamazepine seem to affect mood disorders positively, while gabaergic drugs influence mood negatively. one hypothesis is that lamotrigine and carbamazepine affect structures in the limbic system,
e.g. amygdala, known to be related to emotion.[10]
this effect could be caused by modulation of monoamines, as lamotrigine dose-dependently decreases extracellular levels of serotonin and dopamine in rats, or decreases the exocytosis of glutamate.[11,46,122] lamotrigine inhibits high-voltagegated calcium channels responsible for neurotransmitter exocytosis.[3] lamotrigine was superior to
gabapentin or placebo in bipolar disorder and, at
present, there are no data to support the use of
gabapentin in maintenance therapy of bipolar disorder, including the rapid cycling variant of the disease.[121]
several clinical studies have evaluated the efficacy of phenytoin in bipolar disorder, both as an
anti-manic and a mood-stabilizing drug; however,
the results are not conclusive. [46,64,123] some reports
on topiramate and  xxxd3564xxx  support their potential use as mood-stabilizers.[71,121] both drugs are
regarded as broad-spectrum drugs with multiple
mechanisms of action, resulting in reduction in excitatory neurotransmission, which may be the main
goal of therapy for mood stabilization. the effects of
aeds in mood-related disorders have been reviewed and it was concluded that valproate, carbamazepine and lamotrigine are valuable drugs, but
there is no clear evidence as yet supporting the use
of the newer aeds (vigabatrin, tiagabine, topiramate and  xxxd2466xxx ) in these disorders.[124]
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

40

johannessen landmark

valproate is obviously the most thoroughly investigated drug regarding possible mechanisms in
bipolar disorder and it remains to be investigated
whether other aeds, in addition to carbamazepine,
may affect some of these proteins and signalling
pathways. an interesting question that remains to be
answered is: what causes the difference in clinical
efficacy seen with valproate and carbamazepine,
compared with lamotrigine, in manic and depressive
states?
5. co-morbidity
the possible common physiological pathways
between the non-epilepsy disorders and epilepsy,
which are targeted by aeds, are illustrated in figure
1. the frequent co-morbidity of epilepsy and nonepilepsy disorders suggests that these conditions
share one or more common aetiologies.[2] epidemiological evidence indicates that epilepsy, migraine,
depression and essential tremor are often co-morbid
conditions, and the existence of one of these conditions increases the risk of the others.[125]
the incidence of psychiatric disorders in patients
with epilepsy is significantly higher than in the
general population, with depressive and anxiety disorders being the most frequent diagnoses.[126,127]
mood disorders in patients with epilepsy are underdiagnosed, but an average incidence of 30–40% is
assumed.[126] in a recent screening study that included 85 000 patients, bipolar symptoms occurred in
12% of community-based epilepsy patients, and
26% of the epilepsy patients carried a diagnosis of
unipolar depression.[127] affective disorders and epilepsy appear to share partially similar pathogenic
mechanisms, and antidepressants and aeds may
share some similar mechanisms of action.[128,129]
there seems to be a bidirectional relationship between depression and epilepsy, and they may share a
common underlying mechanism.[128] in a recent
study, lamotrigine reduced seizure frequency and
improved depressive symptoms in patients exper© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

iencing both disorders.[130] evidence suggests that
these disorders may arise from a multiplicity of
neurobiological abnormalities, but one component
may arise from noradrenergic and serotonergic deficits.[131] a disorder in one individual may arise via
different mechanisms than a phenomenologically
similar disorder in another individual.[132] the interplay between neurobiological aspects in mood disorders and epilepsy is very complex.[127] future research on intracellular mechanisms might become
decisive for a better understanding of the similarities
between the disorders.[111] both seizures and severe
affective episodes may correlate with neuronal impairment because of an excess of glutamate, an
excess of calcium, or an excess of  xxxd2738xxx ,
which may result in neurotoxic effects. it would be
of interest to know whether the aeds can exert any
type of neuroprotective effect.[111] more preclinical
studies using other models, evaluating the effects of
aeds on monoamine neurotransmitters, are needed
in order to gain a better insight into the pathophysiological processes.
anxiety and bipolar disorder are also common
co-morbid disorders; however, to date no randomized controlled studies of these two disorders have
been conducted.[78]
migraine and epilepsy are often co-morbid, as
patients with epilepsy are 2.4-fold more likely to
develop migraine than their relatives without epilepsy.[133] both migraine and epilepsy can be considered chronic disorders that are characterized by neuronal hyperexcitability, with recurrent neurological
attacks variously accompanied by headache, as well
as by peripheral and psychological features.[134] migraine and epilepsy are linked by their symptom
profiles, as a number of migraine syndromes can be
confused with epilepsy.[134] several receptor-gated
and voltage-sensitive ion channels are implicated in
the pathophysiology of both epilepsy and migraine;
therefore, continued investigation of the factors that
contribute to the initiation of an epileptic seizure or a
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

migraine episode will provide greater insight into
each of the various molecular activities in these
highly devastating episodic disorders.[68] epilepsy
and aeds may co-exist with disfluent speech, and
 xxxd2466xxx  seems to facilitate verbal fluency, and
the effect seems to be independent of its anticonvulsant effect.[135]
in a population of patients with epilepsy, a substantial portion of these patients will need pharmacological treatment for both epilepsy and co-morbid
conditions. the broad-spectrum efficacy of aeds,
with several mechanisms of action, may therefore be
of significant importance.
6. potential use of aeds
derivatives of established aeds are undergoing
development and clinical trials are being conducted
in non-epilepsy disorders such as neuropathic pain,
bipolar disorder and migraine. these derivative
compounds have to be more potent, safer and possess more favourable pharmacokinetics in order to
become successful second-generation aeds.[94]
these drugs include the carbamazepine analogues
 xxxd2034xxx  ( xxxd2034xxx ) and 10-hydroxy  xxxd432xxx  (mhd), the valproate derivatives
valrocemide and isovaleramide (nps 1776), the
gabapentin derivatives pregabalin and xp13512, the
 xxxd2466xxx  derivatives brivaracetam (ucb
34714) and seletracetam (ucb 44212), and the
 xxxd2090xxx  derivative fluorofelbamate.[14,94] in addition, the valproate derivative valnoctamide is undergoing a phase ii double-blind controlled trial as
a nonteratogenic alternative to valproate for
women with bipolar disorder.[136] valproate amide
derivatives, valnoctamide, di-isopropylacetamide,
propylisopropyl  xxxd63xxx  and n-methyl-2,2,3,3tetramethylcyclopropylamide (mtmcd) showed
more potent anti-allodynic effects than valproate,
and also exert minimal motor and sedative adverse
effects at analgesic doses in a rat model of neuropathic pain. consequently, they may become new
© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

41

drugs of choice for the treatment of neuropathic
pain.[92-94] investigations into the clinically relevant
mechanisms of these second-generation substances
are still ongoing. it is important that these new
substances are evaluated in non-epilepsy disorders
in order to map their therapeutic efficacy.
one interesting aspect of a potentially new therapeutic arena for aeds is the antiproliferative effect
of valproate that was unexpectedly noted during
mechanistic studies two decades ago. valproate may
potentially have a role as a maintenance, adjunctive,
or chemoprotective drug in oncology.[137] valproate
is a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylase and could
be used in conjunction with other inhibitors of intracellular pathways as a cytotoxic agent in a wide
range of malignancies.[138] it was superior to six
other analogues when considering inhibition of histone deacetylase and tumour cytotoxicity.[139] valproate also affects p-glycoprotein expression and
function in human tumour cell lines and in rat liver,
and may be responsible for the development of
multidrug resistance in mammalian tumour cells.[140]
the clinical implications of these findings will need
further investigation.
in the treatment of tardive dyskinesia there is the
potential to use valproate as a pharmacological tool,
as it has gaba-potentiating properties, and
gabaergic hypofunction in the basal ganglia is
cited as an important mechanism underlying the
pathophysiology of tardive dyskinesia.[80,141] a finding that supports this hypothesis is that valproate
inhibits reserpine-induced orofacial movements in
rats, an animal model for tardive dyskinesia.[141]
recent reports suggest the potential use of aeds
in the treatment of drug and alcohol abuse and
withdrawal – valproate and carbamazepine for benzodiazepine withdrawal, valproate in the treatment
of cocaine abuse and craving, topiramate for opiate
and alcohol withdrawal, vigabatrin for methamphetamine and cocaine addiction, and lamotrigine
for patients with bipolar disorder with co-morbid
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

42

cocaine dependence.[2,142-146] confirmatory clinical
trials will, however, be needed to confirm initial
findings. topiramate may also be useful in bulimia
nervosa and binge eating disorder.[147,148] the mechanisms of action of the aeds in these disorders are
unclear, but effects on serotonergic or dopaminergic
neurotransmission may be involved, as they are
major mediators in craving and appetite, respectively. another area that has been explored is that carbamazepine demonstrated efficacy in a randomized
trial in bronchial asthma.[149]
neuroprotection is an important potential field
for aeds, and in vitro studies have demonstrated
that there are multiple mechanisms underlying the
neuroprotective effects of several aeds, including
valproate, carbamazepine, topiramate and  xxxd2466xxx , in cerebral ischaemia.[150] also, fluorofelbamate protects against chemically-induced ischaemia in cultured hippocampal neurons and hypoxic
injury in the ca1 region in hippocampal slices, and
provides in vivo protection against hypoxia and ischaemic damage in animal models.[151] all these
drugs may decrease hyperexcitability by affecting
glutamatergic neurotransmission. there may be a
gap between preclinical findings and clinical effects,
but more thorough investigations in new models will
hopefully give promising results that deserve further
clinical investigations.
the neuroprotective activities of valproate have
been investigated in a murine model of hiv-1 encephalitits.[152] valproate is known to affect several
intracellular pathways in a diverse disease process
called hiv-1-associated dementia. this disease develops because of hiv-1 infection in the nervous
system, leading to neuroinflammatory events that
cause neuronal dysfunction and cognitive and behavioural impairments.[152] in an immunodeficient
mouse model, valproate was shown to protect neurons against hiv-1-infected monocyte-derived macrophage neurotoxicity and has, therefore, been pro© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

johannessen landmark

posed as adjunctive therapy to antiretroviral
drugs.[152]
neurodegenerative disorders are another group
where neuroprotection is of importance. another
derivative of  xxxd3485xxx , arundic acid (ono
2506), is undergoing clinical phase i and ii trials for
the treatment of acute-phase cerebral infarction and
neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer’s disease, parkinson’s disease and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.[153] this field will probably expand in
coming years.
the development of clinical trials of aeds for
non-epilepsy disorders in children and adolescents
is another challenging field that should be focused
upon. despite the frequent use of aeds in the
treatment of juvenile bipolar disorder, migraine and
neuropathic pain, there are insufficient data to make
recommendations regarding the efficacy of these
drugs.[5] to date, aeds have not been established as
effective therapy for treating non-epilepsy disorders
in paediatric patients.[5]
future aeds that may be considered for potential use in both epilepsy and non-epilepsy disorders
may include drugs acting on new targets in the
synapse, such as metabotropic gabaergic and
glutamatergic receptors. furthermore, the development of selective drugs acting on specific subtypes
of receptors and ion channels that may be altered in
pathophysiological processes seems a promising research field. known examples of such drugs are
gabapentin and pregabalin, which act on specific
calcium channels in neuropathic pain, as previously
described in section 3.2.
7. conclusions
several pathophysiological processes disturb
neuronal excitability and seem to involve an imbalance in gabaergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission. the main targets for the action of the aeds
include enhancement of gabaergic inhibition, decreased glutamatergic excitation, modulation of
cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels, and
effects on intracellular signalling pathways. all of
these mechanisms are of importance in controlling
neuronal excitability in different ways, such as in
anxiety and essential tremor where gabaergic
mechanisms have been investigated most thoroughly, in neuropathic pain where voltage-gated ion
channels are important, and in bipolar disorder
where intracellular signalling pathways are important. many aeds show a wide spectrum of activity
and seem to affect these processes selectively. none
of the targets for aeds seems to be preferable to the
others, as all of them decrease hyperexcitability.
aeds may be effective in a variety of nonepilepsy disorders. in psychiatric conditions such as
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, aeds such as
valproate, carbamazepine and lamotrigine appear to
have clear roles based on their effect on intracellular
pathways. on the other hand, some aeds, such as
topiramate, have efficacy for nonpsychiatric disorders, including migraine, possibly by decreasing
excitability by enhancing gabaergic and decreasing glutamatergic neurotransmission. aeds that
seem to enhance gabaergic neurotransmission,
such as tiagabine, valproate, gabapentin and possibly  xxxd2466xxx , seem to have a role in neurological disorders, including essential tremor, and in
anxiety disorders. aeds with effects on voltagegated sodium or calcium channels may be advantageous in neuropathic pain, e.g. gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine,  xxxd2809xxx , lamotrigine
and valproate.
a better understanding of the mechanisms of
action of aeds in different disorders will be provided by increased knowledge of the underlying
molecular deficits in each disorder, and clinical investigations that prove efficacy of the aeds in
various disorders. co-morbid conditions include
psychiatric disorders and migraine, and they may
share common pathophysiological pathways. keeping this in mind could be of importance when choos© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

43

ing the right drug for the individual patient. potential
clinical indications for aeds and their derivatives
include cancer therapy, tardive dyskinesia, drug and
alcohol abuse, and the general neuroprotection area.
future challenges include evaluating the secondgeneration aeds in non-epilepsy disorders, and designing trials for paediatric patients with non-epilepsy disorders. the focus of future research should be
on differentiating between the main mechanisms of
action of the different drugs, and in considering the
drugs of choice for optimal treatment of the various
disorders.
acknowledgements
i am grateful to dr svein i. johannessen for his helpful
advice and discussions during the preparation of this manuscript. no sources of funding were used to assist in the
preparation of this review. the author has no conflicts of
interest that are directly relevant to the content of this review.

references
1. spina e, perugi g. antiepileptic drugs: indications other than
epilepsy. epileptic disord 2004; 6: 57-75
2. rogawski ma, löscher w. the neurobiology of antiepileptic
drugs for the treatment of nonepileptic conditions. nat med
2004; 10: 685-92
3. rogawski ma, löscher w. the neurobiology of antiepileptic
drugs. nat rev neurosci 2004; 5: 553-64
4. zaremba pd, bialek m, blasczcyk b, et al. non-epilepsy uses
of antiepilepsy drugs. pharmacol rep 2006; 58: 1-12
5. golden as, haut s, moshé sl. nonepileptic uses of antiepileptic drugs in children and adolescents. ped  xxxd122xxx  2006; 34:
421-32
6. ettinger ab, argoff ce. use of antiepileptic drugs for
nonepileptic conditions: psychiatric disorders and chronic
pain. neurotherapeutics 2007; 4: 75-83
7. goodnick pj. anticonvulsants in the treatment of bipolar mania.
expert opin pharmacother 2006; 7: 401-10
8. rogawski ma. molecular targets versus models for new
antiepileptic drug discovery. epilepsy res 2006; 68: 22-8
9. perucca e. an introduction to antiepileptic drugs. epilepsia
2005; 46 suppl. 4: 31-7
10. stefan h, lopes da silva fh, löscher w, et al. epileptogenesis
and rational therapeutic strategies. acta  xxxd122xxx  scand 2006;
113: 139-55
11. ahmad s, fowler lj, whitton ps. lamotrigine, carbamazepine
and phenytoin differentially alter extracellular levels of 5hydroxytryptamine, dopamine and amino acids. epilepsy res
2005; 63: 141-9

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

44

12. löscher w. basic pharmacology of valproate: a review after 35
years of clinical use for the treatment of epilepsy. cns drugs
2002; 16: 669-94
13. bialer m, johannessen si, kupferberg hj, et al. progress report
on new antiepileptic drugs: a summary of the seventh eilat
conference (eilat vii). epilepsy res 2004; 61: 1-48
14. bialer m, johannessen si, kupferberg hj, et al. progress report
on new antiepileptic drugs: a summary of the eighth eilat
conference (eilat viii). epilepsy res 2007; 73: 1-52
15. lydiard rb. the role of gaba in anxiety disorders. j clin
psychiatry 2003; 64: 21-7
16. nemeroff cb. the role of gaba in the pathophysiology and
treatment of anxiety disorders. psychopharmacol bull 2003;
37: 133-46
17. johannessen cu, petersen d, fonnum f, et al. the acute effect
of valproate on cerebral energy metabolism in mice. epilepsy
res 2001; 47: 247-56
18. rogawski ma. diverse mechanisms of antiepileptic drugs in
the development pipeline. epilepsy res 2006; 69: 273-94
19. kralic je, criswell he, osterman jl, et al. genetic essential
tremor in  xxxd2177xxx  a receptor alpha 1 subunit
knockout mice. j clin invest 2005; 115: 584-6
20. jankovic j, noebels jl. genetic mouse models of essential
tremor: are they essential? j clin invest 2005; 115: 774-9
21. pathwa r, lyons ke. essential tremor: differential diagnosis
and current therapy. am j med 2003; 115: 134-42
22. cutrer fm, moskowitz ma. the actions of valproate and
neurosteroids in a model of trigeminal pain. headache 1996;
36: 579-85
23. yee bk, keist r, von boehmer l, et al. schizophrenia-related
sensorimotor deficit links alpha-3-containing gabaa receptors to a dopamine hyperfunction. proc natl acad sci 2005;
22: 102: 17154-9
24. volk dw, austin mc, perri jn, et al. decreased  xxxg849xxx 
mrna expression in a subset of prefrontal cortical gaba
neurons in subjects with schizophrenia. arch gen psychiatry
2000; 57: 237-45
25. coyle jt. glutamate and schizophrenia: beyond the dopamine
hypothesis. cell mol neurobiol 2006; 26: 363-82
26. akbarian s, kim jj, potkin sg, et al. gene expression for
 xxxd2431xxx  decarboxylase is reduced without loss of neurons
in prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. arch gen psychiatry
1995; 52: 258-66
27. kaminski rm, banerjee m, rogawski ma. topiramate selectively protects against seizures induced by atpa, a  xxxg958xxx 
kainate receptor agonist. neuropharmacology 2004; 46: 1097104
28. sills gj. the mechanisms of action of gabapentin and pregabalin. curr opin pharmacol 2006; 6: 108-13
29. ueda y, doi t, tokumaru j, et al. effect of  xxxd3564xxx  on
molecular regulation of glutamate and gaba transporter proteins during epileptogenesis in rats with hippocampal seizures.
mol brain res 2003; 116: 1-6
30. mcquay h, caroll d, jadad ar, et al. anticonvulsant drugs for
management of pain: a systematic review. bmj 1995; 311:
1047-52

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

johannessen landmark

31. coderre tj, kumar n, lefebyre cd, et al. evidence that
gabapentin reduces neuropathic pain by inhibiting the spinal
release of glutamate. j neurochem 2005; 94: 1131-9
32. yang rh, xing jl, duan jh, et al. effects of gabapentin on
spontaneous discharges and subthreshold membrane potential
oscillation of type a neurons in injured drg. pain 2005; 116:
187-93
33. cheng jk, chiou lc. mechanisms of the antinociceptive action
of gabapentin. j pharmacol sci 2006; 100: 471-86
34. tanabe m, sakaue a, takasu k, et al. centrally mediated
antihyperalgesic and antiallodynic effects of  xxxd3564xxx  following partial nerve injury in the mouse. nauyn schmiedebergs arch pharmacol 2005; 372: 107-14
35. imamura y, bennett gj.  xxxd2090xxx  relieves several abnormal
pain sensations in rats with an experimental peripheral
neuropathy. j pharmacol exp ther 1995; 275: 177-82
36. phiel cj, zhang f, huang ey, et al. histone deacetylases is a
direct target of  xxxd3485xxx , a potent anticonvulsant, mood
stabilizer, and teratogen. j biol chem 2001; 276: 36734-41
37. coyle jt, duman rs. finding the intracellular signaling pathways affected by mood disorder treatments. neuron 2003; 38:
157-60
38. bachmann rf, schloesser rj, gould td, et al. mood stabilizers
target cellular plasticity and resilience cascades: implications
for the development of novel therapeutics. mol neurobiol
2005; 32: 173-202
39. shaltiel g, shamir a, shapiro j, et al. valproate decreases
inositol synthesis. biol psychiatry 2004; 56: 868-74
40. evins ae, demopulos c, yovel i, et al. inositol augmentation of
lithium or valproate for bipolar depression. bipolar disord
2006; 8: 168-74
41. ju s, greenberg ml. valproate disrupts regulation of inositol
responsive genes and alters regulation of phospholipid biosynthesis. mol microbiol 2003; 49: 1595-603
42. williams rsb, cheng l, mudge aw, et al. a common mechanism of action for three mood-stabilizing drugs. nature 2002;
417: 292-6
43. brunello n, tascedda f. cellular mechanisms and second messengers: relevance to the psychopharmacology of bipolar disorders. int j neuropsychopharmacol 2003; 6: 181-9
44. lieb k, treffurth y, hamke m, et al.  xxxd3485xxx  inhibits
 xxxg2240xxx -induced activation of protein kinase c epsilon and
expression of the  xxxg2193xxx . j neurochem 2003; 86:
69-76
45. chetcuti a, adams lj, mitchell pb, et al. altered gene expression in mice treated with the mood stabilizer sodium valproate.
int j neuropsychopharmacol 2005; 28: 1-10
46. xie x, hagan rm. cellular and molecular actions of lamotrigine: possible mechanisms of efficacy in bipolar disorder.
neuropsychobiology 1998; 38: 119-30
47. sechi gp, traccis s, durelli l, et al. carbamazepine versus
 xxxd2924xxx  in the treatment of myotonia. eur  xxxd122xxx 
1983; 22: 113-8
48. rodrigues jp, edwards dj, walters se, et al. gabapentin can
improve postural stability and quality of life in primary orthostatic tremor. mov disord 2005; 20: 865-70

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

49. keck pe, strawn jr, mcelroy lr. pharmacologic treatment
considerations in co-occurring bipolar and anxiety disorders.
j clin psychiatry 2005; 67: 8-15
50. zesiewicz ta, elbe r, louis ed, et al. practice parameter:
therapies for essential tremor. report of the quality standards
subcommittee of the american academy of neurology.
neurology 2005; 64: 2008-20
51. eisenberg e, shifrin a, krivoy n. lamotrigine for neuropathic
pain. expert rev neurother 2005; 5: 729-35
52. lampl c, katsarava z, diener hc, et al. lamotrigine reduces
migraine aura and migraine attacks in patients with migraine
with aura. j  xxxd122xxx  neurosurg psychiatry 2005; 76: 1730-2
53. premkumar ts, pick j. lamotrigine for schizophrenia. cochrane database syst rev 2006; (4): cd005962
54. nierneberg ia, ostacher mj, calabrese jr, et al. treatmentresistant bipolar depression: a step-bd equipoise randomized effectiveness trial of antidepressant augmentation with
lamotrigine, inositol, or risperidone. am j psychiatr 2006;
163: 210-6
55. ondo wg, jimenez je, vuong kd, et al. an open-label pilot
study of  xxxd2466xxx  for essential tremor. clin neuropharmacol 2004; 27: 274-7
56. handforth a, martin fc. pilot efficacy and tolerability: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of  xxxd2466xxx  for essential
tremor. mov disord 2004; 19: 1215-21
57. bushara ko, malik t, exconde re. the effect of  xxxd2466xxx 
on essential tremor. neurology 2005; 64: 1078-80
58. striano p, coppola a, vacca g, et al.  xxxd2466xxx  for cerebellar tremor in multiple sclerosis: an open-label pilot tolerability
and efficacy study. neurology 2006; 253: 762-6
59. drake me, greathouse ni, armentbright ad, et al.  xxxd2466xxx  for preventive treatment of migraine [abstract].
cephalalgia 2001; 21: 373
60. krusz jc.  xxxd2466xxx  as prophylaxis for resistant headaches
[abstract]. cephalalgia 2001; 21: 373
61. magenta p, arghetti s, di palma f, et al.  xxxd2809xxx  is
effective and safe in the treatment of neuropathic pain: pooled
analysis of seven clinical studies.  xxxd122xxx  sci 2005; 26: 218-26
62. raja m, azzoni a.  xxxd2809xxx  vs. valproate in the treatment
of mood and schizoaffective disorders. int j neuropsychopharmacol 2003; 6: 409-14
63. maccleane gj. intravenous infusion of phenytoin relieves
neuropathic pain: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. anesth analg 1999; 89: 985-8
64. mishory a, yaroslavsky y, bersudsky y, et al. phenytoin as an
antimanic anticonvulsant: a controlled study. am j psychiatry
2000; 157: 463-5
65. applebaum j, levine j, belmaker rh. intravenous fosphenytoin in acute mania. j clin psychiatry 2003; 64: 408-9
66. pollack mh, roy-byrne pp, van ameringen m, et al. the
selective gaba reuptake inhibitor tiagabine for the treatment
of generalized anxiety disorder: results of a placebo-controlled
study. j clin psychiatry 2005; 66: 1401-8
67. van ameringen m, mancini c, pipe b, et al. an open trial of
topiramate in the treatment of generalized social phobia. j clin
psychiatry 2004; 65: 1674-8
68. white hs. molecular pharmacology of topiramate: managing
seizures and preventing migraine. headache 2005; 45: s48-56

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

45

69. connor gs. a double-blind placebo-controlled trial of
topiramate treatment for essential tremor. neurology 2002; 59:
132-4
70. sechi g, agnetti v, sulas fm, et al. effects of topiramate in
patients with cerebellar tremor. prog neuropsychopharmacol
biol psychiatry 2003; 27: 1023-7
71. mcintyre rs, riccardelli r, binder c, et al. open-label adjunctive topiramate in the treatment of unstable bipolar disorder.
can j psychiatry 2005; 50: 415-22
72. bartolini m, silvestrini m, taffi r, et al. efficacy of topiramate
and valproate in chronic migraine. clin neuropharmacol 2005;
28: 277-9
73. silberstein sd, walter n, schmitt j, et al. topiramate in migraine prevention. arch  xxxd122xxx  2004; 61: 490-5
74. tiihonen j, halonen p, wahlbeck k, et al. topiramate add-on in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover trial. j clin psychiatry 2005; 66:
1012-5
75. johannessen cu, johannessen si. valproate: past, present, and
future. cns drug rev 2003; 9: 199-216
76. kochar dk, rawat n, agrawal rp, et al. sodium valproate for
painful diabetic neuropathy: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study. qjm 2004; 97: 33-8
77. winterer g, hermann wm. valproate and the symptomatic
treatment of schizophrenia spectrum patients. pharmacopsychiatry 2000; 33: 182-8
78. keck pe, mcelroy sl, tugrul kc, et al. valproate oral loading
in the treatment of acute mania. j clin psychiatry 1993; 54:
305-30
79. hirschfeld rma, baker jd, wozniak p, et al. the safety and
early efficacy of oral-loaded  xxxd3485xxx  versus standard-titration  xxxd3485xxx , lithium, olanzapine, and placebo in the treatment of acute mania associated with bipolar disorder. j clin
psychiatry 2003; 64: 841-6
80. swann ac.  xxxd3485xxx : clinical efficacy and use in psychiatric disorders. in: levy rh, mattson rh, meldrum bs, et al.,
editors. antiepileptic drugs. 5th ed. philadelphia (pa): lippincott williams & wilkins, 2002: 828-36
81. morita s, miwa h, kondo t. effect of  xxxd3564xxx  on essential
tremor: a pilot crossover study in comparison with arotinolol.
parkinsonism relat disord 2005; 11: 101-3
82. sabra af, hallett m. action tremor with altering activity in
antagonist muscles. neurology 1984; 34: 151-6
83. yoshida s, okada m, zhu g, et al. effects of  xxxd3564xxx  on
neurotransmitter exocytosis asociated with ryanodine receptors. epilepsy res 2005; 67: 153-62
84. lynch b, lamberg n, nocka k, et al. the synaptic vesicle
protein  xxxg2233xxx  is the binding site for the antiepileptic drug
 xxxd2466xxx . proc natl acad sci 2004; 101: 9861-6
85. bialer m, johannessen si, kupferberg hj, et al. progress report
on new antiepileptic drugs: a summary of the seventh eilat
conference (eilat vii). epilepsy res 2002; 51: 31-71
86. taylor cp, angelotti t, fauman e. pharmacology and mechanisms of action of pregabalin: the calcium channel  xxxg831xxx -delta (alphadelta) subunit as a target for antiepileptic drug discovery.
epilepsy res 2007; 73: 137-50

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

46

87. finnerup nb, otto m, mcquay hj, et al. algorithm for neuropathic pain treatment: an evidence based proposal. pain 2005;
118: 289-305
88. schmidt d, elger ce. what is the evidence that  xxxd2809xxx 
and carbamazepine are distinctly different antiepileptic drugs?
epilepsy behav 2004; 5: 627-35
89. poolos np, migliore m, johnston d. pharmacological upregulation of h-channels reduces the excitability of pyramidal neuron
dendrites. nat neurosci 2002; 5: 767-74
90. shannon he, eberle el, peters sc. comparison of the effects
of anticonvulsant drugs with diverse mechanisms of action in
the formalin test in rats. neuropharmacol 2005; 48: 1012-20
91. brill j, lee m, zhao s, et al. chronic  xxxd3485xxx  treatment
triggers increased  xxxg1590xxx  expression and signalling in
rat nucleus reticularis thalami. j neurosci 2006; 26: 6813-22
92. winkler i, blotnik s, shimshoni j, et al. efficacy of antiepileptic
isomers of  xxxd3485xxx  and valpromide in a rat model of
neuropathic pain. br j pharmacol 2005; 146: 198-208
93. winkler i, sobol e, yagen b, et al. efficacy of antiepileptic
tetramethylcyclopropyl analogues of  xxxd3485xxx  amides in a
rat model of neuropathic pain. neuropharmacol 2005; 49:
1110-20
94. bialer m. new antiepileptic drugs that are second generation to
existing antiepileptic drugs. expert opin investig drugs 2006;
15: 637-47
95. corbo j. the role of anticonvulsants in preventive migraine
therapy. curr pain headache 2003; 7: 63-6
96. erdemolu ak, ozbakir s.  xxxd3485xxx  in prophylaxis of
refractory migraine. acta  xxxd122xxx  scand 2000; 102: 354-8
97. landy s. migraine throughout the life cycle: treatment through
the ages. neurology 2004; 62: s2-8
98. czapinski p, blaszczyk b, czuczwar sj. mechanisms of action
of antiepileptic drugs. curr top med chem 2005; 5: 3-14
99. schechter pj. clinical pharmacology of vigabatrin. br j clin
pharmacol 1989; 27: 19-22s
100. preece ne, jackson gd, houseman ja, et al. nuclear magnetic
resonance detection of increased gaba in vigabatrin-treated
rats in vivo. epilepsia 1994; 35: 431-6
101. czuczwar sj, patsalos pn. the new generation of gaba
enhancers: potential in the treatment of epilepsy. cns drugs
2001; 15: 339-50
102. kälviäinen r, nousiainen i. visual field defects with vigabatrin:
epidemiology and therapeutic implications. cns drugs 2001;
15: 217-30
103. sills gj, patsalos pn, butler e, et al. visual field constriction:
accumulation of vigabatrin but not tiagabine in the retina.
neurology 2001; 57: 196-200
104. krauss gl, johnson ma, sheth s, et al. a controlled study
comparing visual function in patients treated with vigabatrin
and tiagabine. j neurosurg psychiatry 2003; 74: 339-43
105. johannessen cu. mechanisms of action of valproate: a commentatory. neurochem int 2000; 37: 103-10
106. johannessen cu, johannessen si. an update on valproate:
clinical implications of recent studies for its mechanisms of
action (siic 2004) [online]. available from url: http://www.
siicsalud.com/dato/dat038/04707003.htm [accessed 2007 sep
17]

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

johannessen landmark

107. rudolph u, möhler h. gaba-based therapeutic approaches:
gabaa receptor subtype functions. current opin pharmacol
2006; 6: 18-23
108. bennett s, gronier b. modulation of striatal dopamine release in
vitro by agonists of the glycine b site of nmda receptors:
interaction with antipsychotics. eur j pharmacol 2005; 527:
52-9
109. hosak l, libiger j. antiepileptic drugs in schizophrenia: a
review. eur psychiatry 2002; 17: 371-8
110. göttlicher m, minucci s, zhu p, et al.  xxxd3485xxx  defines a
novel class of hdac inhibitors inducing differentiation of
transformed cells. embo j 2001; 20: 6969-78
111. anmann b, grunze h. neurochemical underpinnings in bipolar
disorder and epilepsy. epilepsia 2005; 46 suppl. 4: 26-30
112. greene jg. gene expression profiles of brain dopamine neurons
and relevance to neuropsychiatric disease. j physiol 2006; 575:
411-6
113. manji hk, duman rs. impairments of neuroplasticity and
cellular resilience in severe mood disorders: implications for
the development of novel therapeutics. psychopharmacol bull
2001; 35: 5-49
114. rogawski m. astrocytes get in the act in epilepsy. nat med
2005; 11: 919-20
115. guo-feng t, hooman a, takano t, et al. an astrocytic basis of
epilepsy. nat med 2005; 11: 973-81
116. harwood aj, agam g. search for a common mechanism of
mood stabilizers. biochem pharmacol 2003; 66: 179-89
117. cordeiro ml, gundersen cb, umbach ja. convergent effects
of lithium and valproate on the expression of proteins associated with large dense core vesicles in ngf-differentiated
pc12 cells. neuropsychopharmacol 2004; 29: 39-44
118. owens mj, nemeroff cb. pharmacology of valproate. psychopharmacol bull 2003; 37: 17-24
119. arban r, maraia g, brackenborough k, et al. evaluation of the
effects of lamotrigine, valproate and carbamazepine in a rodent
model of mania. behav brain res 2005; 158: 123-32
120. ketter ta, manji hk, post rm. potential mechanisms of action
of lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar disorders. j clin
psychopharmacol 2003; 23: 484-95
121. muzina dj, elhaj o, gajwani p, et al. lamotrigine and antiepileptic drugs as mood stabilizers in bipolar disorder. acta
psychiatr scand 2005; 111: 21-8
122. selai c, bannister d, trimble m. antiepileptic drugs and the
regulation of mood and quality of life (qol): the evidence
from epilepsy. epilepsia 2005; 46 suppl. 4: 50-7
123. berudsky y. phenytoin: an anti-bipolar anticonvulsant? int j
neuropsychopharmacol 2006; 9: 627-8
124. gajwani p, forsthoff a, muzina d, et al. antiepileptic drugs in
mood-disordered patients. epilepsia 2005; 46 suppl. 4: 38-44
125. silberstein sd. shared mechanisms and comorbidities in neurologic and psychiatric disorders. headache 2001; 41: s11-7
126. prueter c, norra c. mood disorders and their treatment in
patients with epilepsy. j neuropsychiatry clin neurosci 2005;
17: 20-8
127. ettinger ab, reed ml, goldberg jl, et al. prevalence of bipolar
symptoms in epilepsy vs other chronic health disorders.
neurology 2005; 65: 535-40

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

antiepileptic drugs in non-epilepsy disorders

128. schmitz b. depression and mania in patients with epilepsy.
epilepsia 2005; 46 suppl. 4: 45-9
129. kanner am. depression in epilepsy: a neurobiological perspective. epilepsy curr 2005; 5: 21-7
130. ettinger ab, kustra rp, hammer ae. effect of lamotrigine on
depressive symptoms in adult patients with epilepsy. epilepsy
behav 2007; 10: 148-54
131. jobe pc. shared mechanisms of antidepressant and antiepileptic
treatments: drugs and devices. clin eeg neurosci 2004; 35:
25-37
132. jobe pc. affective disorder and epilepsy comorbidity: implications for development of treatments, preventions and diagnostic approaches. clin eeg neurosci 2004; 35: 53-68
133. ottman r, lipton rb. comorbidity of migraine and epilepsy.
neurology 1994; 44: 2105-10
134. bigal me, lipton rb, cohen j, et al. epilepsy and migraine.
epilepsy behav 2003; 4: s13-24
135. sechi g, cocco ga, d’onofrio m, et al. disfluent speech in
patients with partial epilepsy: beneficial effect of  xxxd2466xxx . epilepsy behav 2006; 9: 521-3
136. applebaum j, gayduk j, agam g, et al. valnoctamide as a
valproate substitute with low teragenic potential: double-blind
controlled clinical trial. bipolar disord 2005; 7: 27-117
137. henry tr. the history of valproate in clinical neuroscience.
psychopharmacol bull 2003; 37: 5-16
138. yeow ws, ziauddin mf, maxhimer jb, et al. potentiation of
the anticancer effect of  xxxd3485xxx , an antiepileptic agent
with histone deacetylase inhibitory activity, by the kinase
inhibitor  xxxd3241xxx  or its clinically relevant analogue
ucn-01. br j cancer 2006; 22: 1436-45
139. eyal s, yagen b, shimshoni j, et al. histone deacetylases
inhibition and tumor cells cytotoxicity by cns-active constitutional isomers and derivatives. biochem pharmacol 2005; 69:
1501-8

47

143. johnson ba, ait-daoud n, bowden cl, et al. oral topiramate
for treatment of alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled
trial. lancet 2003; 361: 1677-85
144. vocci fj, elkashef a. pharmacotherapy and other treatments for
cocaine abuse and dependence. curr opin psychiatry 2005;
18: 265-70
145. brodie jd, figuerosa e, laska em, et al. safety and efficacy of
 xxxd3508xxx  (gvg) for the treatment of methamphetamine and/or cocaine addiction. synapse 2005; 55: 122-5
146. brown es, perantie dc, dhanani n, et al. lamotrigine for
bipolar disorder and comorbid cocaine dependence: a replication and extension study. j affect disord 2006; 93: 219-22
147. hoopes sp, reimherr fw, hedges dw, et al. treatment of
bulimia nervosa with topiramate in a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial (pt 1): improvement in binge
and purge measures. j clin psych 2003; 64: 1335-41
148. nickel c, tritt k, muehlbacher m, et al. topiramate treatment
in bulimia nervosa patients: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. int eat disord 2005; 38: 295-300
149. lomia m, tchelidze t, pruidze m. bronchial asthma as
neurogenic paroxysmal inflammatory disease: a randomized
trial with carbamazepine. respir med 2006; 100: 1988-96
150. costa c, martella g, picconi b, et al. multiple mechanisms
underlying the neuroprotective effects of antiepileptic drugs
against in vitro ischemia. stroke 2006; 37: 1319-26
151. wallis ra, panizzon kl, niquet j, et al. neuroprotective effects of the anticonvulsant, fluorofelbamate [abstract]. epilepsia 2000; 41: 162-3
152. dou h, birusingh k, faraci j, et al. neuroprotective activities of
sodium valproate in a murine model of human immunodefi-

140. eyal s, lamb j, smith-yockman m, et al. the antiepileptic and
chemotherapeutic agent  xxxd3485xxx  induces p-glycoprotein
in human tumor cell lines and in rat liver. br j pharmacol 2006;
149: 250-60

153. de paulis t. ono-2506. curr opin invest drug 2003; 4: 863-7

141. peixoto mf, abilio vc, silva rh, et al. effects of  xxxd3485xxx 
on an animal model of tardive dyskinesia. behav brain res
2003; 142: 229-33

correspondence: dr cecilie johannessen landmark, depart-

142. myrick h, malcolm r, anton r. the use of antiepileptics in
the treatment of addictive disorders. prim psychiatry 2003; 10:
59-63

© 2008 adis data information bv. all rights reserved.

ciency virus-1 encephalitis. j neurosci 2003; 23: 9162-70

ment of pharmacy, faculty of health sciences, oslo
university college, pilestredet 50, n-0167 oslo, norway.
e-mail: cecilie.landmark@hf.hio.no

cns drugs 2008; 22 (1)

