pharmac. ther. vol. 52, pp. 127-147, 1991
printed in great britain. all rights reserved

0163-7258/91 $0.00 + 0.50
© 1992 pergamon press plc

specialist subject editor: e. hamel

effects of antimitotic agents on
tubulin-nucleotide interactions
john j. correia
department of biochemistry, university of mississippi medical center, 2500 north st., jackson,
ms 39216, u.s.a.
abstract--the interaction of antimitotic drugs with guanine nucleotides in the tubulin-microtubule system
is reviewed. antimitotic agent-tubulin interactions can be covalent, entropic, allosteric or coupled to other
equilibria (such as divalent cation binding, alternate polymer formation, or the stabilization of native
tubulin structure). antimitotics bind to tubulin at a few common sites and alter the ability of tubulin to
form microtubules. colchicine and podophyuotoxin compete for a common overlapping binding site but
only colchicine induces gtpase activity and large conformational changes in the tubulin heterodimer. the
vinca alkaloids, vinblastine and vincristine, the macrocyclic ansa macrolides, maytansine and ansamitocin
p-3, and the fungal antimitotic, rhizoxin, share and compete for a different binding site near the
exchangeable nucleotide binding site. the macrocyclic heptapeptide, phomopsin a, and the  xxxd1841xxx ,
 xxxd1925xxx , bind to a site adjacent to the vinca alkaloid and nucleotide sites. colchicine, vinca alkaloids,
 xxxd1925xxx  and phomopsin a induce alternate polymer formation (sheets for colchicine, spirals for
vinblastine and vincristine and rings for  xxxd1925xxx  and phomopsin a). maytansine, ansamitocin p-3
and rhizoxin inhibit vinblastine-induced spiral formation. taxol stoichiometrically induces microtubule
formation and, in the presence of gtp, assembly-associated gtp hydrolysis. analogs of guanine
nucleotides also alter polymer morphology. thus, sites on tubulin for drugs and nucleotides communicate
allosterically with the interfaces that form longitudinal and lateral contacts within a microtubule.
microtubule associated proteins (maps), divalent cations, and buffer components can alter the surface
interactions of tubulin and thus modulate the interactions between antimitotic drugs and guanine
nucleotides.

contents
1. modes of interaction
1.1. mechanism of microtubule assembly
1.2. general features of antimitotic drugs-tubulin interactions
1.3. thermodynamic linkage
2. the colchicine site
2.1. colchicine
2.2.  xxxd2980xxx 
2.3. estrogenic drugs
3. the vinblastine/maytansine site
3.1. vinca alkaloids
3.2. maytansinoids
3.3. phomopsin a and  xxxd1925xxx 
4. taxol
5. the third nucleotide (atp) binding site
6. n-site gtp
7. microtubule associated proteins (maps)
acknowledgements
references

1. m o d e s o f i n t e r a c t i o n
the interaction of antimitotic drugs with tubulin
and microtubules has been extensively reviewed
(lacey, 1988; hamel, 1990) and is a very active area
of research. these drugs are useful as biochemical
and cytological probes, and have proven or potential
utility as antineoplastic agents. this review will highlight a particular aspect of their interaction with
tubulin: the interplay between antimitotics and
nucleotides. this interaction will be discussed first in

127
127
129
130
132
132
133
134
135
135
136
137
138
140
140
141
142
142

terms of a number of general molecular aspects.
specific drugs and topics will be discussed later in this
chapter.

1.1. mechanismof microtubuleassembly
the mechanism of microtubule assembly/disassembly has been reviewed elsewhere (correia and
williams, 1983; purich and kristofferson, 1984;
dustin, 1984; kirschner and mitchison, 1986;
127

128

j.j. correia

mandelkow and mandelkow, 1989; engelborghs,
1981; detrich et al., 1985). sheets are often observed
1990), but, to facilitate the discussion of drug and
by electron microscopy and the occurrence of a short
nucleotide effects, a brief overview is presented sheet region with a microtubule is consistent with a
here. microtubules are composed of tubulin (an 7/~ helical lattice with a seam, referred to as the b-type
heterodimer of 40% sequence-similar polypeptides, lattice (mandelkow et al., 1986; linck, 1989;
each of about 50kda) and numerous microtubule mandelkow and mandelkow, 1989). there is eviassociated proteins, maps (wiche et al., 1991), that dence that microtubules are cylindrical sheets, a two
decorate the exterior walls of the hollow microtubule dimensional polymer constrained to a cylindrical
structure. typical purification schemes generate surface, and that sheets and ribbons are overshoot
microtubule protein (mtp), tubulin plus maps, or products (mandelkow and mandelkow, 1989). upon
purified tubulin (williams and lee, 1982). multiple closure of the sheet, microtubule growth, called
tubulin genes, gene products, and post-translational elongation, occurs in an endwise manner with hetmodifications occur in a species specific manner erodimers adding to both ends in vitro, although at
(cleveland and sullivan, 1985; sullivan, 1988). there different rates (fig. 1). the fast growing end is the
are two guanine nucleotide binding sites in a tubulin plus end (fig. 1). the minus end is typically anchored
heterodimer. one, the exchangeable (or e-site) on the to microtubule organizing centers (mtoc) like basal
/? chain, will rapidly exchange gtp for gdp in a bodies or centrosomes (euteneuer and mclntosh,
mg 2÷ dependent manner (correia et al., 1987), and
1981a,b), and thus growth in vivo typically occurs in
will hydrolyze gtp during microtubule formation. the plus direction. a different critical concentration
the other site (n-site) on the ~ chain is noncatalytic, and rate of growth at the two ends is allowed
is always occupied by gtp, and is nonexchangeable thermodynamically because of the irreversible step of
for nucleotides, although it will slowly exchange free gtp hydrolysis that is coupled to subunit addition to
mn 2+ for bound mg 2+ (correia et al., 1988). in vivo,
the polymer (kirschner and mitchison, 1986). this
tubulin forms a helical rod composed of 13 protohydrolysis step occurs concurrent with or soon after
filaments that run the length of the polymer (scheele
subunit addition and limits the size of the gtp cap,
et al., 1982). in vitro conditions often support struca region of tubulin heterodimers at both ends of the
tures composed of 12-16 protofilaments (scheele
microtubule that contain gtp bound to their e-site.
et al., 1982). it is not known how this variation affects
subunit disassembly occurs by endwise loss of
ligand binding sites. microtubules are 300 a in diam- heterodimers, now containing gdp at the e-site
eter, by electron density maps from fiber diffraction (melki et al., 1989), although at high mg 2÷ concenstudies (besse et al., 1987a,b). the molecular mechan- tration protofilament or ring structures may disasism of microtubule assembly is believed to proceed semble, thus accelerating the rates (mandelkow and
from a nucleation event, a highly unlikely event that
mandelkow, 1985; o'brien et al., 1990; fig. 1). the
exhibits a critical tubulin concentration, co, below hydrolysis of gtp and the conformation switch to
which polymerization does not occur. nucleation the gdp form of tubulin within the microtubule is
probably involves protofilament formation and lat- believed to include the release of mgpo4. this is
eral association of protofilaments into a sheet struc- similar to the mechanism of atp hydrolysis in actin
ture that curves into a helical rod (thompson et al.,
and actomyosin filaments (korn et al., 1987; carlier,

(-) or (+)
end

q

(*) or (-)
end

m

i

hpo4mg

i1 mg=+

o

fig. 1. an idealized mechanism of microtubule assembly/disassembly.gtp-tubulin heterodimers with
gtp at the e-site are represented by dark ovals; gdp-tubulin heterodimers are represented by light ovals.
microtubule growth occurs at both ends in vitro. in vivo the slow growing end, the minus end, may be
anchored at mtoc's. gtp hydrolysis occurs upon assembly and, after the release of hpo4mg, generates
a microtubule that is stabilized by a gtp cap, a layer of gtp-tubulin subunits that prevent catastrophic
disassembly. disassembly may occur by the loss of oligomers. subunits may also form nonmicrotubule
polymers, typically double walled rings. only the gdp-tubulin reaction is shown (frigon and timasheff,
1975a,b; howard and timasheff, 1986).

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
1991a), although the rate of po 4 release appears to
not be rate limiting for microtubules (carlier et al.,
1989; combeau and carlier, 1989; melki et al, 1990).
the addition of gtp-tubulin subunits to the ends
of a growing microtubule, and the hydrolysis of gtp
after addition to the microtubule, leads to a gradient
of gtp within the microtubule and thus to two forms
of polymers, the gdp- and the gtp-form. this has
been described as a phase transition (hill, 1983). it
is now widely believed (however see discussion in
carlier, 1991 b) that only a few gtp-subunits (maybe
as few as one gtp-tubulin layer) exist at the end of
any given microtubule, consistent with a lateral cap
model (bayley et al., 1990) or a vectorial model
(carlier et al., 1984). this conclusion is strongly
dependent upon the ability to rapidly fix and trap a
population of microtubules during growth such that
they retain y32p labeled gtp (stewart et al., 1990).
the temporal sequence of this event boils down to
whether the delay after gtp-tubulin binding and
before gtp hydrolysis, with the corresponding conformational change(s), is ~sec or sec (see carlier,
1991b for a discussion). alternative theories endorse
co-operative effects at the end of a cylindrical surface
(mandelkow and mandelkow, 1989). under steady
state conditions, the removal of this cap allows for
a conversion from an assembling or growing microtubule with gtp-tubulin at the ends to a disassembling or shrinking microtubule with gdp-tubulin at
the ends. this process, referred to as dynamic instability, was first observed with microtubules nucleated
from isolated centrosomes (mitchison and kirschner,
1984a,b) and is known to occur in vitro and in vivo.
the effect is due to the fact that the off rate for
gdp-tubulin heterodimers is ca. 100 fold faster
than gtp-tubulin heterodimers (gal et al., 1988;
o'brien et al., 1990). this may in part be due to the
increased ability of gdp-tubulin heterodimers to
form oligomers in a mg 2÷ dependent manner (frigon
and timasheff, 1975a,b; howard and timasheff,
1986; see fig. 1), and is consistent with different
conformations of g d p - and gtp-tubulin. the
consequences of this are that (1) microtubules are
simultaneously growing and shrinking in the same
solution although maintaining a constant polymer
mass, (2) gtp is hydrolyzed in an initial burst with
microtubule polymerization and at a steady state
with dynamic instability, and (3) the mean length of
microtubules increases with time as a few microtubules completely depolymerize (catastrophic disassembly) and the heterodimers released exchange
bound g d p for free gtp and add onto existing
microtubules. recovery or rescue from disassembly
(tempered disassembly) is typically observed (horio
*sulfhydryl modifications are chemically reversable by
reducing agents, however tubulin is often irreversibly
changed by the modification of 1-2 sh groups/dimer,
preventing complete recovery of polymerization activity.
sulfhydryl modification of tubulin has been reviewed in this
series (luduena and roach, 1991).

129

and hotani, 1986; bayley et al., 1990; o'brien et al.,
1990). the extent of microtubule dynamics is strongly
dependent upon the buffer conditions. glycerol
(kristofferson et al., 1986) and the presence of accessory proteins, maps (kristofferson and purich, 1981;
horio and hotani, 1986; keates, 1990), reduce dynamics. there is some support for treadmilling (wegner, 1976) under these conditions, a vectorial process
where growth occurs at one end and disassembly
occurs at the other end, leading to a flux of subunits
through the microtubule (farrell et al., 1987; hotani
and horio, 1988; see discussion in correia and
williams, 1983).
most of the above discussion pertains to in vitro
experiments although the same concepts are often
invoked in explaining in vivo results. for example,
microtubules in nonneuronal cells are known to be
dynamic (schulze and kirschner, 1986) and microtubule dynamics are believed to be involved in the
formation of the mitotic spindle and chromosome
movement (gorbsky and borisy, 1989; mitchison,
1988). thus, cellular requirements of a cytoskeleton
are consistent with the dynamic instability model of
microtubule assembly/disassembly (see kirschner
and mitchison, 1986).
1.2. generalfeaturesof antimitotic
drugs-tubulin interactions
as explained above, guanine nucleotides are
involved in microtubule assembly and dynamics.
antimitotic agents that inhibit microtubule formation can be viewed as repressor molecules in this
interaction. the activators are gtp and maps. the
activity is dynamic assembly. in this context, then,
our goal is to outline the various molecular means by
which these effectors interact. drugs that influence
the interactions of gtp might reduce the affinity of
its binding, alter the activity of the gtpase, or shift
the conformation of gtp-tubulin to gdp-tubulin
or to a nonmicrotubular form. the general principles
of protein-protein interactions, enzyme kinetics and
allosteric regulation pertain to this discussion (nichol
and winzor, 1972; oosawa and asakura, 1975;
frieden and nichol, 1981; perutz, 1990; wyman and
gill, 1990).
most of the interactions to be discussed here are
reversible interactions. most drug binding to tubulin
is rapidly reversible.* colchicine is the primary exception, due to a large activation barrier of binding, and
thus an extremely slow off rate (see below). taxol
binding to tubulin is often referred to in the literature
as being strong and irreversible, but its affinity for
microtubules is only 106 m-1 (parness and horwitz,
1981), and methods have been described for its
recovery from microtubule solutions (collins and
vallee, 1987; collins, 1991). antimitotic drugs prevent microtubule assembly (colchicine,  xxxd2980xxx , vinca alkaloids, etc.) or prevent microtubule
disassembly (taxol). cell toxicity is thus believed to be

130

j.j. correia

due to preventing formation of the mitotic spindle,
or, in the case of taxol, preventing disassembly of
the cytoplasmic microtubules at metaphase, or preventing disassembly of the mitotic spindle and thus
cell division during mitosis. any disruption of microtubule dynamics may induce metaphase arrest (see
jordan and wilson, 1990). upon polymerization
into a microtubule, tubulin becomes a gtpase and
cleaves the terminal phosphate bond of gtp bound
at the e-site. thus, if a drug prevents microtubule
formation or alters steady state dynamics, then it
indirectly prevents or diminishes gtp hydrolysis.
this is not in general believed to be a direct allosteric
modification of the gtp binding site, but an indirect
effect due to the inhibition of polymerization.
there are many potential mechanisms of drug
inhibition of microtubule assembly. there are two
kinds of stoichiometric effects. a direct steric
mechanism involves drug binding at a site on the
heterodimer that forms an interface within the microtubule and thus blocks longitudinal or lateral contact and bond formation. alternatively, an indirect
effect occurs when binding induces a conformational
change in tubulin that interferes with microtubule
bond formation. both of these mechanisms involve
sequestering of a drug-tubulin complex in a nonpolymerizable form. at stoichiometric concentrations,
polymorphism, the formation of alternate nonmicrotubular polymer forms, may be induced. as long
as the free tubulin concentration is less than co,
polymerization is inhibited. for example, vinblastine
and vincristine induce spiral protofilaments that are
nonmicrotubular and lack gtpase activity. vinca
alkaloids also prevent microtubule assembly in a
substoichiometric manner by means of a mechanism
that is believed to cause poisoning of the ends of
growing microtubules. a drug-tubulin complex adds
to a growing protofilament, alters the conformation
of that end and prevents the addition of tubulin
subunits. this mechanism may involve copolymerization of tubulin and drug-tubulin molecules that
alter the overall efféciency or energetics of growth
(sternlicht and ringel, 1979). to put this in quantitative terms, vinblastine will inhibit mitosis at
7.5 x 10 -8 m, but in vitro it  xxxd1740xxx  with an
affinity of ca. 4 × 104m 2. this reflects the difference
between inferring an effect due to substoichiometric
poisoning by measuring microtubule assembly and a
direct equilibrium binding measurement (see below).
since treadmilling may predominate under certain
conditions, poisoning of endwise growth may be
selective or preferential for one end of a microtubule.
(it will probably not be exclusive. treadmilling can be
expressed quantitatively with s = 0 meaning no
treadmilling at steady state, and s = 1 meaning only
association at one end and only disassembly at the
other end. the experimental data puts s at ca. 0.1
(correia and williams, 1983). this means both ends
grow, one just grows faster.) alternatively, drugs may
induce alternate polymer formation and yet retain

the activation of gtpase activity. colchicine forms
sheets or ribbons that have gtpase activity (andreu
and timasheff, 1982c). colchicine also induces weak
gtpase activity in the heterodimer. it is not clear
if gtp hydrolysis is coupled to colchicine-tubulin
polymer formation although the evidence is that
the gtpase activity increases with polymerization.
possibly the weak gtpase activity observed with
heterodimers is actually coupled to small oligomer
formation, perhaps as small as dimers of heterodimers
(heusele and carlier, 1981). there is no evidence that
colchicine-tubulin polymers are dynamic structures
that assemble and disassemble in a gtp-dependent
manner.
the molecular details of these interactions are not
understood. many studies of antimitotic analogs
are beginning to unravel the structure-function
requirements of these drugs (lin et al., 1988; batra et
al., 1988; liu et al., 1989; andreu et al., 1991;
medrano et al., 1991; see muzaffar and brossi, 1991).
however, the molecular structure of tubulin and
microtubules is not likely to be known for some
time (see mandelkow and mandelkow, 1989 for a
discussion), and thus the topology of the binding sites
remains a mystery. below, attempts will be made
to correlate binding at a particular site with consequences. the effects are not often additive, consistent
or conclusive. in the future, upon obtaining the
crystal structure of a d r u ~ t u b u l i n complex and
viewing the molecular interaction involved, it will
then be our task to explain how these contacts
allosterically affect contacts within the rnicrotubule.
many workers persist in using a molecular weight
of the heterodimer (110 kd instead of 100 kd) derived from sds page or denaturing sedimentation
equilibrium experiments. the use of this erroneous
value will systematically affect tubulin concentrations
by ca. 9%, and will thus overestimate stoichiometries
and binding constants determined for drug or nucleotide interactions with tubulin. much of the tubulin
literature uses the terms oligomer and aggregate
interchangeably. thus, there is no distinction made
between reversible oligomer formation and irreversible aggregate formation. ignoring the irreversible
gtpase step, microtubule formation is reversible in
the sense that heterodimers can be cycled between
functional monomers and polymers. this is more like
recycling an enzyme. most drug induced polymorphic
forms are reversible polymers and are sensitive to
concentration effects. irreversible tubulin aggregates
are often irregular, denatured forms and are not our
concern here.
1.3. thermodynamiclinkage
the theory of thermodynamic linkage as applied to
macromolecular interactions was first developed by
wyman (1964) and has been applied extensively to
biological macromolecules (wyman and gill, 1990).
it is based upon the thermodynamic principle that a

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
change in the activity of any species affects the
activity of all other species in solution. the wyman
linkage relationship is
(6 in k / 6 in a3)r.pc, z = a~
where k is the equilibrium constant for some reaction
to product at constant temperature, pressure, and
protein concentration, a 3 is the activity of the ligand,
and af is the change in the apparent additional
binding of component 3 to the protein, component 2,
during the reaction. note that it reflects a change in
binding and not total amount bound, and is thus
referred to as preferential interaction. this equation
can be applied to protein stability, self-association,
ligand binding, or solubility. in the context of microtubule assembly the binding of a ligand like a drug
influences the binding of a heterodimer to the growing end of a microtubule. a~ can be positive or
negative and does not imply a specific binding site.
for example, nonspecific electrostatic binding as
described by record et al. (1978) is an application of
preferential interactions. the ligand need not bind
uniquely to the polymer form, just more tightly. if a
ligand preferentially binds to microtubules over
heterodimers, then the addition of that ligand will
shift the reaction to microtubule formation. for
example, microtubule formation is accompanied by
the binding of one h + (0.86) and one mg 2+ (0.78)
per heterodimer addition (andreu and timasheff,
1986). thus microtubule formation is favored by
lower ph and increasing mg 2+ concentration. the
sites of binding may be newly formed at the subunit
interfaces in the polymer, but their location is irrelevant to the consequence; the extent and free energy
of microtubule formation is increased.
thermodynamic linkage applies to microtubule
assembly in numerous ways. (1) colchicine and a
number of colchicine analogs induce large conformational changes in tubulin. some of these
conformational states have gtpase activity not
coupled to microtubule assembly. using a bifunctional model and ligand-linked conformational equilibria, a thermodynamic model has been proposed
that is consistent with and explains the kinetics of
colchicine binding (andreu et al., 1991).
(2) the mg 2+ induced assembly of tubulin into
rings involves the binding of one additional mg 2+
per heterodimer and proceeds by isodesmic chain
growth and a ring closure step (frigon and
timasheff, 1975a,b). the vinblastine-induced assembly of tubulin into spirals (na and timasheff,
1986a,b) can be described by a ligand-mediated plus
ligand-facilitated polymerization model. as described
below, there is one assembly-linked vinblastine binding site. the concentration dependence of microtubule and nonmicrotubule polymer formation
magnifies the allosteric interactions between multiple
ligands. this in turn is coupled to large changes in the
solvent activity due to large changes in surface area
upon assembly (wyman and gill, 1990).

131

(3) the concept of preferential interactions has
been applied to explain the influence of solvent
components on the induction of microtubule
assembly. typical examples are glycerol or dmso
nonspecific stimulation of assembly at very high
concentrations. the driving force is the preferential
hydration of tubulin and the minimization of surface
area to avoid interaction between the solute, e.g.
glycerol, and the macromolecule (lee and timasheff.
1977).
(4) in addition to nonspecific preferential interactions, there are a number of specifc chelation
equilibria that are important to the tubulin system.
the original discovery of in vitro microtubule assembly conditions involved the addition of egta as a
ca 2+ chelator. ca 2+ inhibits microtubule assembly,
in the mm range for mtp and in the #m range
for pure tubulin (berkowitz and wolff, 1981).
since mg 2+ is required for strong gtp binding to
the e-site, chelation of divalent cations in general
will also inhibit assembly. tropolone (andreu and
timasheff, 1982a) and  xxxd1816xxx  (na and
timasheff, 1977) are weak microtubule inhibitors due
to binding to tubulin. however, they also bind mg 2+
and thus could influence assembly by altering the
free divalent cation concentration (andreu and
timasheff, 1982d; dabrowiak, 1980). mn 2+ will substitute for mg 2+ and in the early reports it was noted
that mn 2÷ was less effective than mg 2+ in promoting
assembly (buttlaire et al, 1980). however, those
authors used lmm egta in their buffers, a weak
chelator of mg 2+ but a strong chelator of mn 2+
(correia et al., 1988). in addition drugs may interact
with buffer components. hinman and cann (1976)
reported that chlorpromazine complexes with sucrose
and complicated the interpretations of their study
of chlorpromazine interaction with mouse tubulin.
chlorpromazine competes with colchicine and in
tissue culture resembles  xxxd1831xxx  in arresting mitosis
and disrupting organized microtubule structure
(appu rao et al, 1978).
(5) it has been reported that vincristine stabilizes
the colchicine binding activity of tubulin (wilson,
1970) and that colchicine itself prolongs native conformation of the protein (garland, 1978). this is a
thermodynamic linkage between drug binding and
tubulin stabilization. the native tubulin conformation is stabilized against denaturation by the additional energy of drug binding or nucleotide binding
(cf. brandts and lin, 1990). the induction of polymer
formation may provide additional stabilization.
this probably contributes to the influence of vinca
alkaloids or taxol on tubulin stability.
monod et al. (1963) predicted that "no direct
interaction need occur between the substrate of the
protein and the regulatory metabolite which controls
its activity". in the examples listed above the driving
forces are free energy changes mediated by coupled
equilibria and allosteric interactions. the thermodynamic linkage principle is sufficient to understand

132

j.j. corre1a

this partial list, and to correlate structure, function
and energy aspects of an antimitotic-microtubule
system.

2. the colchicine site
2.1. colchicine
colchicine (fig. 2) is the classic antimitotic; in fact,
tubulin was once known as the colchicine binding
protein (wilson, 1970). colchicine has four major
effects on tubulin: (1) it induces a change in secondary
structure as measured by circular dichroism, (2) it
induces a weak gtpase activity in the heterodimer,
(3) it inhibits microtubule formation substoichiometrically and thus inhibits the microtubule-linked
gtpase activity, and (4) at elevated temperatures it
induces sheet-like polymer formation at stoichiometric concentrations of drug. the kinetics (lambeir
and engelborghs, 1981; bane et al., 1984;
engelborghs and fitzgerald, 1987; hastie, 1989)
and thermodynamics (andreu et al., 1991; medrano
et al., 1989, 1991) of colchicine binding to tubulin
have been extensively characterized. roles for the
a, b and c rings have been proposed. colchicine is
known to undergo a slow conformational change
upon binding to tubulin and to induce a conformation change in tubulin. the slow kinetics of
effectively irreversible colchicine binding are due to a
large activation barrier (e, = 24 kcal/mol), in part
involving distortion of the central or b ring (garland,
1978; lambeir and engelborghs, 1981; banerjee
et al., 1987). removing the b ring increases the
overall rate and decreases the activation barrier
with a slight reduction in the overall affinity (bane
et al, 1984; engelborghs and fitzgerald, 1987). the
specificity of binding is due to h-bonding and hydrophobic interactions at the trimethoxybenzene a ring
and to stacking interactions at the 7 membered
tropolone c ring. the link between colchicine and
tubulin conformational changes has been experimentally inferred from kinetic studies (garland, 1978;
lambeir and engelborghs, 1981), measured by cd
(detrich et al, 1981; andreu and timasheff, 1982a)
and quenched protein fluorescence (andreu and
timasheff, 1982a), demonstrated by immunological

oh
ch=o~nh-r
"~

c..o" "t" ~

o

ch,o ] , ~ 0

och3
colchicine:
 xxxd1831xxx :

r• cochs
r ch=

ch=o/~och:
och~
 xxxd2980xxx 

=

f16.2. the structure of colchicine,  xxxd1831xxx  and  xxxd2980xxx .

methods (morgan and spooner, 1983), and inferred
by the induction of gtpase activity in the heterodimer (david-pfeuty et al., 1979; andreu and
timasheff, 1981). the small cd changes are also
induced by analogs of colchicine, mtc (2-methoxy5-(2,3,4-trimet hoxyphenyl)-2,4,6-cycloheptatrien- 1one) (andreu et al., 1984), allocolchicine (medrano
et al., 1989) and tropolone methyl ether (andreu
and timasheff, 1982b).
 xxxd2980xxx  (fig. 2) is known to compete with
colchicine for binding to tubulin and is believed to
share a site with colchicine through the trimethoxybenzene moiety; yet  xxxd2980xxx  does not induce
a conformational change in tubulin or induce the
gtpase activity. in fact,  xxxd2980xxx  and tropolone, the c ring alone, can bind to tubulin simultaneously suggesting that only the a ring is shared in
these binding sites (cortese et al., 1977). neither
tropolone methyl ether nor vinblastine induces the
gtpase activity (andreu and timasheff, 1981). an
early report suggested that  xxxd2235xxx  and  xxxd1816xxx  induce gtpase activity in heterodimers and do
not compete with colchicine binding (david-pfeuty
et al., 1979), but this has not been followed up. a
molecular understanding of this selectivity must
await determination of a three dimensional structure
of tubulin and a knowledge of the drug binding sites.
recent work suggests that the colchicine related site
that induces gtpase activity requires binding to both
the a ring and c ring subsites. thus, gtpase activity
is trimethoxybenzene-specific while the conformational change can be due to interactions, stacking
or n stacking of the c ring alone (lin and hamel,
1981; andreu et al., 1991; medrano et al., 1991). this
is also the mechanism of colchicine and  xxxd1831xxx 
dimerization (engelb0rghs, 1981). the identity of
the aromatic amino acid participating in this stacking
is not known, but tryptophan has been suggested
(andreu and timasheff, 1982a; hastie, 1989).
there is evidence that the b ring subdomain may also
be involved in induction of the gtpase activity
(banerjee et al., 1987).
an alternative model of the colchicine binding site
has been proposed based upon the rapid and reversible binding of  xxxd1744xxx  a-4 and a-2, natural
products that have replaced the tropolone ring with
a phenyl ring at the c-ring position (lin et al., 1989).
this model suggests a symmetry to the colchicine site
that appears to be inconsistent with the head-to-tail
asymmetry of the microtubule (see a complete discussion in andreu et al., 1991). it is not clear from this
report if these compounds induce large conformational changes in tubulin or alternate polymer
formation. gtpase activity was assessed in 1.0m
glutamate, 4% dmso under conditions where the
drugs inhibit turbidity development but stimulated
gtpase activity above the microtubule associated
levels under otherwise identical (drug-free) conditions. the half-lives of colchicine displacement
of these compounds from tubulin are much shorter

tubulin-nucleotide interactions

133

than for colchicine (3.6 and 2.4 vs 405 min) but chain can alter the conformation of the other and thus
also longer than that for 2-methoxy-5-(2',3',4'- affect drug binding. nonspecific weak sites may be
trimethoxy)tropone, mtpt, a tropolone analog lack- induced by protein denaturation, possibly by the
ing the b ring (12-17 sec). direct measurements of alkylating agents or the uv wavelength. a second
binding constants and rates of binding will greatly colchicine binding site has an affinity 25-fold weaker
assist in evaluating the implications of these unusual than the high affinity specific site (floyd et al., 1989).
proteolysis studies suggest a specific fragment,
colchicine analogs.
since colchicine turns on the gtpase activity of the residues 339-390 of the ct chain, is involved in colchiheterodimer, possibly mediated by small oligomer cine binding (serrano et al., 1984a). colchicine modinteractions (heusele and carlier, 1981), this will ifies the trypsin cleavage pattern of tubulin, adding
necessarily change the interactions between divalent a cleavage site at arg 390 (serrano et al., 1984a).
cations, guanine nucleotides, and tubulin. the affinity subtilisin treatment, removal of the carboxyl terminal
of the gtpmg complex and of gdp may be altered. regions of both chains, also affects colchicine binding
the conformation of the complex is clearly different, (avila et al., 1987). in addition, colchicine inhibits the
at least during hydrolysis where the triphosphate takes crosslinking of cys 239 and 354 on the fl chain,
on the activated complex conformation. the tran- suggesting that colchicine binding sterically or allosition state probably involves a pentavalent structure sterically affects this region of the b chain (luduena
about the y-phosphate with the fifth coordinate pos- and roach, 1991). epr studies suggest that this is due
ition occupied by an attacking water molecule (osei to conformational changes and that these residues are
et al., 1988; angelastro and purich, 1990). in the not near the colchicine binding site. deinum and
presence of stoichiometric gtp, hydrolysis will occur coworkers (deinum et al., 1981; deinum and lincoln,
and the site will be occupied with gdp. it will be a 1986) have measured the distance from the e-site to
low affinity mg :+ site (correia et al., 1987). the the essential cysteines to be greater than 10/~, the
colchicine-tubulin sheets must also then consist of distance between the essential cysteines to be at least
gdp occupied e-sites. a recent study of the colchi- 17/~, and the high affinity colchicine site to be far
cine-tubulin complex with nucleotides utilized removed from them all. ward and timasheff (1988)
gtp(7-f), a nonhydrolyzable analog (monasterio, report that the colchicine site is > 24 a from the e-site
1985). using n m r techniques, a distance of 6 to 8
(but see below). only minimum distances could be
was measured from mn 2+, a substitute for mg 2+, to determined due to an absence of spectral change.
the 7f. gtp(vf) does have a reduced affinity for these results are consistent with the observation that
mn 2+ and mg 2+, and gtp(7 f) inhibits microtubule alkylation of essential cysteines inhibits polymerizpolymerization (monasterio, 1985; monasterio and ation but not colchicine binding (kuriyama and
timasheff, 1985a) although some incorporation may sakai, 1974; ikeda and steiner, 1978; bai et al., 1989)
occur. tubulin gtpase apparently requires two nega- or gtp binding (nishida and kobayashi, 1977).
tive charges at the 7-phosphate, since gtp(7 f) only
since binding of colchicine and colchicine analogs
has one (monasterio and timasheff, 1985b). nonethe- induces gtpase activity, this site on the surface of
less, the distance measured by monasterio (1985) tubulin may be involved in lateral contacts within a
probably reflects the conformation of the colchi- microtubule that also promote the assembly-linked
cine-tubulin complex trapped in a nearly active gt- gtpase activity. it has been suggested that map
pase conformation.
binding favors protofilament contacts that lead to
the location and number of the colchicine binding curvature and rod closure (correia and williams,
sites is still under investigation. cross-linking studies
1983). the structure of the colchicine-tubulin polywith potent alkylating agents, photoaffinity labeling, mers, sheets instead of rods, is consistent with steric
or direct uv cross-linking suggest the site is on or allosteric effects that alter lateral contacts, and thus
the ct chain or the ct and fl chains (schmitt and lead to a different curvature in the polymer. the sheets
atlas, 1976; floyd et al., 1989; wolff et al., 1991). or ribbons induced by colchicine are similar to microbromocolchicine labeled the • and fl chains but only tubules in that they share the same temperature, ph,
labeling is specifically inhibited by colchicine divalent cation and nucleotide binding dependences.
(schmitt and atlas, 1976). in the uv cross-linking both processes are entropically driven reactions with
studies the fl chain was preferentially labeled, but both similar changes in heat capacity, acp (andreu and
the fl and ct chains were labeled (filet > 1), with the timasheff, 1986). in conclusion, we have a large body
labeling at ct correlated with structural changes, poss- of information but very little molecular understanding
ibly loss of native structure (wolff et al., 1991). the of where colchicine binds or how colchicine alters
data are interpreted in terms of the colchicine site structure, gtpase activity or polymerizability.
being at the interface between the subunits. an
interface site is consistent with the genetic data that
2.2.  xxxd2980xxx 
mutations in the fl chain and the ~t chain can induce
 xxxd2980xxx  (fig. 2) binds slowly to tubulin
resistance to colchicine (cabral et al., 1980),  xxxd1831xxx 
(keates et al., 1981) or competitors of colchicine (1000m -~ sec -~ at 37°c with an activation energy
(morris et al., 1979). alternatively, a change in either of 14.7kcal/mol) with reasonably high affinity,

134

j.j. correia

1.8 × 106m-1 at 37°c (cortese et al., 1977;
engelborghs and fitzgerald, 1987). the partial overlap of the binding site with the colchicine site is
suggested by the observation that  xxxd2980xxx 
competes with colchicine and trimethoxybenzene or
a ring analogs but not with tropolone or c ring
analogs. consistent with this selective competition,
 xxxd2980xxx  does not induce gtpase activity in
the heterodimer or major conformation changes in
tubulin. the slow rate of binding is consistent with a
slow tubulin conformation change associated with
binding at this site and previously described for
colchicine analogs that lack the b ring. morgan and
spooner (1983) have reported antibody studies that
suggest a conformational change with binding of
colchicine,  xxxd2980xxx  or vinblastine binding to
tubulin, but only colchicine induces significant
changes detectable by cd measurements.
batra et al. (1988) describe a number of  xxxd2980xxx  analogs that weakly compete for the colchicine/ xxxd2980xxx  binding site, inhibit microtubule polymerization stoichiometrically, and like
colchicine, stimulate rather than inhibit tubulindependent gtpase hydrolysis. microtubule polymerization is suppressed and thus these analogs are
stimulating the heterodimer gtpase activity. these
analogs all required the trimethoxybenzene ring
for activity. the substitutions were at the 6 and 7
position of the central ring. if these analogs mimic
colchicine then they most likely bind partially at the
tropolone, c ring, site and are actually colchicine
analogs. competitive binding studies with tropolone
methyl ether would be instructive. modifications of
 xxxd2980xxx  with groups in the/3 configuration
at the c-4 position of the c ring (the oh group
of the central ring) result in reduced inhibition
of tubulin polymerization but greater inhibition of
topoisomerase (liu et al., 1989).
bhattacharyya et al. (1985) report that subtilisin
treatment of the/~ subunit generates a polymer that
is insensitive to cold,  xxxd2980xxx  and gtp or
gdp. further cleavage of the ~ subunit restores the
sensitivity to cold and  xxxd2980xxx  and the requirement for gtp. the polymer forms are reported
to be different, rings vs bundles and sheets, consistent
with different energetics of formation and thus sensitivity to destabilizing agents. these results do not
therefore suggest that the ~ and fl carboxyl terminal
regions interact with  xxxd2980xxx  selectively.
since  xxxd2980xxx  does not induce heterodimer
gtpase activity or alternate polymer formation, it
constitutes a relatively simple system for studying the
interaction of an antimitotic with steady state microtubules. interactions with map-free tubulin should
probe the dynamic instability characteristics of those
microtubules. the mechanism of dynamic instability
is intimately connected to the assembly-linked
gtpase activity of tubulin and the differences between gtp-tubulin and gdp-tubulin at the ends of
the microtubule. the mechanism of endwise poison-

ing provides a means of investigating the details of
these reactions.  xxxd2980xxx  induces microtubule
disassembly with a rate of 160sec ~, a rate very
similar to the intrinsic rate of microtubule disassembly (schilstra et al., 1989). the amount of disassembly is proportional to the amount of drug added,
and thus the gtp-tubulin- xxxd2980xxx  ternary
complex is elongation-inactive. the free tubulin concentration remains at the cc value. these experiments
are all performed with a gtp regeneration system to
avoid complications of gdp-tubulin suppression of
elongation or dynamics. schilstra et al. (1989) also
found a marked effect of dmso on microtubule
dynamics, and thus because methanol did not alter
dynamics, they used 2% methanol in all their experiments. (these solvents are used to solubilize drugs at
stock solution concentrations.) with stoichiometric
or excess drug, complete polymer disassembly occurs.
however, with substoichiometric drug amounts,
under conditions where free tubulin heterodimers and
microtubules still coexist, dynamics are dramatically
reduced, with 50% suppression of dynamics
occurring at 2-3/~m  xxxd2980xxx  (9.5-14.3%
drug/subunits in microtubules). these results are
consistent with the ternary complex binding to the
ends of microtubules but then coming off without
elongating or allowing elongation. kinetically,
the ternary complex binds like gtp-tubulin but
dissociates like gdp-tubulin. in the context of a
lateral cap model, a single layer of ternary complex,
gtp-tubulin- xxxd2980xxx , prevents elongation
and exchange, but allows for rapid disassembly to the
cc level. this is in contrast to the mode of action
of colchicine. the affinity of colchicine-tubulin
complex for microtubule ends has been estimated
to be 0.3/~m, and the complex is an inhibitor of
microtubule assembly and disassembly (lambeir and
engelborghs, 1981).
2.3. estrogenicdrugs
estrogenic drugs inhibit microtubule assembly and
induce the formation of twisted ribbons (hartley-asp
et al., 1985; sato et al., 1987; chaudoreille et al.,
1987, 1991; sakakibara et al., 1990). there is no
interaction with tryptophan residues or modification
of free sulfhydryls. these drugs do not compete with
gtp or vinblastine but they do weakly compete with
colchicine. they induce twisted ribbons that are
insensitive to ca 2÷ and cold and, like vinblastineinduced polymers, are favored by mg 2*. note that
the same polymers are generated by estrogenic drugs,
vinblastine, gmpcpp (sandoval and weber, 1979,
1980a,b), low ph and ca 2÷ (matsumura and
hayashi, 1976; serrano et al., 1986b) and gmppcp
(seckler et al., 1990), and that each of these effectors
has a distinct binding site. colchicine and estrogenic
drugs compete for the same site but do not induce the
same alternate polymer structures. furthermore,
the polymorphism is dependent upon the solvent;

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
it is mg 2+ dependent and more common in 1%
methanol than in 1% dmso (donoso et al., 1979;
chaudoreiile et al., 1991). a molecular explanation of
these observations is not currently possible. energetically each of these effectors favors twisted ribbon
formation and thus twisted ribbons may expose
binding sites for these effectors, or the corresponding
effector sites on tubulin may be capable of allosterically or directly modifying lateral contacts within
the polymer in a similar manner.

3. the vinblastine/maytansine site
3.1. vincaalkaloids
the vinca alkaloids, vinblastine and vincristine
(fig. 3), inhibit microtubule assembly substoichiometrically by endwise poisoning or stoichiometrically by
causing the formation of spiral polymers that lack
gtpase activity. there is no significant change in the
cd spectra of tubulin upon binding vinblastine or
vincristine. most uv difference changes are in the
drug and not in tubulin, except at low wavelengths.
these changes in the spectra of the drugs are due to
the lower dielectric constant of the binding pocket and
reflect changes in the environment of the indole of the
catharanthine moiety (prakash and timasheff, 1991).
both drugs induce the formation of rings, coils, and
tubular aggregates. at sufficiently high drug and
protein concentrations fragile paracrystals form.
these are optically birefringent, parallel arrays of
spiraled protofilaments or fibrils that require mg 2+ or
ca 2+ in pipes buffer. paracrystal formation in vivo is
stimulated by the presence of colchicine or  xxxd1831xxx ,
consistent with the requirement of a pool of unpolymerized tubulin (takanari et al., 1990). palanivelu
and luduena (1982) studied the interaction of colchicine,  xxxd2980xxx  and sulfhydryl-oxidizingagents
with vinblastine-induced tubulin spirals in the presence of tau, a low molecular weight map. these agents
inhibit microtubule assembly but not vinblastine
spirals, consistent with disruption of lateral and not
longitudinal interactions. thus, a colchicine-tubulin
complex, derived from disassembled microtubules,
can still be induced to form vinblastine spirals.
oh

r1

o~.c - r2

vinblastine: r1 • ch,; r2 • och,; r3 • cochs
vincristine: r1 • cho; r2 • ochs; r3 = coch=

fig. 3. the structure of the vinca alkaloids vinblastine and
vincristine.

135

the formation of vinca alkaloid-induced polymers
or paracrystals has been extensively characterized
by timasheff and coworkers (lee et al., 1975; na
and timasheff, 1980a,b, 1982, 1986a,b; prakash
and timasheff, 1985, 1991). according to na and
timasheff (1986a,b), the binding of the first vinblastine molecule is linked to spiral assembly. this is
presumably a specific binding site (k = 4 x 104 m-l)
that is protein concentration dependent. there are at
least two additional sites that are not protein concentration dependent and must be considered weak,
nonspecific sites (k = 5 x 103m-l). the mechanism
involves ligand-mediated plus ligand-facilitated spiral
growth which means vinblastine can bind to both
heterodimers or spirals. in addition, mg 2÷ enhances
vinblastine-induced tubulin self-association and thus
must also enhance vinblastine binding to the association-linked binding site. mg 2÷ alone induces alternate polymer forms in a gdp and gtp dependent
manner (frigon and timasheff, 1975a,b; howard
and timasheff, 1986). thus mg2+-induced double
walled rings may coexist with vinblastine spirals
at high mg 2÷ concentrations. a comparison of spiral
formation in gdp vs gtp buffers has not been
reported and thus we do not know if nucleotide
content at the e-site contributes to this complex
mechanism. the vinca alkaloid analog vinzolidine
binds with a two-fold higher affinity to gdp-tubulin
than to gtp-tubulin, but this could be due to a
difference in extents of spiral assembly and not an
intrinsic difference in the binding affinity (codaccioni
et al., 1988).
as recently verified by singer et al. (1988), these
results explain the wide variation in the number of
sites and affinities reported in the literature (partially
summarized in luduena et al., 1986). depending
upon the method of measurement, the protein concentration, the drug concentration, the ionic strength,
and the mg 2÷ concentration, the number of sites
for vinca alkaloids can vary dramatically. studies of
vinblastine binding to taxol and dmso stabilized
microtubules suggest a single binding site with an
affinity of 3-4 x 103m-i (singer et al., 1989), very
similar to the equilibrium constant of the two low
affinity sites identified by na and timasheff
(1986a,b). vincristine-induced tubulin aggregation
has been analyzed as ligand-mediated or ligandfacilitated (prakash and timasheff, 1985), but we
must presume that the subsequent results of na and
timasheff (1986a,b) reinterpreting the vinblastine
data in terms of both mechanisms apply to vincristine
as well. a thermodynamic interpretation of vinca
alkaloid binding to tubulin using the bifunctional
model previously applied to colchicine suggests that
the cratic energy gained by covalently immobilizing
the two parts of the molecule together is lost, unlike
for colchicine (andreu and timasheff, 1981), possibly
due to strain energy upon binding (prakash and
timasheff, 1991). thus the free energy of binding
is due to the sum of the two constituents and is

136

j.j. corre1a

not increased by the entropy lost due to covalent
immobilization.
photoaffinity studies demonstrate labeling of both
and fl subunits by vinblastine in a 3:2 ratio (safa
et al., 1987). irradiation was at 304 nm, potentially
modifying and denaturing tubulin, and the high drug
concentrations used precluded any control of labeling
specific vs nonspecific sites. in a more recent study,
a photosensitive derivative of vinblastine, photoactivated by light at 455 nm, was also crosslinked
to both the ~ and fl chains (nasioulas et al., 1990).
this analog reacts with tubulin in a similar manner
to vinblastine, but the active photo product has a
half-life of 400 min and thus may also react in a
nonspecific manner.
bowman et al. (1986, 1990) have suggested a
requirement of gtp or gdp for vincristine binding
to tubulin in cytosol from two human rhabdomyosarcoma xenographs. the effect is reported to be due to
a factor, 20-50 kda, possibly a gtp binding protein,
that does not copurify with tubulin or maps.
the interaction of substoichiometric amounts of
vinblastine with microtubules containing maps has
been investigated by a double labeling procedure
using [14c]gtp and [3h]gtp (jordan and wilson,
1990). the bovine brain mtp preparations are described as map rich and contain 30-40% maps.
it is reported that these microtubules exhibit no
dynamic instability, only steady state treadmilling.
the presence of substoichiometric concentrations of
vinblastine decreases the dissociation rate constant of
tubulin at the a or plus end without changing the
dissociation rate constant at the d or minus end. this
is described as producing a kinetic cap at the plus or
growing end of the microtubule, despite the fact that
disassembly predominantly occurs at the plus end.
these data are interpreted as being consistent with
free drug rapidly and reversibly binding to highaffinity sites at one or both microtubule ends. thus,
vinblastine reduces the critical concentration but
does not induce microtubule disassembly; rather it
kinetically stabilizes the plus end.
using their reported rate constants, both ends
have identical affinities for tubulin, with association
constants of 4.0-4.3 x 10~m i at the plus end and
3.8-4.3 × 105m-~ at the minus end. the addition of
vinblastine, 0.15 and 0.3/tm, reduces the association
constants equally for both ends, 3.2 and 2.1 × 105 m t
respectively for the plus end, and 3.3 and
*previous experiments on the dynamics of microtubules
have demonstrated that mixing or turbulence of any kind
will shear microtubules and thus reveal behaviors of the
internal regions of a microtubule population (keates and
hallet, 1988; lynch and williams, 1989). given this possibility in the double labeling experiments described above
(either during drug addition or filter binding assays), the
inconsistencies in the affinity estimates, and the intrinsic
complexity of the system (cf. na and timasheff, 1986a,b),
it does not appear that the critical experiments or analysis
have been done to verify the methodologies or conclusions
of these substoichiometric studies.

2.3 x 105m-i respectively for the minus end. at
steady state these microtubules are indeed treadmilling very slowly. only during a transition induced
by dilution, addition of drug, or new assembly will
the ends appear to be different. in fact, the minus
ends of these microtubules disassemble more slowly
than the plus ends, possibly due to the map content.
given the identity of the association constants and
the similarity of the rate constants, it appears that
both ends are involved, with different ends being
more active at various times.
the idea of a high affinity binding site at the end(s)
of the microtubules comes from earlier vinblastinemtp experiments (wilson et al., 1982). in those
experiments the estimates of affinities come from the
[3h]-vinblastine concentration and the total tubulin
concentration in a pellet. the data are consistent with
a vinblastine-tubulin complex binding to the microtubule end(s), and thus a reasonable mechanism is
vinblastine binding to free tubulin and the resulting
complex adding to microtubules but then subsequent
binding being inhibited by the presence of this complex. if the affinity of vinblastine for tubulin is taken
from na and timasheff (1986a), 4 × 104m -1, and the
complex binds to a microtubule with the affinity of
free tubulin (1 x 105 m ~in the experiments of wilson
et al. (1982), ca. 4 x 105m l in the experiments of
jordan and wilson (1990)), then by thermodynamic
coupling, the affinity of free vinblastine for microtubule ends is the product or 4-16 x 199m t. if
vinblastine binding to the heterodimer alters this
affinity for the ends, these values would be too large.
in addition, affinities at different ends of the microtubules may be different since the geometries or
topologies of the two ends are different. previous
estimates of these apparent affinities were
5.3 × 105 m-~, derived from inhibition of polymerization (wilson et al., 1982). these values are not
derived from the free concentration of tubulin in
equilibrium with the ends, and do not take into
account the loss of drug during the centrifugal separation that must occur due to rapid re-equilibration,
although the 50% sucrose cushion may alter, most
likely increase, the affinity and reduce this loss.
na and timasheff (1986a,b) indicate the problems
with measuring binding constants in this system,
suggesting careful maintenance of free drug activity
and consideration of all the competing equilibria
in the calculations. this procedure appears to
be a reasonable framework for interpreting the substoichiometric, endwise effects of drugs.*
3.2. maytansinoids

vinblastine and maytansine (fig. 4) share and
compete for a binding site on tubulin. ansamitocin
p-3 (fig. 4) (an analog of maytansine), rhizoxin
(fig. 5) (a fungal antimitotic that only slightly
resembles maytansine), and maytansine all inhibit
vinblastine-induced tubulin aggregation. all of these

tubulin-nucleotide interactions

137
ch=

cl ch= o~,r

0
h

c

h

h

ch=
~ "
chs

och=

c.,
maytansine:

o

r=--q--n--c--oh,
h cha
/ch,

ansarnitoein p-3:

r • ~ ch~ch~

fig. 4. the structure of maytansine and ansamitocin p-3.
drugs competitively inhibit vinblastine and vincristine
binding (bai et al., 1990b), and substoichiometrically
inhibit microtubule assembly and assembly-linked
gtp hydrolysis. for example, maytansine inhibits
vinblastine and vincristine binding to tubulin with a
g i of 0.5 and 0.4 [tm respectively (luduena et al.,
1986). rhizoxin is a strong competitive inhibitor of
maytansine and ansamitocin p-3 with a kd = 0.17/~m.
it inhibits vinblastine effects but not colchicine
(takahashi et al., 1987). because maytansine does not
induce alternate polymer formation and does inhibit
induction of spirals by vinca alkaloids, maytansine
has been referred to as a pure inhibitor of all tubulin
polymerization. luduena and coworkers (roach
and luduena, 1984; sullivan et al., 1990) use a
bifunctional crosslinker ebi to alkylate cysteines in a
class of fl chains of tubulin and produce three new fll
bands, two singly crosslinked and one doubly crosslinked (for a review see luduena and roach, 1991).
gtp, maytansine, rhizoxin and vinblastine have
common effects, enhancing the fl* and inhibiting the
fl~ crosslink, while colchicine,  xxxd2980xxx  and
 xxxd2745xxx  inhibit the fl* and enhance the fls crosslinks.* these results are consistent with the lack of
competitive binding between these two classes of
drugs and the conclusion that they target different
regions of the heterodimer.
maytansine and vinblastine appear to have an
overlapping binding site near the e-site. in support of
this, huang et al. (1985) have shown that maytansine
inhibits nucleotide exchange at the exchangeable site
of tubulin. this could be a steric effect or due to a
conformational change. another indication that
maytansine binds near the e-site is that maytansine
and gtp have similar effects on alkylation (roach
and luduena, 1984). vinblastine does not affect
*/~* refers to the crosslinking of cysteine 239 and 354 on
the fl chain, fl' refers to the crosslinking of cysteine 12 and
201 or 211 on the fl chain. refer to luduena and roach
(1991) for a current review of this research.

och,
o

h
~ nch,

o

"\'h

och=
rhizoxin

flo.5.thestructureof rhizoxin.
nucleotide exchange, although it is not clear if these
experiments have been done under conditions where
spirals form. as mentioned above, vinca alkaloids
stabilize colchicine binding activity and thus prevent
tubulin denaturation. maytansine, ansamitocin p-3
and rhizoxin do not stabilize tubulin. taken together
these data are evidence for competitive but overlapping binding sites and are consistent with a fl chain
binding site for these agents.
mutation of the ~t chain produces resistance to
maytansine (schibler and cabral, 1985). surprisingly,
the mutation was also cross resistant to  xxxd2235xxx ,
vinblastine and  xxxd1831xxx  and supersensitive to taxol.
these results are consistent with a mutation that
stabilizes microtubules, modifying a domain that
affects subunit-subunit interactions (cabral, 1983).
in a more recent example (schibler and huang,
1991), a  xxxd752xxx -tubulin missense mutation in chlamydomonas reinhardtii originally isolated as a colchicine resistant mutant is actually cross resistant to
vinblastine and antimitotic herbicides and has increased sensitivity to taxol. thus these mutations
produce enhanced microtubule stability. antimitotic
resistant mutations of tubulin are often not at the
drug binding sites. rather they are mutations at
the subunit-subunit interfaces that strengthen or
diminish microtubule stability and are thus cross
resistant with drugs specific for diverse sites (rudolph
et al, 1987).
3.3. phomopsin a and dolastatin10

phomopsin a (fig. 6) and  xxxd1925xxx  (fig. 7)
both prevent nucleotide exchange, and inhibit microtubule polymerization and assembly-linked gtp
hydrolysis (tonsing et al., 1984; lacey et al., 1987;
luduena et al., 1989; bai et al., 1990a,b). they both
stabilize tubulin against decay, thus stimulating colchicine binding and diminishing binding by bis(8anilino-naphthalene 1-sulfonate), bis ans, a probe
sensitive to newly exposed hydrophobic regions. they
both stabilize tubulin better than vinblastine, and
were described in one case as providing indefinite
stabilization (luduena et al., 1990). thus they may be

138

j. j. correia

h
chsnh-'--c
i

h-%c,

ho'
\
ci

/ch3

co
i
nh h
/c..
~ "~
o--c
"co-- n - - c - c o - nh- c - c o - n h - c - c o , h
/
in,
....
"h
ii
ii
i vn2~ns
ch
c
c
oh
3
/\
chsch,
ch3 h/ \ co=h
phomopsin a
fig. 6. the structure of phomopsin a.

useful in crystallization. phomopsin a inhibits ebi
crosslinking in a manner very similar to maytansine
and vinblastine (luduena et al., 1990). phomopsin a
induces 40 nm rings with mtp and purified tubulin,
although drug induced depolymerization also causes
coils and short helices, possibly during an endwise
depolymerization mechanism (tonsing et al., 1984).
 xxxd1925xxx , like vinblastine, induces cold stable
polymers (bai et al., 1990a) although recent em
studies demonstrate they are rings similar to those
reported for phomopsin a (p. skehan and e. hamel,
personal communication). these agents are both
noncompetitive inhibitors of vinblastine binding,
suggesting a site distinct from vinblastine but
overlapping with maytansine (bai et al., 1990b).
a topological model of the vinca alkaloid, maytansine, phomopsin a and  xxxd1925xxx  sites has
been proposed that places them in adjacent and
overlapping regions on the/~ chain near the guanine
nucleotide e-site (bai et al., 1990b). both steric
and allosteric effects may be involved in these
interactions.

4. taxol
the diterpenoid taxol (fig. 8) is the sole antimitotic
that stoichiometrically induces microtubule assembly
and assembly-associated gtpase activity (manfredi
and horwitz, 1984; hamel, 1990). nucleation is
enhanced, thus microtubules are shorter, and growth
proceeds through ribbon-like structures (schiff et al.,
1979) and extensive length redistribution (caplow
and zeeberg, 1982; carlier and pantaloni, 1983). this
may explain the observation of biphasic kinetics with
taxol and map stimulated assembly (kumar, 1981;
choudhury et al., 1987). similar observations at low
ph (barton and riazi, 1980; bayley et al., 1983) may
also be due to changes in morphology (heusele et al.,
1987). microtubule annealing contributes to this process as well (williams and rone, 1988). the affinity
*the insolubility of taxol in water may cause it to
precipitate and pellet in excess of its affinity with microtubules and thus taxol may appear to bind irreversibly t o
microtubules. this is especially true at low temperature.

of subunits for the end of a growing microtubule is
increased by - 2 kcal/mol (schiff et al, 1979; see
below) and dynamics are dramatically reduced
(wilson et al, 1985) although not eliminated (caplow
and zeeberg, 1982). other effectors also stimulate
assembly and reduce dynamics in a specific (maps)
or nonspecific (polylysine, glycerol, dmso, sucrose,
glutamate) manner.
taxol alone
stimulates
gdp-tubulin and nucleotide-depleted tubulin to
assemble (schiff and horwitz, 1981; carlier and
pantaloni, 1983). this is evidence that gtp
hydrolysis is not absolutely required for microtubule
polymerization, and that the free energy associated
with the growth of gtp-tubulin can be derived from
taxol binding to a stabilized microtubule. taxol does
not inhibit nucleotide binding or map binding to
microtubules (schiffand horwitz, 1981; vallee, 1982;
collins, 1991), although the e-site nucleotide within
the assembled microtubule is nonexchangeable except
through subunit exchange at the ends (carlier and
pantaloni, 1983).
taxol binds to microtubules with a kd near 1 #m
(parness and horowitz, 1981) and is reported to not
bind to subunits (collins and vallee, 1987; takoudju
et al., 1988), although a gel filtration assay used to
measure this is not sensitive to affinities weaker than
ca. 1 x 105 m-i. * in fact, carlier and pantaloni (1983)
estimated the affinity of taxol for the colchicinetubulin complex to be 13pm, or 7.7 x 104m i. this

r

nh
0__ ~

0
ch~
h,

3

hs

~

~n~,.

 xxxd1925xxx 
fig. 7. the structure of  xxxd1925xxx .

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
ocochs

oh

0

o.

o=
choh

i

hc

oc'--(kt

"/~

n--c=o

taxol

fig. 8. the structure of taxo].

estimation involved the stimulation of colchicinetubulin complex gtpase activity. the experiments
were performed under conditions where the complex
alone did not form colchicine-tubulin sheets, and no
polymer formation was observed upon addition of
taxol. thus taxol appears to stimulate the gtpase
activity of colchicine-tubulin heterodimers and probably  xxxd1740xxx  heterodimers in the absence of
colchicine with a similar affinity. because taxol binds
to microtubules with high affinity, the location of
this taxol binding site is suspected of being at the
interface between subunits in the microtubule, but
this is not known. the affinity of taxol for the
colchicine-tubulin complex suggests a single subunit can bind taxol, and additional conformational
changes within the microtubule could account for the
affinity increase, corresponding to ca. 1.6 kcal/mol.
previous suggestions that nonhydrolyzable analogs of
gtp bind at the taxol site are probably not correct
(manfredi and horwitz, 1984).
taxol induces microtubule bundle formation
(schiff and horwitz, 1980; turner and margolis,
1984). bundles are also induced in vivo by gmpcpp
(wehland and sandoval, 1983). this may be mediated by a number of protein factors that are known
to induce microtubule bundle formation in vivo and
in vitro (aamodt and culotti, 1986; amos, 1989;
campbell et al., 1989; huitorel and pantaloni, 1985).
other drugs inhibit taxol-stimulated assembly.
studies in vivo and in vitro suggest inhibition of
taxol-stimulated assembly by colchicine,  xxxd1831xxx ,
 xxxd2980xxx , and vinblastine (see hamel, 1990
for a list). estrogens inhibit taxol-induced assembly
but this is reversed with the addition of gtp
(hartley-asp et al., 1985). there are also many
reports of resistance to antimitotic depolymerization
of preformed taxol-microtubules (see hamel, 1990).
taxol does not compete directly with colchicine,
vinblastine or map binding sites, although experiments with drugs have not always distinguished
competition for subunits or polymers (schiff and
horwitz, 1981). a reasonable conclusion is that taxol
competes with other drugs that shift the equilibrium

139

to unpolymerized tubulin and alternate polymer
forms. thus, to interpret results, the relative affinity
of these drugs, their relative concentrations, the total
protein concentration, and the stability of alternate
polymer forms are all involved in the competing
equilibria and must be considered.
taxol-stabilized microtubules are relatively insensitive to cold temperatures or ca 2÷ in the presence of
maps. however, collins and vallee (1987) found
that a combination of ca 2÷ or elevated ionic strength
and low temperatures will depolymerize taxolstabilized microtubules. in the absence of maps, cold
temperatures alone will slowly depolymerize taxolstabilized microtubules (hamel et al., 1981). these
results are tubulin concentration dependent. thus,
the free energy of microtubule stabilization by taxol
and maps can be overcome by the free energy lost
by the destabilizing effects of ca 2÷ and cold temperatures. howard and timasheff (1988) have quantified
the effects of taxol in terms of linkage free energy. in
a phosphate, mg2+-dependent buffer system, taxol
enhanced subunit addition to a growing microtubule
end by at least - 3 . 0 kcal/mol. taxol also enhances
the addition of colchicine-tubulin complex to the
alternate, sheet-like polymers it forms by
- 0 . 5 kcal/mol. this is much less enhancement than
for microtubule formation, and consistent with this,
taxol-stabilized colchicine~tubulin polymers depolymerize in the cold. analysis by wyman linkage theory
(wyman, 1964) gives 0.55 mol of taxol bound per mol
of tubulin assembled, consistent with stoichiometric
binding when corrected for unpolymerized tubulin
and bound taxol, but possibly consistent with a
bridging or cross-linking mechanism of taxol binding
(ie. one mole of drug linking two dimers of tubulin).
previous experiments with [3h]taxol suggested a stoichiometry of 0.6 with mtp and 0.78 with pc-tubulin
(parness and horwitz, 1981). in addition, taxolinduced assembly of tubulin does not require gtp,
even in the cold, while taxol-induced colchicinetubulin assembly requires gtp and elevated temperatures. this is buffer dependent. thus, the free energy
gained from gtp binding is required for the taxol
enhanced colchicine-tubulin complex to assemble,
while taxol alone can enhance tubulin assembly.
to suppress subunit and nucleotide exchange at the
ends of taxol-stabilized microtubules, inferred by
steady state gtp hydrolysis, much higher taxol concentrations were required than the amount needed
to completely polymerize the tubulin (carlier and
pantaloni, 1983). the data is consistent with a class
of low affinity sites, perhaps at the ends of microtubules, or additional low affinity sites along the
microtubule lattice. a model was suggested that
makes the outer layer of gtp-tubulin subunits different in their affinity for taxol, possibly because they
lack the extra subunit contacts that completely form
the high affinity taxol binding site. as with the
previous cases involving drug affects on the ends of
microtubules, the interpretation of the data rests

j. j. correia

140

upon the framework of the model chosen, and thus
strongly reinforces the idea that without a clear
picture of the molecular events at the ends of microtubules, the effects of drugs on microtubule dynamics
will continue to be problematic.

5. the third nucleotide (atp)
binding site
there has been some suggestion of a third nucleotide binding site on tubulin that prefers atp and
modulates microtubule assembly synergistically with
gtp, including the formation of double walled rings
(zabrecky and cole, 1980, 1982a,b; o'brien and
erickson, 1989). these effects are reminiscent of drug
affects on tubulin and one could speculate that this
third nucleotide binding site and antimitotic binding
sites share common surfaces or regions of interaction.
however, other workers suggest that atp is interacting weakly with the e-site (duanmu et al., 1986;
mejillano et al., 1990; seckler et al., 1990) and that
the problem with the previous work was not vacating
the e-site of endogenous gdp or gtp nucleotides,
by treatment with charcoal or alkaline phosphatase,
or by hydrophobic chromatography (hanssens et al.,
1990), prior to measuring atp binding. for example,
duanmu et al. (1986) have shown for atp-stimulated
microtubule formation a similar competitive inhibition by antimitotics and by gtp (gdp/atp < 1),
consistent with weak affinity for the e-site. atp is
hydrolyzed in their experiments, also consistent with
interaction at the catalytic e-site. the atp affinities
measured by all of these workers, when corrected for
contaminating nucleotides, are of the same magnitude, 3-7 × l04 m i, only the presumed site of binding
differs. buffer condition do vary in these studies.
seckler et al. (1990) report that, in the absence of
mg 2~ and glycerol, gmppcp binding to the e-site
is too weak to accurately measure (kd ~>400#m).
gdp and gtpmg bind at least 1000 fold tighter to
the e-site than does atp. it is the conclusion of this
reviewer that tubulin has only two nucleotide binding
sites, and antimitotic drugs interact allosterically
with the e-site (but see below). the importance of
these observations is that the nucleotide site can
modulate the form of polymer and the extent of
polymerization just as antimitotic drug binding to
distal sites can. this has been observed with the
nonhydrolyzable guanine nucleotides, gmppcp,
gmppnp, and gmpcpp (sandoval et al., 1977;
sandoval and weber, 1979, 1980a,b; hamel et al.,
1983; seckler et al., 1990). the same experimental
difficulties which are due to relatively weak binding,
have applied to studies using atp and these
gtp analogs. these observations are all consistent
with allosteric interactions between drug binding
sites and the e-site and their mutual modulation
of the extent of polymer formation and polymer
form.

6. n-site gtp
one of the two nucleotide binding sites on tubulin,
the n-site, is nonexchangeable, noncatalytic and
believed to only turn over upon protein degradation
in vitro (spiegelman et al, 1977) or protein denaturation in vitro (osei et al., 1990). tubulin possesses
two high affinity divalent cation binding sites
(kd = 1.o43.2 #m) and it has been suggested that one
site is at the n-site gtp and the other site is at the
e-site gtp (correia et al., 1988; osei et al., 1990).
gdp at the e-site is a low affinity metal site,
kdmg=0.5mm. mn 2+ will slowly exchange for
mg 2~ at the n site (correia et al., 1988), and it is
possible that other divalent and trivalent cations may
also exchange at this site. recent q-band epr and
electron spin echo envelope modulation spectroscopy
experiments are consistent with mn: ~ at both sites
being directly coordinated to the triphosphate of
gtp (correia et al., 1990). these results prove that
the divalent cation at both sites directly interacts with
gtp (monasterio, 1985). more recent epr studies
on the colchicine-gdp-tubulin complex and on
taxol-gdp-microtubules with mn 2+ bound to the
n-site show a dramatic change in the mn 2 ~ epr
spectra (j. j. correia and a. h. beth, in preparation).
these results are consistent with a tightening of the
tubulin structure, at least in the proximity of the
n-site divalent cation, by colchicine binding or by
taxol induced microtubule formation. these results
suggest a global, allosteric effect on tubulin structure
upon drug binding. the e-site with gdp bound
appears to be a low affinity metal site in the microtubule, just as it is in gdp-tubulin heterodimers
(correia et al., 1987). thus, the n-site divalent cation
is a spectroscopic probe of the influence of drug
binding on tubulin-microtubule structure function.
these results suggest caution in measuring distances from divalent cations by nmr (monasterio,
1985) or fluorescence (ward and timasheff, 1988)
techniques without verification of the location of the
metal, the n-site and/or the e-site. for example,
monasterio (1985) used gtp(tf), mn 2+ and 19e
and 3~p nmr to study the localization of a high
affinity divalent cation within the colchicine-tubulin
complex. his results suggested that at the e-site
the divalent cation is within 6 to 8 ~ of 31p at the
triphosphate. the use of a guanine nucleotide analog
insured that only e-site interactions are studied.
ward and timasheff (1988) measured the distance
from colchicine and ans to co 2+ at the e-site by
using energy transfer methods. they report that
the binding of co 2+ is reduced when tubulin is
complexed to colchicine, possibly consistent with the
absence of co 2÷ at the gdp filled e-site, and c o 2 +
now only bound to the n-site. they report greater
than 28/~ between co 2+ and the ans site and
greater than 24 a between co :+ and the colchicine
binding site. if the colchicine binding site is at the
~fl interface this may represent the distance to the
average of the two sites or the distance to the n-site

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
and not to the e-site. because the n-site is nonexchangeable for other nucleotide analogs, it should
not affect drug binding or alter polymer morphology,
but it is not known if different divalent cations at
the e- or n-site can modulate polymer forms.
mn 2÷ will stimulate microtubule assembly with a
similar critical concentration, when corrections
are made for a tighter affinity than mg 2÷ for
gtp and the e-site (correia et al., 1988). divalent
cations are known to bind to other sites and to alter
polymer morphology (serrano et al., 1986b, 1988).
the ca 2÷ sites in the carboxyl terminal region may
allosterically affect assembly (serrano et al., 1986b).
the zn: ÷ site(s) in the n-terminus region may be at
the interface(s) within the polymers (serrano et al.,
1988).

7. microtubule associated proteins
(maps)
research in the tubulin-microtubule field was hindered for many years by a plethora of buffer conditions, widely differing assumptions and a tendency
to treat all data, whether collected on pure tubulin
or microtubule protein (mtp), as equivalent. mtp
contains 70-80% tubulin and 20-30% associated
proteins with numerous enzymatic functions that
can alter the experimental conditions in subtle ways.
these include gtpase, atpase, nucleoside transferase, protein kinases, and molecular motors that
transport microtubules or vesicles along microtubules
in an energy dependent manner (vallee, 1986, 1991).
clearly maps are present in rico and the effects of
drugs must be interpreted in the context of their
effects on maps and tubulin-map interactions.
the major brain maps, map-l,  xxxg1360xxx  and tau,
are known to bind to the carboxyl-terminal region
of the ~ and /3 subunits (serrano et al., 1984b,
1986a; avila et al., 1987; maccioni et al., 1989;
joly et al., 1989; joly and purich, 1990). as this
region is known to influence and regulate polymer
morphology, map binding must influence and
modulate drug and nucleotide effects. below a few
examples of the interaction of maps with antimitotic
drugs and nucleotides in the tubulin system are
presented.
maps from pig brain do not affect the rate constant for the conformational change after colchicine
initially  xxxd1740xxx , but they do lower the
apparent affinity of the drug for tubulin (garland,
1978; nunez et al., 1979; lambeir and engelborghs,
1981). colchicine binding is slow, and thus the rate
of ring disassembly is fast enough to provide tubulin
heterodimers for interaction with colchicine. colchicine can bind to map-induced rings. billger et al.
(1991) have demonstrated that other maps may
impart variable effects on drug binding either through
shared binding sites or unique allosteric mechanisms.
colchicine sensitivity is map dependent for tubulin
jpt 52/2--b

141

isolated from the atlantic cod. in the presence of cod
maps, cod tubulin is resistant to depolymerization
by colchicine. in the presence of bovine maps, cod
tubulin is partially resistant to depolymerization by
colchicine. this is not due to an absence of colchicine
binding ability, because in the absence of maps,
cod tubulin is extremely sensitive to colchicine
inhibition of polymerization. this map-dependent
effect is reported to be a property of acetylated cod
tubulin.
donoso et al. (1979) demonstrated that maps
stimulated the formation of vincristine-induced spirals. in their absence microtubules were disassembled
and at 0°c amorphous aggregates were formed. as
mentioned previously, 10% dmso stabilized microtubules and hindered the formation of vincristineinduced spirals. luduena et al. (1981) observed a
similar vinblastine-induced aggregation enhancement
with tau and not  xxxg1360xxx . in the absence of tau, with
just tubulin and vinblastine, they saw no spiral
formation. these experiments were done  xxxd1891xxx  #m
tubulin, 10/~m vinblastine. as shown by na and
timasheff (1986a,b), higher tubulin and drug concentrations will promote spiral formation. the active
map fraction in the work of donoso et al. (1979)
may be due to tau and not  xxxg1360xxx , but concentration
effects are clearly important. in subsequent work
luduena et al. (1984) investigated map concentration effects and found that  xxxg1360xxx  enhanced
vinblastine-induced aggregation, but with less effectiveness than tau. they continued to limit the tubulin
concentration to 10 #m.  xxxg1360xxx  was very effective at
inhibiting the effect of tau. both tau and  xxxg1360xxx 
readily induce microtubule formation. under nonpolymerizing conditions both tau and  xxxg1360xxx  stimulate the formation of tubulin rings, a 20s species for
tau and a 30-39s species for  xxxg1360xxx . in the presence
of gmpcpp, tau and  xxxg1360xxx   xxxg1400xxx  induce different kinds
of polymers, microtubules or ribbons (sandoval and
weber, 1980b). these results suggest a difference
between the activity of tau and  xxxg1360xxx  in stimulating
vinblastine-induced spirals, although it may only
be due to a difference in affinities (sandoval and
vandekerckhove, 1981). it is now well known that
these maps share a tandem repeat sequence that
binds to a region of the carboxyl terminus of fl
tubulin (aizawa et al., 1988), although tau also
interacts with a region near the n-terminus of the ~t
chain (littauer et al., 1986). removal of the carboxyi
terminal region by subtlisin precludes binding of
 xxxg1360xxx  and tau but enhances vinblastine-induced
aggregation into spirals (serrano et al., 1986a). this
subtlisin digested tubulin assembles into microtubulelike structure more readily than undigested tubulin,
and in the presence of vinca alkaloids, assembles
more readily into spirals. chemical modification of
the carboxyl groups in the highly acidic region also
enhances polymerization and decreases interactions
with maps and other positively charged species
(mejiuano and himes, 1991). thus, the carboxyl

142

j.j. correia

terminal region regulates both lateral and longitudinal interactions between subunits in these polymers
(longitudinal bonds in spiral formation and lateral
and longitudinal bonds in microtubule formation).
vallee (1982) developed a taxol, salt procedure for
isolating m a p s from microtubules composed of pure
tubulin. this procedure was used to demonstrate that
different m a p s are enriched in different tissues of the
brain. thus, drug interaction with different tissues
may, for the same reasons, be modulated by different
m a p populations.
hamel et al. (1983) suggested that m a p s may
stimulate assembly by, in part, enhancing the affinity
of g t p analogs for tubulin. this would constitute an
additional linked free energy boost. the enhanced
affinity was inferred indirectly by an effect on polymerization. previous work by this group had demonstrated that m a p s stimulate taxol induced assembly
such that it does not require g t p or warm temperatures (hamel et al., 1981). in the absence of maps,
g t p and warm temperatures are required. alternatively, raising the glutamate concentration will promote taxol-microtubule formation. the effect of high
concentrations of glutamate has been thermodynamically investigated by arakawa and timasheff (1984).
as do other stimulators of assembly and stabilizers of
protein structure, glutamate preferentially hydrates
tubulin due to its unfavorable free energy of interaction with the surface of tubulin. stimulation of
polymerization is thus nonspecific, entropic and proportional to the surface area of tubulin. assembly
into microtubules decreases the surface area per g and
thus further reduces unfavorable interactions. there
is an important electrostatic component to this interaction, the negative charge on glutamate contributing
to its exclusion from the surface of tubulin. in the
absence of maps the predominant structures formed
with taxol are sheets. this is in contrast to the results
of schiff and horwitz (schiff and horwitz, 1981;
schidff et al., 1979), but the difference may be due to
different buffers. hamel et al. (1981) use 0.1 m to 1 m
glutamate buffers, while schiff and horwitz (schiff
and horwitz, 1981; schiff et al., 1979) used 0.1 m
mes buffer.
this final section is intended to stress the contribution m a p s can make in regulating or modifying
drug-nucleotide-tubulin interactions. similar free
energy arguments involving surface free energy, conformational changes, competitive or noncompetitive
binding, concentration effects, or alternate polymer
reactions apply to the role of these effectors in vivo
and in vitro. thus a critical evaluation of microtubule
protein interaction with antimitotic drugs must include the role or influence of m a p s and other tubulin
independent effects.
acknowledgements--i wish to thank drs sharon lobert,

susan wellman and brad chaires for critically reading the
manuscript. this work is supported by research grant
gm41117.

references
aamodt,e. j. and culotti,j. g. (1986) microtubules and
microtubule-associated proteins from the nematode
caenorhabditis elegans: periodic cross-links connect
microtubules in vitro. j. cell biol. 103: 23-31.
aizawa, h., kawasaki, h., murofushi, h., kotani, s.,
suzuki, k. and sakai, h. (1988) microtubulebinding domain of tau proteins. j. biol. chem. 263:
7703-7707.
amos,l. a, (1989) brain dynein crossbridges microtubules
into bundles. j. cell sci. 93: 19-28.
andreu, j. m. and timasheff,s. n. (1981) the ligand and
microtubule assembly-induced gtpase activity of
purified calf brain tubulin. archs biochem. biophys. 211:
151 157.
andreu, j. m. and timashefe,s. n. (1982a) interaction of
tubulin with single ring analogs of colchicine. biochemistry 21: 53,~543.
andreu, j. m. and timasheff, s. n. (1982b) conformational states of tubulin liganded to colchicine, tropolone methyl ether, and  xxxd2980xxx . biochemistry
21: 6465~476.
andreu,j. m. and timasheff,s. n. (1982c) tubulin bound
to colchicine forms polymers different from microtubules.
proc. nam. acad. sci. u.s.a. 79: 6753~756.
andreu,j. m. and timash~ff,s. n. (1982d) the interaction
of tropolone with  xxxd2531xxx  and tubulin. biochim.
biophys. acta 714: 373-377.
andreu, j. m. and timasheff,s. n. (1986) tubulin
colchicine interactions and polymerization of the complex. ann. n.y. acad. sci. 466: 676~89.
andreu, j. m., gorbunoff,m. j., lee,j. c. and timasheff,
s. n. (1984) interaction of tubulin with bifunctional
colchicine analogs: an equilibrium study. biochemistry 23:
1742 1752.
andreu, j. m., gorbunoff, m. j., medrano, f. j.,
rossi, m. and timasheef,s. n. (1991) mechanism of
colchicine binding to tubulin. tolerance ofsubstituents in
ring c' of biphenyl analogues. biochemistry 30:
3777-3786.
angelastro, j. m. and purich, d. l. (1990) apparently
irreversible gtp hydrolysis attends tubulin self-assembly.
eur. j. biochem. 191: 507-511.
appu rao, a. g., hare, d. l. and cann, j. r. (1978) a
circular dichroism study of the interaction of chlopromazine with mouse brain tubulin. biochemistr) 17:
4735-4739.
arakawa, t. and timasheff,s. n. (1984) the mechanism
of action of na glutamate, lysine hci, and piperazinen,n'-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) in the stabilization of
tubulin and microtubule formation. j. biol. chem. 259:
4979-4986.
avila, j., serrano, l. and maccion1,r. b. (1987) regulatory aspects of the colchicine interactions with tubulin.
molec. cell. biochem. 73:29 36.
bai, r., lin, c. m., nguyen,n. y., liu, t.-y. and hamel,
e. (1989) identification of the cysteine residue of fl-tubulin alkylated by the antimitotic agent 2,4-dichlorobenzyl
thiocyanate, facilitated by separation of the protein subunits of tubulin by hydrophobic column chromatography.
biochemistry 28: 5606-5612.
bai, r., pettit,g. r. and hat, l, e. (1990a)  xxxd1925xxx ,
a powerful cytostatic peptide derived from a marine
animal. biochem. pharmac. 39: 1941-1949.
bai, r., pettit, g. r. and hamel,e. (1990b) binding of
 xxxd1925xxx  to tubulin at a distinct site for peptide
antimitotic agents near the exchangeable nucleotide and
vinca alkaloid sites. j. biol. chem. 265:17141 17149.
bane, s., puett, d., macdonald, t. l. and williams,
r. c., jr (1984) binding to tubulin of the colchicine
analog 2-methoxy-5-(2',y,4'-trimethoxyphenyl) tropone.
j. biol. chem. 259: 7391-7398.

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
banerjee,a., barnes,l. d. and luduena,r. f. (1987) the
role of the b-ring of colchicine in the stability of the
colchicine-tubulin complex. biochim. biophys. acta 913:
138-144.
barton, j. s. and riazi, g. h. (1980) evidence for two
growth steps in microtubule polymerization. biochim.
biophys. acta 630: 392-401.
batra, j. k., kang, g. j., jurd, l. and hamel, e. (1988)
methylenedioxy-benzopyran analogs of  xxxd2980xxx ,
a new synthetic class of antimitotic agents that inhibit
tubulin polymerization. biochem.
pharmac.
37:
2595-2602.
bayley, p. m., clark, d. c. and martin, s. r. (1983)
conformational properties of microtubule protein: their
relation to the self-assembly process in vitro. biopolymers
22: 87-91.
bayley, p. m., schilstra,m. j. and martin, s. r. (1990)
microtubule dynamic instability: numerical simulations
of microtubule transition properties using a lateral cap
model. j. cell sci. 95: 33~48.
beese, l., stubbs,g. and cohen, c. (1987a) microtubule
structure at l0 a resolution. j. molec. biol. 194: 257-264.
beese, l., stubas, g., thomas, j. and cohen, c. (1987b)
structure of microtubules with reduced hydration.
j. molec. biol. 196: 575-580.
berkowitz, s. a. and wolff, j. (1981) intrinsic calcium
sensitivity of tubulin polymerization. j. biol. chem. 256:
11216-11223.
bhattacharyya,b., sackett,d. l. and wolff, j. (1985)
tubulin hybrid dimers and tubulin. j. biol. chem. 260:
10208-10216.
billger, m., stromberg, e. and wallin, m. (1991)
microtubule-associated protein-dependent colchicine
stability of acetylated cold-labile brain microtubules
from the atlantic cod, gadus morhua. j. cell biol. 113:
331 338.
bowman, l. c., houghton, j. a. and houghton, p. j.
(1986) gtp influences the binding of vincristine in human
tumor cytosols. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 135:
695-700.
bowman, l. c., houghton, j. a. and houghton, p. j.
(1990) influence of guanine nucleotides on vincristine
binding in tumor cytosis and purified tubulin: evidence for
an inhibitor of vincristine binding. j. cell. phys. 144:
376-382.
brandts, j. f. and  xxxd915xxx , l.-n. (1990) study of strong to
ultratight protein interactions using differential scanning
calorimetry. biochemistry 29: 6927-6940.
buttlaire, d. h., czuba, b. a., stevens,t. h., lee, y. c.
and h1m~s, r. h. (1980) manganeous ion binding to
tubulin. j. biol. chem. 255: 2164-2168.
cabral,f. r. (1983) the isolation of chinese hamster ovary
cell mutants requiring the continuous presence of taxol
for cell division. j. cell biol. 97: 22-29.
cabral, f., sobel,m. e. and gottesman,m. m. (1980)
cho mutants resistant to colchicine,  xxxd1831xxx  or  xxxd2235xxx  have an altered fl-tubulin. cell 20: 29-36.
campbell,e. j., mackinlay, s. a. and macrae, t. h.
(1989) cross-linking of microtubules by microtubuleassociated proteins (maps) from the brine shrimp,
artemia. j. cell sci. 93: 29-39.
caplow, m. and zeeberg, b. (1982) dynamic properties
of microtubules at steady state in the presence of taxol.
fur. j. biochem. 127: 319-324.
carlier, m.-f. (1991a) actin: protein structure and
filament dynamics. j. biol. chem. 266: 1-4.
carlier, m.-f. (1991b) nucleotide hydrolysis in cytoskeletal assembly. c. o. cell biol. 3: 12-17.
carlier, m.-f. and pantaloni,o. (1983) taxol effect on
tubulin polymerization and associated guanosine 5'triphosphate hydrolysis. biochemistry 22: 4814-4822.
carlier,m.-f., hill,t. l. and crmn, y. d. (1984) interference of gtp hydrolysis in the mechanism of micro-

143

tubule assembly: an experimental study. proc. natn. acad.
sci. u.s.a. 81: 771-775.

carlmr,m.-f., d1dry,d., simon,c. and pantalon1,d.
(1989) mechanism of gtp hydrolysis in tubulin polymerization-characterization of the kinetic intermediate microtubule-gtp-p~ using phosphate analogs. biochemistry
211: 1783-1791,
chatjdo~ille, m. m., i~vrot, v., bragtmg, d. and
cravat, a. (1987) interaction of some estrogenic drugs
with tubulin. formation of twisted ribbon structures.
molec. pharmac. 32: 731-736.
chaudoreille, m. m., peyrot, v., braguer, d.,
codaccioni, f. and crevat,a. (1991) qualitative study
of the interaction mechanism of estrogenic drugs with
tubulin. biochem. pharmac. 41: 685-693.
choudhury, g. g., bhattacharyva,b. and bxswas,b. b.
(1987) kinetic and thermodynamic analysis of taxolinduced polymerization of purified tubulin. biochem. cell
biol. 65: 558-564.
cleveland, d. w. and sullivan,k. f. (1985) molecular
biology and genetics of tubulin. ann. rev. bioehem. 54:
331-365.
codaccioni, f., dell'amico, m., bourdeaux, m.,
briand, c. and lux, b. (1988) influence of the guanine
phosphorylation state and of mg 2+ ions on the interaction of vinzolidine/tubulin 6 s: a fluorescence quenching study. archs biochem. biophys. 267: 236-244.
collins, c. (1991) reversible assembly purification of taxoltreated microtubules. methods in enzymol. 196: 246-253.
collins, c. and vallee,r. b. (1987) temperature-dependent reversible assembly of taxol-treated microtubules.
j. cell biol. 105: 2847-2854.
comreau,c. and carlmr,m.-f. (1989) characterization of
the aluminum and beryllium fluoride species bound to
f-actin and microtubules at the site of the ~,-phosphate of
the nucleotide. j. biol. chem. 264: 19017-19021.
correia, j. j. and williams,r. c., jr (1983) mechanisms
of assembly and disassembly of microtubules. a. rev.
biophys. bioeng. 12: 211-235.
corrrla, j. j., baty, l. t. and williams, r. c., jr
(1987) mg 2+ dependence of guanine nucleotide binding to
tubulin. j. biol. chem. 262: 17178-17284.
correia, j. j., beth, a. h. and williams,r. c., jr (1988)
tubulin exchanges divalent cations at both guanine
nucleotide-binding sites. j. biol. chem. 263: 10681-10686.
corp,£1a,j. j., beth,a. h., bernardo,m. and thomann,h.
(1990) q-band epr and electron spin echo studies on the
interaction of mn 2+ with the e-site and the n-site of
• fl-tubulin. biophys. j. 59: 59a.
cortese, f., bhattacharyya, b. and wolff, j. (1977)
 xxxd2980xxx  as a probe for the colchicine binding site
of tubulin. 3. biol. chem. 252:1134-1140.
dabrowiak, j. c. (1980) metal binding to antitumor antibiotics. in: metal ions in biological systems, vol. ll,
pp. 305-337, sigel,h. (ed.) marcel dekker, new york.
dav1d-pfeuty, t., simon, c. and pantaloni, d. (1979)
effect of antimitotic drugs on tubulin gtpase activity
and self-assembly. j. biol. chem. 254: 11696-11702.
deinum, j. and lincoln,p. (1986) binding to tubulin of an
allocolchicine spin probe: interaction with the essential
sh groups and other active sites. biochim. biophys. acta
870: 226-233.
deinum, j., wallin,m. and lagercrantz, c. (1981)
spatial separation of the two essential thiol groups and
the binding site of the exchangeable gtp in brain tubulin.
a spin label study. biochim. biophys. acta 671: 1-8.
detrich, h. w., ii1, williams,r. c., jr, macdonald,
t. l., wilson, l. and pueyr, d. (1981) changes in the
circular dichroic spectrum of colchicine associated with its
binding to tubulin. biochemistry 21: 5999-6005.
detrich, h. w., iii, jordan, m. a., wilson, l. and
wmuams, r. c., jr (1985) mechanism of microtubule
assembly. changes in polymer structure and organization

144

j.j. corre1a

during assembly of sea urchin egg tubulin. j. biol. chem.
260: 94794490.
donoso, j. a., haskins,k. m. and hlrcms, r. h. (1979) effect
of microtubule-associated proteins on the interaction of
vincristine with microtubules and tubulin. cancer res. 39:
1604-1610.
duanmu, c., l1n, c. m. and hamel, e. (1986) tubulin
polymerization with atp is mediated through the
exchangeable gtp site. biochim. biophys. acta 881:
113-123.
dustin, p. (1984) microtubules (2nd edn) springer-verlag,
new york.
engelaorghs, y. (1981) a thermodynamic study of colchicine and  xxxd1831xxx  dimerization. j. biol. chem. 256:
327(~3278.
engelborghs, y. (1990) dynamic aspects of microtubule
assembly. in: microtubule proteins, pp. 1 35, avila, j.
(ed.) crc press, inc., boca raton.
engelborghs, y. and fitzgerald, t. j. (1987) a fluorescence stopped flow study of the competition and displacement kinetics of  xxxd2980xxx  and the colchicine
analog 2-methoxy-5-(2',3',4'-trimethoxyphenyl)tropone
on tubulin. j. biol. chem. 262: 5204-5209.
euteneuer, u. and mcintosh, j. r. (1981a) structural
polarity of kinetochore microtubules in ptk 1 cells. j. cell
biol. 89: 338-345.
euteneuer, u. and mcintosh, j. r. (1981b) polarity of
some motility-related microtubules. proc. num. acad. sci.
u.s.a. 78: 372-376.
farrell, k. w., jordan, m. a., miller, h. p. and wilson,
l. (1987) phase dynamics at microtubule ends: the
coexistence of microtubule length changes and treadmilling. j. cell biol. 104:1035 1046.
floyd, l. j., barnes, l. d. and williams, r. f. (1989)
photoaffinity labeling of tubulin with (2-nitro-4-azidophenyl)deacetylcolchicine: direct evidence for two colchicine binding sites. biochemistry 28: 8515-8525.
frieden, c. and nichol, l. "w. (eds) (1981 ) protein-pro tein
interactions, john wiley and sons, new york.
frigon, r. p. and timasheff, s. n. (1975a) magnesiuminduced self-association of calf-brain tubulin. i. stoichiometry. biochemistry 14: 4559-4566.
fr1gon, r. p. and timasheff, s. n. (1975b) magnesiuminduced self-association of calf-brain tubulin. ii. thermodynamics. biochemistry 14: 4567-4573.
gal, v., martin,s. and bayley,p. (1988) fast disassembly
of microtubules induced by mg 2+ or ca 2+. biochem.
biophys. res. commun. 155: 1464-1470.
garland,d. l. (1978) kinetics and mechanism ofcolchicine
binding to tubulin: evidence for ligand-induced conformational change. biochemistry 17: 4266-4272.
gorbsky, g. j. and borisy, g. g. (1989) microtubule
dynamics and the movement of the chromosome. prog.
clin. biol. res. 318: 159-169.
hamel, e. (1990) interaction of tubulin with small ligands.
in: microtubule proteins, pp. 89-191, av1la,j. (ed.) crc
press, inc., boca raton.
hamel,e., del campo,a. a., lowe,m. c. and lin, c. m.
0981) interactions of taxol, microtubule-associated proteins, and guanine nucleotides in tubulin polymerization.
j. biol. chem. 256: i1887-11894.
hamel, e., del campo,a. a., lustbader,j. and lin, c. m.
(1983) modulation of tubulin-nucleotide interactions
by microtubule associated proteins. biochemistry 22:
1271 1279.
hanssens,i., baert,j. and cauwelaert,f. v. (1990) effect
of guanine nucleotides on the hydrophobic interaction of
tubulin. biochemistry 29: 5160--5165.
hartley-asp,b., deinum,j. and wallin,j. (1985) diethylstilbestrol induces metaphase arrest and inhibits microtubule assembly. mutat. res. 143: 231-235.
hastie, s. b. (1989) spectroscopic features of allocolchicine
binding to tubulin. biochemistry 28: 7753-7760.

heusele,c. and carlier,m.-f. (1981) gtpase activity of
the tubulin-colchicine in relation with tubulin tubulin
interactions. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 103:
332-338.
heusele,c., bonne, d. and carlier,m.-f. (1987) is microtubule assembly a biphasic process? eur. j. biochem. 165:
613-620.
hill, t. (1983) phase-change kinetics for microtubules
with two free ends. proc. num. acad. sci. u.s.a. 82:
431-435.
hinman, n. d. and cann, j. r. (1976) reversible binding
of chlorpromazine to brain tubulin. molec. pharmac. 12:
769-777.
hor10, t. and hotani, h. (1986) visualization of the
dynamic instability of individual microtubules by darkfield microscopy. nature 321: 605-4507.
hotani, h. and horio, t. (1988) dynamics of microtubules visualized by dark-field microscopy--treadmilling
and dynamic instability. cell motil. cytoskel. 10: 229-236.
howard, w. d. and timasheff,s. n. (1986) gdp state of
tubulin: stabilization of double rings. biochemistry 25:
8292 8300.
howard, w. d. and timasheff, s. n. (1988) linkages
between the effects of taxol, colchicine, and gtp on
tubulin polymerization. j. biol. chem. 263: 1342-1346.
huang, a. b., lin, c. m. and hamel,e. (1985) maytansine
inhibits nucleotide binding at the exchangeable site of
tubulin. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 128: 1239-1246.
huitorel, p. and pantaloni,d. (1985) bundling of microtubules by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate defiydrogenase
and its modulation by atp. eur. j. biochem. 150: 265-269.
ikeda, y. and steiner, m. (1978) sulfhydryls of platelet
tubulin: their role in polymerization and colchicine binding. biochemistry 17: 3454-3459.
joly, j. c. and pumch, d. l. (1990) peptides corresponding
to the second repeated sequence in  xxxg1360xxx  inhibit binding
of microtubule-associated proteins to microtubules. biochemistry 29: 8916-8920.
joly, j. c., flynn, g. and purich, d. l. (1989) the
microtubule-binding fragment of microtubule-associated
protein-2: location of the protease-accessible site and
identification of an assembly-promoting peptide. j. cell
biol. 109: 2289-2294.
jordan, m. a. and wilson, l. (1990) kinetic analysis of
tubulin exchange at microtubule ends at low vinblastine
concentrations. biochemistry 29: 2730-2739.
keates,r. a. (1990) traces of brain microtubule-associated
proteins affect dynamic properties of microtubules. bidchem. cell. biol. 68: 1202-1209.
keates, r. a. b. and hallett, f. r. (1988) dynamic
instability of sheared microtubules observed by quasi-elastic light scattering. science 241: 1642-1645.
keates,r. a. b., sarangi,f. and ling, v. (1981) structural
and functional alterations in microtubule protein from
chinese hamster ovary cell mutants. proc. num. acad. sci.
u.s.a. 78: 5638-5642.
kirschner, m. and mitchison, t. (1986) beyond selfassembly: from microtubules to morphogenesis. cell 45:
329-342.
korn, e. d., carlier, m.-f. and pantaloni, d. (1987)
actin polymerization and atp hydrolysis. science 238:
638-644.
kristofeerson, d. and purich, d. l. (1981) time scale
of microtubule length redistribution. archs biochem.
biophys. 211: 222-226.
kristofferson, d., mitchison, z. and kirschner, m.
(1986) direct observation of steady state microtubule
dynamics. j. cell biol. 102: 1007-i019.
kumar, n. (i 98 i) taxol-induced polymerization of purified
tubulin. j. biol. chem. 256: 10435-10441.
kuriyama, r. and sakai,h. (1974) role of tubulin-sh
groups in polymerization to microtubules. j. biochem. 76:
651-654.

tubulin-nucleotide interactions
lacey, e. (1988) the role of the cytoskeletal protein,
tubulin, in the mode of action and mechanism of
drug resistance to bcnzimidazoles. int. j. paras. 18:
885-936.
lacey,e., edgar,j. a. and culvenor,c. j. (1987) interaction of phomopsin a and related compounds with
purified sheep brain tubulin. biochem. pharmac. 36:
2133-2138.
lambeir,a. and engelborghs,y. (1981) a fluorescence
stopped flow study of colchicine binding to tubulin.
j. biol. chem. 256: 3279-3282.
lee,j. c. and timasheff,s. n. (1977) in vitro reconstitution
of calf brain microtubules: effects of solution variable.
biochemistry 16: 1754-1764.
lee, j. c., harrison,d. and timasheff,s. n. (1975) interaction of vinblastine with calf brain microtubule protein.
j. biol. chem. 250: 9276-9282.
lin, c. m. and hamel,e. (1981) effects of inhibitors of
tubulin polymerization on gtp hydrolysis. j. biol. chem.
256: 9242-9245.
lin, c. m., singh, s. b., chu, p. s., dempcy, r. o.,
schmidt, j. m., pettit, g. r. and hamel, e. (1988)
interactions of tubulin with potent natural and synthetic
analogs of the antimitotic agent  xxxd1744xxx : a structure-activity study. molec. pharmac. 34: 200-208.
lin, c. m., ho, h. h., pettit,g. r. and hamel,e. (1989)
antimitotic natural products  xxxd1744xxx  a-4
and  xxxd1744xxx  a-2: studies on the mechanism of
their inhibition of the binding of colchicine to tubulin.
biochemistry 28: 6984-6991.
linck, r. w. (1989) perspective: microtubule structure
and function. in: cell movement, volume 2: kinesin,
dynein, and microtubule dynamics, pp. 13-21, warner,
f. d. and mcintosh,j. r. (eds) alan r. liss, inc., new
york.
littauer,u. z., giveon, d., thierauf,m., ginzburg,i.
and ponstingl,h. (1986) common and distinct tubulin
binding sites for microtubule-associated proteins. proc.
ham. acad. sci. u.s.a. 83: 7162-7166.
liu, s.-y., hwang, b. d., haruna,m., imakura,y., lee,
k.-h. and ct-mno,y.-c. (1989)  xxxd2980xxx  analogs:
effects on dna  xxxg2312xxx . tubulin polymerization, human tumor kb cells, and their  xxxd2068xxx -resistant
variants. molec. pharmac. 36: 78-82.
luduena, r. f. and roach, m. c. (1991) tubulin
sulfhydryl groups as probes and targets for antimitotic
and antimicrotubulc agents. pharmac. ther. 49: 133-152.
ludtrena, r. f., fellous,a., francon,j., nunez,j. and
mcmanus, l. (1981) effect of tau on the vinblastineinduced aggregation of tubulin. j. cell biol. 89: 680-683.
luduena,r. f., fellous,a., mcmanus,l., jordan,m. a.
and nl~ez, j. (1984) contrasting roles of tau and  xxxg1360xxx  in the vinblastine-induced
aggregation of brain tubulin. j. biol. chem. 259:
12890-12898.
luduena,r. f., anderson,w. h., prasad,v., jordan,m.
a., ferrigni,k. c., roach, m. c., horowitz,p. m,,
murphy, d. b. and fellous,a. (1986) interactions of
vinblastine and maytansine with tubulin. ann. n. y. acad.
sci. 466: 718-732.
luduena,r. f., prasad,v., roach,m. c. and lacey,e.
(1989) the interaction of phomopsin a with bovine brain
tubulin. archs biochem. biophys. 272: 32-38.
luduena,r. f., roach,m. c., prasad,v. and lacey,e.
(1990) effect of phomopsin a on the alkylation of
tubulin. biochem. pharmac. 39: 1603-1608.
lynch, s. r. and williams,r. c., jr. (1989) disassembly
of broken microtubules: size of the "gtp cap". biophys.
j. 55: 256a.
macc1oni,r. b., vera,j. c., dominguez,j. and avila,j.
(1989) a discrete repeated sequence defines a tubulin
binding domain on  xxxg1375xxx .
archs biochem. biophys. 275: 568-579.

145

mandelkow,e. and mandelkow,e.-m. (1989) tubulin,
microtubules, and oligomers: molecular structure and
implications for assembly. in cell movement, volume 2:
kinesin, dynein, and microtubule dynamics pp. 23-45,
warner,f. d. and mcintosh,j. r. (eds) alan r. liss,
inc., new york.
mandelkow,e.-m. and mandelkow,e. (1985) unstained
microtubules studied by cryo-electron microscopy: substructure, supertwist, and disassembly. j. molec. biol, 181:
123-135.
mandelkow,e.-m., schultheiss,r., rapp, r., muller,
m. and mandelkow,e. (1986) on the surface lattice of
microtubules: helix starts, protofilament number, seam,
and handedness. j. cell biol. 102: 1067-1073.
manfredi, j. j. and horwitz, s. b. (1984) taxol: an
antimitotic agent with a new mechanism of action. pharmac. ther. 25: 83-125.
matsusrcra,f. and havashi,m. (1976) polymorphism of
tubulin assembly. in vitro formation of sheets, twisted
ribbons and microtubule. biochim. biophys. acta, 453:
162-175.
medrano, f. j., andreu,j. m., ~orbunoff,m. j. and
timashf.ff,s. n. (1989) roles of colchicine rings b and
c in the binding process to tubulin. biochemistry 28:
5589-5599.
medrano, f. j., andreu,j. m., gorbunoff,m. j. and
timasheff,s. n. (1991) roles of ring c oxygens in the
binding of colchicine to tubulin. biochemistry 30:
3770-3777.
mejillano,m. r. and him~s,r. h. (1991) assembly properties of tubulin after carboxyl group modification, d. biol.
chem. 266: 6574/64.
mehllano,m. r., barton,j. s., nath, j. p. and himes,
r. h. (1990) analogues interact with the tubulin exchangeable site during assembly and upon binding. biochemistry 29: 1208-1216.
melki, r., carlier,m.-f., pantaloni,o. and timasheef,
s. n. (1989) cold depolymerization of microtubules to
double rings: geometric stabilization of assemblies. biochemistry 28: 9143-9152.
melki, r., carlier, m.-f. and pantaloni,d. (1990)
direct evidence for gtp and gdp-p~ intermediates in
microtubule assembly. biochemistry 29: 8921-8932.
mitchison,t. j. (1988) microtubule dynamics and kinetochore function in mitosis. a. rec. cell biol. 4: 527-549.
mitcmson, t. j. and kirschner,m. (1984a) microtubule
assembly nucleated by isolated centrosomes. nature 312:
232-237.
mitchison, t. j. and kirschner,m. (1984b) dynamic
instability of microtubule growth. nature 312: 237-242.
monasterio, o. (1985) 19f nuclear magnetic resonance
measurements of the distance between the e-site gtp and
the high affinity mg 2+ in tubulin. biochemistry 26:
6099-6106.
monasterio,o. and timasheff,s. n. (1985a) inhibition
of tubulin self-assembly and tubulin-colchicine gtpase
activity by guanosine 5'-(y-fluorotriphosphate). biochemistry 26: 6091-6199.
monasterio,o. and timasheff,s. n. (1985b) role of the
dianionic form of the gtp ~,-phosphate in the polymerization process of tubulin. archs biol. med. exp. 18:
325-329.
monod,j., changeux,j.-p. and jacob,f. (1963) allosteric
proteins and cellular control systems. j. molec. biol. 6:
306-329.
morgan, j. l. and spoo~r, b. s. (1983) immunological
detection of microtubule poison-induced conformational
changes in tubulin. j. biol. chem. 258: 13127-13133.
morris,n. r., la1,m. h. and oakley,c. e. (1979) identification of a gene for ~t-tubulin in aspergiuus nidulans. cell
16: 437-442.
muzaffar,a. and brossl,a. (1991) chemistry of colchicine. pharmac. ther. 49: 105-109.

146

j.j. corre1a

na, g. and timasheff,s. n. (i 977) physical-chemical study
of  xxxd1816xxx -tubulin interactions. archs biochem. bidphys. 182: 147-154.
na, g. and timasm~ff,s. n. (1980a) stoichiometry of the
vinblastine-induced self-association of calf brain tubulin.
biochemistry 19: 1347-1354.
na, g. and timasheff,s. n. (1980b) thermodynamic linkage between tubulin association and the binding of
vinblastine. biochemistry 19: 1347-1354.
na, g. and timasi-ieff,s. n. (1982) in vitro vinblastineinduced tubulin paracrystals. j. biol. chem. 257:
10387-10391.
na, g. and timash~ff, s. n. (1986a) interaction of
vinblastine with calf brain tubulin: multiple equilibria.
biochemistry 25: 6214-6222.
na, g. and timasheff, s. n. (1986b) interaction of vinblastine with calf brain tubulin: effects of  xxxd2531xxx .
biochemistry 25: 6222~228.
nasioulas, g., grammbitter, k., himes, r. h. and
ponstingl, h. (1990) interaction of a new photosensitive
derivative of vinblastine, napavin, with tubulin and
microtubules in vitro. eur. j. biochem. 192:69 74.
nichol, l. w. and winzor, d. j. (1972) migration o f
interacting systems. clarendon press, oxford.
nishida, e. and kobayasm,t. (1977) relationship between
tubulin sh groups and bound guanine nueleotides,
j. biochem. 81: 343-347.
nunez, j., fellous, a., francon, j. and lennon, a. m.
(1979) competitive inhibition of colchicine binding to
tubulin by microtubule-associated proteins. proc. natn.
acad. sci. u.s.a. 76: 86-91.
o'brien, e. t. and erickson,h. p. (1989) assembly of pure
tubulin in the absence of free gtp: effect of magnesium,
glycerol, atp, and the nonhydrolyzable gtp analogues.
biochemistry 28:1413 1422.
o'brien, e. t., salmon, e. d., walker, r. a. and
erickson, h. p. (1990) effects of magnesium on the
dynamic instability of individual microtubules. biochemistry 29: 6648~i656.
oosawa, f. and asakura,s. 0975) thermodynamics o f the
polymerization o f protein. academic press, new york.
osel a. a., everett, g. w. and himes, r. h. (1988) gtp
hydrolysis by tubulin occurs with water oxygen incorporation into inorganic phosphate. biochim. biophys. acta
955: 269-271.
osei, a. a., everett, g. w. and himes, r. h. (1990)
evidence that the tightly bound magnesium in tubulin is
associated with the n-site gtp. febs lett. 276: 85-87.
palanivelu, p. and luduena, r. f. (1982) interactions
of the z-tubulin-vinblastine complex with colchicine,
 xxxd2980xxx , and n,n'-ethylenebis(iodoacetamide).
j. biol. chem. 257: 6311-6315.
parnes5, j. and horwitz, s. b. (1981) taxol binds to
polymerized microtubules in vitro. j. cell biol. 91:
479-487.
perutz, m. (1990) mechanisms o f cooperativity and allosteric regulation in proteins. cambridge univ. press,
cambridge.
prakash, v. and timasheff, s. n. (1985) vincristineinduced self-association of calf brain tubulin. biochemistry 24: 5004-5010.
prakash, v. and timasheef, s. n. (1991) mechanism of
interaction of vinca alkaloids with tubulin: catharanthine
and vindoline. biochemistry 30: 873-880.
purich, d. l. and kristofeerson,d. (1984) microtubule
assembly: a review of progress, principles and perspectives. adv. protein chem. 36:133 212.
record,m. t., anderson,c. f. and lohman,t. m. (1978)
thermodynamic analysis of ion effects on the binding and
conformational equilibria of proteins and nucleic acids:
the roles of ion association or release, screening, and
ion effects on water activity. quart. rev. biophys. i1:
103-178.

roach, m. c. and luduena,r. f. (1984) different effects
of tubulin ligands on the intrachain cross-linking of
,srtubulin. j. biol. chem. 259:12063 12071.
rudolph, j. e., kimble, m., hoylt, h. d., subler, m. a.
and raff, e. c. (1987) three drosophila fl-tubulin
sequences: a developmentally regulated isoform f13,
the testes-specific f12 and an assembly-defective mutation
of the testes specific isoform, reveal both an ancient
divergence in metazoan isotypes and structural constraints of fl-tubulin function. molec. cell. biol. 7:
2231-2242.
safa, a. r., hamel, e. and felsted, r. l. (1987) photoaffinity labeling of tubulin subunits with a photoactive
analogue of vinblastine. biochemistry 26: 97-102.
sakak1bara, y., hasegawa, k., oda, t., saito, h.,
kodama, m., hirata, a., matsuhash1,m. and sato, y.
(1990) effects of synthetic estrogens, (r,r)-( + )-, (s,s)( - ) - , dl- and meso-hexestrol stereoisomers on microtubule assembly. biochem. pharmac. 39: 167-172.
sandoval, i. v. and vandekerckhove,j. s. (1981) a
comparative study of the in vitro polymerization of
tubulin in the presence of the microtubule-associated
proteins  xxxg1360xxx   xxxg1400xxx  and z. j. biol. chem. 258:8795 8800.
sandoval, i. v. and weber, k. (1979) polymerization of
tubulin in the presence of colchicine or  xxxd2980xxx .
formation of a ribbon structure induced by guanylyl-5'methylene diphosphate. j. molec. biol. 134:159 172.
sandoval, i. v. and weber, k. (1980a) guanosine 5'-(a,flmethylene) triphosphate enhances specifically microtubule nucleation and stops the treadmill of tubulin
protomers. j. biol. chem. 255: 6966-6974.
sandoval,i. v. and weber, k. (1980b) different tubulin
polymers are produced by microtubule-associated proteins  xxxg1400xxx  and z in the presence of guanosine 5'(a,fl-methylene) triphosphate. j. biol. chem. 255:
8952-8954.
sandoval, i. v., macdonald, e., jameson, j. l. and
cuatrecasas,p. (1977) role of nucleotides in tubulin
polymerization: effect of guanylyl 5'-methylene  xxxd2553xxx . proc. natn. acad. sci. u.s.a. 74: 4881~,885.
sato, y., mural, t., oda, t., saito,h., kodama,m. and
hirata, a. (1987) inhibition of microtubule polymerization by synthetic estrogens: formation of a ribbon
structure. j. biochem. 101: 1247-1252.
scheele, r. b., bergen, l. g. and borisy, g. g. (1982)
control of the structural fidelity of microtubules by
initiation sites. j. molec. biol. 154: 485-500.
schibler, m. j. and cabral, f. r. (1985) maytansine
mutants of chinese hamster ovary cells with an alteration
in alpha-tubulin. can. j. biochem. cell biol. 63:503-510.
schibler,m. j. and huang, b. (1991) the col] and col~s
fl-tubulin mutations in chlamydomonas reinhardtii confer
altered sensitivity to microtubule inhibitors and herbicides by enhancing microtubule stability. j. cell biol. 113:
605~ 14.
schief, p. b. and horwltz, s. b. (1980) taxol stabilizes
microtubules in mouse fibroblast cells. proc. natn. acad.
sci. u.s.a. 77: 1561-1565.
schiee, p. i. and horwitz, s. b. (1981) taxol assembles
tubulin in the absence of exogenous  xxxd2247xxx  or microtubule-associated proteins. biochemistry
20: 3247-3252.
schife, p. b., fant, j. and horwitz, s. b. (1979) promotion
of microtubule assembly in vitro by taxol. nature 277:
665467.
schilstra, m. j., martin, s. r. and bayley,p. m. (1989)
the effect of  xxxd2980xxx  on microtubule dynamics.
j. biol. chem. 264: 8827-8834.
schmitt, h. and atlas, d. (1976) specific affinity labeling
of tubulin with bromocolchicine. j. molec. biol. 102:
743-758.
schulze, e. and k1rschner,m. (1986) microtubule dynamics in interohase cells. j. cell biol. 102: 1020-1031.

tubulin-nucleotide interactions

seckler, r., wu, g.-m. and timasheff, s. n. (1990)
interactions of tubulin with guanylyl-(fl-7-methylene) xxxd2553xxx : formation and assembly of a stoichiometric complex. j. biol. chem. 265: 7655-7661.
serrano,l., avila,j. and maccion1,r. b. (1984a) limited
proteolysis of tubulin and the localization of the binding
sites for colchicine. j. biol. chem. 259:6607-6611.
serrano, l., avila, j, and maccioni, r, b. (1984b)
controlled proteolysis of tubulin by subtilisin: localization of the site for  xxxg1400xxx  interaction. biochemistry 23:
4675-4681.
serrano,l., de latorre, j., luduena,r. f. and av1la,j.
(1986a) the removal of the carboxyl-terminus of tubulin
favors its vinblastine-induced aggregation into spiral-like
structures. archs biochem. biophys. 249: 611-615.
serrano,l., valencia,a., caballero, r. and avila, j.
(1986b) localization of the high affinity calcium-binding
site on tubulin molecule. j. biol. chem. 261: 7076-7081.
serrano, l., dom1nguez,j. e. and avila,j. (1988) identification of zinc-binding sites of proteins: zinc binds to the
amino-terminal region of tubulin. anal. biochem. 172:
210-218.
singer, w. d., hersh, r. t. and himes,r. h. (1988) effect
of solution variables on the binding of vinblastine to
tubulin. biochem. pharmac. 37: 2691-2696.
singer,w. d., jordan, m. a., wilson, l. and himes, r. h.
(1989) binding of vinblastine to stabilized microtubules.
molec. pharmac. 36: 366-370.
sp1egelman, b. u., penningroth, s. m. and k1rschner,
m. w. (1977) turnover of tubulin and the n-site gtp in
chinese hamster ovary cells. cell 12: 587-600.
sternlicht, h. and ringel, i. (1979) colchicine inhibition
of microtubule assembly via copolymer formation. j. biol.
chem. 254: 10540-10550.
stewart, r. j,, farrell,k. w. and wilson,l. (1990) role
of gtp hydrolysis in microtubule polymerization: evidence for a coupled hydrolysis mechanism. biochemistry
29: 6489-6498.
sullivan,a. s., prasad,v., roach,m. c., takahashi,m.,
iwasaki, s. and luduena, r. f. (1990) interaction of
rhizoxin with bovine brain tubulin. cancer res. 50:
42774280.
sullivan, k. f. (1988) structure and utilization of tubulin
isotypes. a. rev. cell biol. 4: 687-716.
takahashi, m., iwasaki, s., kobayashi, h., okuda, s.,
mural, t. and sato, y. (1987) rhizoxin binding to
tubulin at the maytansine-binding site. biochim. biophys.
acta 926: 215-223.
takanari, h., yosida, t., morita, j., izutsu, k. and ito,
t. (1990) instability of pleomorphic tubulin paracrystals
artificially induced by vinca alkaloids in tissue-cultured
cells. biol. cell. 70: 83-90.
takoudju, m., wright, m., chenu, j., guerittevoegelein, f. and gu~nard, n . (1988) absence of 7acetyl taxol binding to unassembled brain tubulin. febs
lett. 227:96 98.
thompson, w. c., wilson, l. and purich, d. l. (1981)
taxol induces microtubule assembly at low temperatures.
cell motil. 1: 445-454.
tonsing, e. m., steyn, p. s., osborn, m. and weber, k.
(1984) phomopsin a, the causative agent of lupinosis,
interacts with microtubules/n vivo and in vitro, fur. j. cell
biol. 35: 156-164.

147

turner, p. f. and margol1s,r. l. (1984) taxol-induced
bundling of brain-derived microtubules. j. cell biol. 99:
940-946.
vallee, r. b. (1982) a taxol-dependent procedure for the
isolation of microtubules and microtubule-associated proteins. j. cell biol. 92: 435-442.
vallee,r. b, (1986) structural and contractile proteins.
part c. the contractile apparatus and the cytoskeleton.
in: methods in enzymology vol. 134, academic press,
inc., orlando.
vallee,r. b. (1991) molecular motors and the cytoskeleton. in: methods in enzymology vol 196, academic press,
inc., san diego, ca.
ward, l. d. and timasheff, s. n. (1988) energy-transfer
studies of the distance between the high-affinity metal
binding site and the colchicine and  xxxd1071xxx  binding sites on calf brain tubulin. biochemistry 27: 1508-1514.
wegner, a. (1976) head to tail polymerization of actin.
j. molec. biol. 108: 139-150.
wehland, j. and sandoval,i. v. (1983) cells injected with
guanosine 5'-(~t,fl-methylene) triphosphate, an ~,fl-nonhydrolyzable analog of gtp, show anomalous patterns
of tubulin polymerization affecting cell translocation,
intraceuular movement, and the organization of
golgi elements. proc. natn. acad. sci. u.s.a. 80:
1938-1941.
wlcn~, g., oberkanins,c. and himmler, a. (1991) molecular structure and function of microtubule-associated
proteins. int. rev. cytol. 124: 217-273.
williams, r. c., jr. and lee, j. c. (1982) preparation of
tubulin from brain. methods enzymol. 85: 376-385.
williams,r. c., jr and rone, l. a, (1988) end-to-end
joining of microtubules: kinetics in crowded solutions.
protoplasma 145: 200-203.
wilson, l. (1970) properties of colchicine binding protein
from chick embryo brain. interactions with vinca alkaloids and  xxxd2980xxx . biochemistry 9: 4999-5007.
wilson, l., jordan,m. a., morse,a. and margolis,r. l.
(1982) interaction of vinblastine with steady-state microtubules in vitro. j. molec. biol. 159: 125-149.
wilson, l., miller, h. p., farrell, k. w., snyder,k. b.,
thompson, w. c. and purich, d. l. (1985) taxol stabilization of microtubules in vitro: dynamics of tubulin
addition and loss at opposite microtubule ends. biochemistry 24: 5254-5262.
wolff,j., knipling,l., cahnmann,h. j. and palumbo,g.
(1991) direct photoaffinity labeling of tubulins with colchicine. proc. nam. aead. sci. u.s.a. 88: 2820-2824.
wyman,j. (1964) linked functions and reciprocal effects in
hemoglobin: a second look. adv. protein chem. 19:
223-286.
wyman, j. and gill, s. j. (1990) binding and linkage.
functional chemistry o f biological macromolecules. university science books, mill valley, ca.
zabrecky, j. r. and cole, r. d. (1980) atp-induced
aggregates of tubulin rings. j. biol. chem. 255:
11981-11985.
zabrecky, j. r. and cole, r. d, (1982a) binding of atp
to tubulin. nature 296: 775-776.
zabrecky,j. r. and cole, r. d. (1982b) effect of atp on
the kinetics of microtubule assembly. j. biol. chem. 257:
4633-4638.

