730

current cancer drug targets, 2007, 7, 730-742

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work? an overview
mary ann jordan* and kathy kamath
department of molecular, cellular, and developmental biology and neuroscience research institute, university of california santa
barbara, santa barbara, ca 93106, usa
abstract: the importance of microtubules in mitosis makes them a superb target for a group of highly successful, chemically diverse
anticancer drugs. knowledge of the mechanistic differences among the many drugs of this class is vital to understanding their tissue and
cell specificity, the development of resistance, the design of novel improved drugs, optimal scheduling of treatment, and potential
synergistic combinations. this overview covers microtubule assembly dynamics, the exquisite regulation of microtubule dynamics in
cells by endogenous regulators, the important role of microtubule dynamics in mitosis, the diversity and number of microtubule-targeted
drugs undergoing clinical development, the antimitotic mechanisms of microtubule-targeted drugs with emphasis on suppression of
microtubule dynamics by vinblastine and taxol, the role of drug uptake and retention in the efficacy of microtubule-targeted drugs, and
the anti-angiogenic and vascular-disrupting mechanisms of microtubule targeted drugs. in view of the success of this class of drugs, it has
been argued that microtubules represent the single best cancer target identified to date, and it seems likely that drugs in this class will
continue to remain an important chemotherapeutic class of drugs even as more selective chemotherapeutic approaches are developed.

keywords: microtubules, mitosis, cancer, drugs, tubulin, taxol, vinblastine, dynamic instability.
introduction
microtubules are filamentous polymers that form one of the
major components of the cytoskeleton. they are dynamic, everchanging structures that can create a multiplicity of cell shapes in
different tissues types and can dramatically and rapidly depolymerize
and rearrange in a single cell to form the mitotic spindle that aligns
and separates the chromosomes. they also provide roadways for the
transport of cellular cargo and are involved in intracellular signaling.
microtubules are composed of - and -tubulin heterodimers
arranged head-to-tail in protofilaments that are aligned in parallel to
form long, slender tubes (fig. 1). fig. (2) shows the typical radial
organization of microtubules in an interphase cell (a) and the bipolar
spindle that forms during mitosis (b-e). the amazing functional
diversity of microtubules is achieved through regulation of their
dynamics and organization by the binding of an array of proteins to
microtubule surfaces and ends, by incorporation of different tubulin
isotypes, and through post-translational modifications of tubulin.
the importance of microtubules in mitosis and cell division make
them a superb target for a group of chemically diverse anticancer
drugs that have become highly successful therapeutically, including,
for example, taxol and vinblastine, as well as many other drugs. table
1 is a list of microtubule-targeted drugs currently in clinical use or
under clinical development. in view of the success of this class of
drugs, it has been argued that microtubules represent the single best
cancer target identified to date, and it seems likely that drugs in this
class will continue to remain an important chemotherapeutic class of
drugs even as more selective chemotherapeutic approaches are
developed [1, 2].
the knowledge that this class of drugs targets microtubules and
blocks cell division at mitosis is fundamental to understanding their
use. however, in addition, a knowledge of the mechanistic
differences among the many drugs of this class is vital to
understanding their tissue and cell specificity, the development of
resistance, the design of novel improved drugs, optimal scheduling of
treatment, and potential synergistic combinations. thus, this
overview will cover the following: microtubule assembly dynamics,
the exquisite regulation of microtubule dynamics in cells, the
important role of microtubule dynamics in mitosis, the antimitotic
mechanisms of microtubule-targeted drugs with emphasis on
suppression of microtubule dynamics by vinca alkaloids and taxanes,
the role of drug uptake and retention in the efficacy of microtubule*address correspondence to this author at the department of molecular, cellular, and
developmental biology and neuroscience research institute, university of california
santa barbara, santa barbara, ca 93106, usa; tel: 805-893-5317; fax: 805-893-4724;
e-mail: jordan@lifesci.ucsb.edu

1568-0096/07 $50.00+.00

targeted drugs, and the anti-angiogenic and vascular-disrupting
mechanisms of microtubule targeted drugs.

fig. (1). microtubules are composed of tubulin heterodimers that arrange
head to tail into protofilaments. a microtubule contains 13 protofilaments that
form a cylinder 24 nm in diameter. the end with the -subunit exposed is
termed the plus end and the end with the -subunit exposed is termed the
minus end.

microtubule assembly dynamics
the biological functions of microtubules in cells are determined
and regulated in large part by their polymerization dynamics [58, 59].
the polymerization of microtubules occurs by a mechanism in which
relatively slow formation of a short microtubule ‘nucleus‘ is followed
by rapid elongation of the microtubule at its ends by the reversible,
noncovalent addition of tubulin dimers.
microtubules exhibit two kinds of interesting non-equilibrium
dynamic behaviors, “dynamic instability” and “treadmilling”, that are
important to their cellular function. in dynamic instability the
individual microtubule ends switch stochastically and independently
between phases of growth and shortening [60, 61]. the two ends of a
microtubule are not equivalent; one end, called the plus end, grows
and shortens more rapidly and more extensively than the other end
(the minus end). the changes in length with time at the ends of
microtubules due to dynamic instability are illustrated in fig. (3). the
© 2007 bentham science publishers ltd.

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?
table 1.

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

731

microtubule-targeted drugs, their binding sites on tubulin, and their stages of clinical development

binding domain

drugs

therapeutic uses

stage of clinical development

references

vinca domain

vinblastine ( xxxd3511xxx )

hodgkin’s disease, testicular germ cell
cancer

in clinical use, many combination
trials in progress

[3]

vincristine ( xxxd3512xxx )

leukemia, lymphomas

in clinical use, many combination
trials

[3]

vinorelbine (navelbine)

solid tumors, lymphomas, lung cancer

in clinical use, many clinical trials,
phases i-iii, single and combination

[4]

vinflunine

bladder, non-small cell lung cancer,
breast cancer

phase iii

[5, 6]

cryptophycin 52

platinum-resistant advanced ovarian
cancer

phase ii

[7]

phase ii

[8-10]

vascular targeting agents

phase i, ii

[11-14]

phase i

[15]

halichondrins ( xxxd2025xxx )
dolastatins (tzt-1027, tasidotin)
hemiasterlins (hti-286)

colchicine
domain

taxane site

other
microtubule
binding sites

maytansinoids
(conjugated to humanized monoclonal antibody)

colon, lung, pancreas

phase ii

[16-21]

colchicine

non-neoplastic diseases (gout, familial
mediterranean fever), also actinic
keratoses

appears to have failed most cancer
trials, presumably due to toxicity

[22]

combretastatins (ave8062. ca-1-p, ca-4-p
( xxxd1744xxx  a4 phosphate), n-acetylcolchicinolo-phosphate, npi-2358, zd6126

vascular -disrupting agents

phase i, ii

[12, 23, 24]

 xxxd28xxx 

multiple myeloma, glioblastoma
multiforme carcinoid, prostate, breast

phase i, ii

[25-27]

methoxybenzene-sulfonamide (abt-751, e7010)

solid tumors, vascular-disrupting agents

phase i, ii

[12, 28, 29]

diketopiperazine (npi-2358)

vascular-disrupting agent

phase i

[16, 30]

paclitaxel and analogs (taxol, tl00139, xrp9881,
 xxxd399xxx , bms844476, bms188797, tpi287)

ovarian, breast, lung tumors, kaposi’s
sarcoma; trials with numerous other
tumors

in clinical use and in combination
and single drug trials, phases i-iii

[16, 31-35]

docetaxel (taxotere)

prostate, brain, breast, and lung tumors

phases i-iii

[36, 37]

 xxxd2014xxx  ( xxxd2410xxx , epothilones b ( xxxd2854xxx ),
d, zk-epo,  xxxd2014xxx , kos-1584)

taxol-resistant tumors

phases i, ii, iii

[38-40]

discodermolide

synergistic with taxanes

phase i

[41-47]

 xxxd2041xxx 

prostate, often in combination

phases i, ii, iii, in combinations with
taxanes, epothilones, and vinca
alkaloids

[48-53]

 xxxd226xxx 
( xxxd226xxx )

vascular-disruptive agent

noscapine

leukemia, lymphoma

microtubules undergo relatively long periods of slow lengthening,
brief periods of rapid shortening, and periods of attenuated dynamics
or pause, when the microtubules neither grow nor shorten detectably.
dynamic instability can be characterized by four main parameters:
the rates of microtubule growth and shortening and the frequencies of
“catastrophe” and “rescue”. a “catastrophe” occurs when a
microtubule transitions from growth or pause to shortening and a
“rescue” occurs when a microtubule transitions from shortening to
growth or pause. pause is defined as a period when changes in
microtubule length are undetectable by light microscopy.
“dynamicity”, a very useful combination parameter, describes the
overall detectable rate of exchange of tubulin dimers with
microtubule ends.
the second dynamic behavior, called "treadmilling", consists of
net growth at one microtubule end and balanced net shortening at the
opposite end [62-67]. it results in an intrinsic flow of tubulin subunits
from the plus end of the microtubule to the minus end and is
particularly important in mitotic spindles [68].
the polymerization dynamics of microtubules are unusual. they
are created by the gain and loss of a short region (perhaps no larger

[54, 55]
phase i

[16, 56, 57]

than a single layer of tubulin subunits) of tubulin-gtp or tubulingdp-inorganic phosphate (pi) at the two microtubule ends, called a
gtp-cap (fig. (4)). when tubulin-bound gtp adds to the
microtubule ends, it is ultimately hydrolyzed to tubulin-gdp and pi.
after the pi dissociates from the microtubule, it leaves a microtubule
core consisting of tubulin with stoichiometrically-bound gdp. the
tubulin- gdp remains non-dissociable and non-exchangeable until
the tubulin subunit dissociates from the microtubule. a generally
accepted model is that tubulin-gtp polymerizes into protofilaments
in which the tubulin has a straight conformation. upon gtp
hydrolysis, the conformation becomes curved such that the tubulingdp locked into the microtubule core is in a strained conformation
[69]. when the gtp-cap or gdp-pi-cap is present, the end of the
microtubule is stabilized and the microtubule can grow [70, 71].
when the cap is lost, the strained unstable core of the microtubule is
exposed and the end shortens rapidly [72, 73]. at least two sets of
association and dissociation rate constants govern tubulin addition at
each microtubule end, a stabilized (capped) set, and an unstabilized
(uncapped) set. modification of the rate constants at either end by
drugs or regulatory proteins has dramatic effects on polymerization
dynamics [64] and thus on microtubule function.

732 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

the exquisite regulation of microtubule
dynamics in cells
cells have developed a myriad of mechanisms for regulating
microtubule dynamics. dynamics are regulated differentially both in
different regions of a cell (such as at the leading and trailing edges of
migrating cells [74]) and during different cell activities such as during
migration or during mitosis. among the mechanisms that can regulate
dynamics are tubulin isotype expression, post-translational
modification of tubulin, microtubule-associated proteins and
microtubule-interacting proteins. for example, there are at least 6 tubulin and 7 -tubulin human tubulin isotypes, which are expressed
to varying degrees in different cells and tissues. these tubulins can be
further modified post-translationally by polyglutamylation, polyglycylation, phosphorylation, acetylation, detyrosination/tyrosination,
and removal of the penultimate  xxxd2431xxx  residue on alphatubulins [75-77]. some of the many proteins that associate with
microtubules and their actions on microtubule dynamics are
summarized in table 2. microtubule-targeted drugs appear to mimic
the actions of these endogenous proteins. understanding that
microtubule-targeted drugs interact with microtubules in cooperation
with or in competition with the intracellular array of microtubule
regulatory proteins may be an important clue to understanding both
the different tissue and tumor specificities of different drugs as well
as the development of tumor resistance to microtubule-targeted drugs.
microtubule dynamics speed up dramatically
in mitosis
mitosis is the principal anti-cancer target of microtubule-targeted
drugs. the correct movements of the chromosomes and their proper
segregation to daughter cells require extremely rapid microtubule
dynamics, making mitosis exquisitely sensitive to microtubuletargeted drugs. mitosis is also a striking example of the tight regional
and temporal control of microtubule dynamics [97]. during mitosis
the cell’s duplicated chromosomes are separated into two identical
sets before cleavage of the cell into two daughter cells. at the onset of
mitosis, the interphase microtubule network disassembles and is
replaced by a new population of spindle microtubules that is manyfold more dynamic than the microtubules in the interphase
cytoskeleton.  xxxg1365xxx  (table 2), a microtubule-associated protein that
binds along the surface of microtubules and appears to stabilize and
slow their dynamics, becomes phosphorylated by cyclin b- xxxg407xxx 
kinase at the onset of mitosis, leading to a reduced association of
 xxxg1365xxx  with microtubules [98, 99], and likely contributing to
increased dynamics. the change in microtubule dynamics also
appears to be regulated by ran (table 2), a ras-like gtpase and its
chromatin-bound nucleotide-exchange factor, rcc1, that are released
from the nucleus upon nuclear envelope breakdown at the beginning
table 2.

jordan and kamath

of prometaphase. rcc1 may mediate a high local concentration of
ran-gtp in the region of the chromosomes, thus producing a state of
increased dynamic behavior of spindle microtubules with both an
increased catastrophe frequency and reduced rescue frequency [91].
the result is that a large number of very dynamic microtubules
accumulate in the region of the chromosomes and a bipolar spindle is
organized [100, 101].
during prometaphase (fig. 2b) microtubules emanating from
each of the two spindle poles make vast growing and shortening
excursions, essentially probing the cytoplasm until they "find" and
become attached to chromosomes at their kinetochores [102]. such
microtubules must be able to grow for long distances (typically 5-10
m), undergo catastrophe and shorten almost completely, then rescue
and re-grow again until they successfully become attached. after
kinetochore attachment to microtubules emanating from one spindle
pole, microtubules from the opposite pole must be sufficiently
dynamic to successfully attach to the sister kinetochore, thereby
setting up a bipolar spindle. by means of the synchronous growing
and shortening of the microtubules in bundles attached to the
respective sister kinetochores, the chromosomes gradually congress
to the metaphase plate (fig. 2c). many microtubule-targeted drugs act
at this stage to prevent formation of a complete bipolar spindle (see
below).
during metaphase (fig. 2c), the duplicated chromosomes that
have congressed to the spindle equatorial region are under high
tension. the tension is produced, at least in part, by dynamic
microtubules attached at their plus ends to the kinetochores, with their
minus ends extending toward the two spindle poles. the tension
arises from microtubule treadmilling (or flux) as well as from
dynamic instability of the kinetochore microtubules [103]. during
metaphase, tubulin is continuously added to microtubule plus ends (at
the kinetochores) and lost at the minus ends (at the poles) in balanced
fashion (i.e., the microtubules treadmill) [68, 104, 105]. if tension is
absent, cell cycle progress from metaphase to anaphase is blocked
[106-108]. microtubule growth and shortening also appear to play a
major role in tension production. the chromosome pairs oscillate
back and forth across the spindle midline as the microtubules attached
to sister kinetochores alternately grow and shorten. as a result, the
intercentromere distance periodically increases and decreases as the
tug-of-war occurs between microtubules attached to opposite spindle
poles [109, 110]. when microtubule-targeted drugs suppress
microtubule dynamics, thereby diminishing the tension, the
intercentromere distance shortens [111, 112]. as described below and
illustrated in figs. (8-10), we and others have utilized measurement
of the intercentromere distance to monitor the effects of microtubuletargeted drugs on microtubule dynamics during mitosis.

some of the many endogenous cellular proteins that regulate mt polymerization dynamics
regulatory protein

location on mt

mechanism

references

tau,  xxxg1400xxx ,  xxxg1365xxx 

surfaces

 dynamics,  growth-rate and rescue

[78, 79]

xmap215

surfaces

 growth rate and dynamicity

[80]

 xxxg1278xxx 

+ ends

 catastrophe

[81-84]
[85, 86]

eb1

+ ends

 catastrophe,  rescue

clasp 1

+ ends

 dynamicity

[87]

clip 170

+ ends

 catastrophe, rescue

[86, 88]

apc

+ ends

 catastrophe,  growth

[89]

nudf (lis 1 homolog)

ends

 catastrophe, rescue frequencies, and
shortening-rate

[90]

 catastrophe,  rescue

[91]

rangtp
 xxxg2220xxx 

- ends, + ends, surfaces

 catastrophe, sequester tubulin

[92, 93]

ninein

- ends

 nucleation, anchorage

[94, 95]

severs microtubules

[96]

katanin, spastin

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

733

dynamic microtubules are crucial to passage through the
mitotic checkpoint
the spindle checkpoint ensures accurate chromosome
segregation in mitosis and meiosis (reviewed in [113]). if microtubule
dynamics are perturbed during mitosis, resulting in unattached
chromosomes and /or insufficient spindle tension, the spindle
checkpoint blocks mitosis. thus, if chromosomes do not attain a
bipolar spindle attachment because microtubules are not sufficiently
dynamic to complete bipolar attachment or if there is insufficient
tension on kinetochores [106, 107, 114-116], the checkpoint blocks
the activity of the anaphase-promoting complex, a large ubiquitin
ligase required for chromosome segregation. upon checkpoint
activation, a checkpoint protein complex containing bubr1, bub3,
mad2 and cdc20 binds to the anaphase promoting complex, inhibits
its ubiquitin ligase activity, and thus prevents destruction of sister
chromatid cohesion and anaphase onset.
many cells eventually undergo apoptosis (programmed cell
death) if they are blocked in mitosis [117-119]. we have found that
suppression of microtubule dynamics by drugs such as taxol and
vinca alkaloids appears to be a common mechanism by which these
drugs block mitosis and kill tumor cells. fig. (2f) shows a human
endothelial cell after incubation with 10 nm taxol. some
chromosomes (arrow) are stuck at the spindle poles, unable to
congress to the metaphase plate. cancer cells are relatively sensitive
to these drugs as compared with many normal cells because many
cancer cells divide more frequently than normal cells and thus
frequently pass through a stage of vulnerability to mitotic poisons.
however, it is likely that other mechanisms, such as expression of
various checkpoint and apoptotic proteins and differential uptake and
retention of drugs, can also distinguish the differential responses of
tumor and normal cells to antimitotic drugs.
a
principal
antimitotic
mechanism
of
microtubule-targeted drugs is suppression
of microtubule dynamics
a very large number of chemically diverse substances originating
from natural sources bind to tubulin (table 1). they bind to different
sites on tubulin and on microtubules with varying affinities and
reversibility and affect microtubule dynamics in diverse ways. most
of these compounds are antimitotic agents and inhibit cell
proliferation by suppression of microtubule dynamics during the
particularly vulnerable mitotic stage of the cell cycle.

fig. (2). immunofluorescence microscopic images of microtubules in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (huvec) throughout the cell cycle. cells
were stained with antibodies to tubulin (red), to pericentrin (yellow-green), and
dapi (blue) for chromatin and chromosomes. (a) interphase. microtubules
(red) with their minus ends anchored at or near to the centrosome (yellowgreen) emanate radially with their plus ends extending toward the cell
periphery. bar =10 mum. b-e) the mitotic spindle throughout mitosis. (b) in
prometaphase the bipolar spindle is established. microtubules (red) emanate
from two spindle poles (yellow-green). the chromosomes (blue) have not yet
been captured by microtubules. (c) in metaphase the chromosomes become
attached to the kinetochore microtubules and are aligned at the metaphase
plate. chromosomes oscillate back and forth under tension exerted by
microtubule dynamics. once all the chromosomes have become aligned and
are under proper tension, the anaphase checkpoint is satisfied and anaphase
can begin. (d) during anaphase, the chromosomes are pulled apart by
microtubules as they depolymerize. (e) at telophase, the interpolar microtubules have elongated and chromosomes are near the poles; the cell has begun
to constrict to form two daughter cells. (f-g) mitotic cells in the presence of 10
nm taxol. in (f) the spindle is bipolar, however some chromosomes have failed
to congress (arrow). (g) shows a multipolar spindle. two spindle poles contain
centrioles, whereas the others do not. both unaligned chromosomes and
multipolar spindles are hallmark effects of taxol. bar (b-g) = 5 mum.

the microtubule-targeted antimitotic drugs are often classified
into two major groups, the microtubule-destabilizing agents and the
microtubule-stabilizing agents, according to their effects at high
concentrations on microtubule polymer mass. the so-called
“destabilizing” agents inhibit microtubule polymerization when
present at high concentrations. most of these agents bind in one of
two domains on tubulin, the “vinca” domain and the “colchicine”
domain (table 1). they include the vinca alkaloids (vinblastine,
vincristine, vinorelbine,  xxxd3513xxx , and vinflunine), cryptophycins,
halichondrins, hemiasterlins, dolastatins, maytansine conjugates,
 xxxd2041xxx ,  xxxd28xxx , colchicine, the anti-tussive
noscapine and analogs, phenylahistins (diketopiperazine), and
combretastatins. in addition, this group includes a very large number
of natural compounds that have not undergone clinical development
for cancer therapy, including rhizoxin, spongistatins,  xxxd2980xxx , steganacins, and curacins [120]; herbicides that inhibit
microtubule polymerization [121]; naturally-occurring food nutrients
such as the sulforaphane found in broccoli and cauliflower [122],
antifungal and antihelmintic agents [123]; and some psychoactive
drugs [124-126].
the “microtubule-stabilizing” agents enhance microtubule
polymerization at high drug concentrations and include taxol (taxol®,
the first identified in this class), docetaxel (taxotere®), the
epothilones,  xxxd2410xxx , discodermolide, the eleutherobins,

734 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

sarcodictyins, laulimalide, rhazinalam, and certain steroids and
polyisoprenyl benzophenones [127, 128]. it is likely that, throughout
evolution, plants and animals have “taken advantage” of the
importance of microtubules and their dynamics in cell function to
evolve a vast number compounds that mimic endogenous
microtubule regulators for protection from predation.

jordan and kamath
table 3.

summary of similarities and
mechanisms of antimitotic drugs

differences

between

drug

mitotic arrest at
low and high drug
concentrations

microtubule
dynamics

effect of high
concentrations on
microtubule
polymer mass

taxanes,
epothilones,
discodermolide

yes

suppressed

enhanced

vincas,
halichondrins,
dolastatins,
colchicine

yes

suppressed

depolymerized

as examples of the two major classes of microtubule-targeted
drugs, we will discuss in detail two drugs that are, by now, classical
microtubule inhibitors, vinblastine and taxol, and then we will
compare the effects of several microtubule-targeted drugs on
microtubule dynamic instability.
fig. (3). schematic diagram of dynamic instability. the dark portion of the
microtubule marks the same group of tubulin subunits as the microtubule
length changes over time. microtubules grow and shorten by random addition
and loss of tubulin subunits from their ends. changes in length at the plus ends
are greater than at the minus ends. the microtubules also undergo periods of
attenuated dynamics or pause during which the tubulin gain or loss is below
the resolution of the microscope.

vinca alkaloids
tubulin and microtubules are the main targets of the vinca
alkaloids [129]. the vinca alkaloids depolymerize microtubules and
destroy mitotic spindles at high concentrations (e.g., 10-100 nm in
hela cells[129]), thus leaving the dividing cancer cells blocked in
mitosis with condensed chromosomes. at low but clinically relevant
concentrations, vinblastine does not depolymerize the spindle
microtubules, yet it powerfully blocks mitosis (e.g., ic50: 0.8 nm in
hela cells[129]), and the cells die by apoptosis. studies from our
laboratory of low vinca alkaloid concentrations in living cancer cells
indicate that the mitotic block is due to suppression of microtubule
dynamics rather than to microtubule depolymerization [127, 130].
vinblastine  xxxd1740xxx  and also directly to microtubules. it
binds to the -subunit of tubulin dimers at a distinct region called the
vinca binding domain [131]. a variety of other novel
chemotherapeutic drugs also bind in the vinca domain (see table 1).
the binding of vinblastine to soluble tubulin is rapid and reversible
[132, 133]. importantly, the binding of vinblastine to tubulin induces
a conformational change in the tubulin that leads to tubulin selfassociation [134-136]. the ability of vinblastine to increase the
affinity of tubulin for itself very likely plays a key role in the ability
of the drug to stabilize microtubules kinetically.

fig. (4). polymerization dynamics and the gtp cap. tubulin-bound gtp is
hydrolyzed to tubulin-gdp and inorganic phosphate (pi) at the time that
tubulin adds to the microtubule ends or shortly thereafter. ultimately, the pi
dissociates from the microtubule, leaving a microtubule core consisting of
tubulin with stoichiometrically bound gdp. a microtubule end containing
tubulin bound gtp or gdp-pi is stable, or ‘capped’, against depolymerization.
hydrolysis of tubulin-bound gtp and the subsequent release of pi induce a
conformational change in the tubulin molecules that destabilizes the
microtubule polymer, resulting in catastrophe and shortening of the
microtubule (adapted from [2] nature reviews cancer).

the classification of drugs as either microtubule “stabilizers” or
“destabilizers” is simple and useful, but is somewhat misleading. as
discussed below, both classes of drugs, those that increase and those
that decrease microtubule polymerization at high concentrations, both
potently suppress microtubule dynamics  xxxd1891xxx -100-fold lower
concentrations. the sensitivity of microtubule dynamics to regulation
means that both kinds of microtubule-regulating drugs can kinetically
stabilize the microtubules without changing the microtubule polymer
mass. thus, as summarized in table 3, at a very basic mechanistic
level, these two classes of drugs act similarly to block mitosis.
however, at higher concentrations, there are clear differences in their
cellular effects on microtubule mass. importantly, the attainment and
maintenance of high drug concentrations that alter microtubule
polymer mass may not be necessary for their therapeutic efficacy.

as we found in vitro with purified microtubules, vinblastine
 xxxd1740xxx  at the extreme microtubule ends (fig. 5) with very
high affinity, but it binds with markedly reduced affinity to tubulin
buried in the tubulin lattice [137, 138]. remarkably, the binding of
one or two molecules of vinblastine per microtubule plus end is
sufficient to reduce both treadmilling and dynamic instability by ~
50%, without causing appreciable microtubule depolymerization.
the effects of drugs on microtubule dynamics can be quantitated
in vitro with microtubules assembled from purified tubulin (for
example, [139-141] or in living cells after making the cellular
microtubules fluorescent (for example, [8, 27, 42, 130, 142, 143]).
tubulin can be purified from pig or cow brains which are rich sources
of tubulin, but also is sometimes purified from human tumor cells or
from other plant or animal cells. fig. 6 shows a time-lapse sequence
of microtubules in mcf7 human breast cancer cells in the absence of
drug. three dynamic microtubules are shown at the arrows; two of
them grew and one shortened in length over the course of 16 s.
the dynamic instability of individual microtubules is represented
in “life history” plots of changes in microtubule length over time, and
these plots are used to quantitate the effects of drugs on microtubule
dynamic instability. as shown in fig. 7a, microtubules in the absence
of drugs undergo periods of slow growth and random transitions into
periods of rapid shortening. as shown in fig. 7c and table 4,
vinblastine strongly reduces the rate and extent of microtubule growth
and moderately suppresses the shortening parameters.

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

735

table 4, at the concentration that half-maximally blocked mitosis we
found that most parameters of microtubule dynamic instability were
suppressed. thus, as with vinblastine, taxol suppresses microtubule
dynamics in association with mitotic arrest with little or no effect on
microtubule polymer mass [111, 143, 145] in contrast with
vinblastine, which completely stabilizes microtubule dynamic
instability in a relatively small proportion of cellular microtubules at
the mitotic ic50, taxol completely suppresses dynamic instability in
nearly all cellular microtubules (>70%) at the mitotic ic50
(unpublished data, k. kamath, l. wilson, and m.a. jordan).

fig. (5). antimitotic drugs bind to microtubules at diverse sites. (a) a few
molecules of vinblastine bound to high-affinity sites at the microtubule plus
end suffice to suppress microtubule dynamics. (b) taxol (paclitaxel) binds
along the interior surface of the microtubule and stabilizes it along its length to
suppress dynamics (adapted from [2], nature reviews cancer).

fig. (6). how microtubule dynamic instability is measured in living cells. a
sequence of time-lapse images shows the dynamics of fluorescently labeled
microtubules in an interphase mcf7 human breast cancer cell. two
microtubules grow (arrows), and one shortens (arrowhead). in control cells, 70
to 90% of the microtubules are dynamic in the course of a two minute timelapse sequence. the changes in length over time can be graphed to create life
history plots (fig. 7) from which the parameters of dynamic instability can be
derived.

taxol
unlike vinblastine, taxol binds poorly to soluble tubulin itself, but
binds with high affinity directly to tubulin along the interior length of
the microtubule (fig. 5) [144]. binding of taxol stabilizes the
microtubule and increases microtubule polymerization presumably by
inducing a conformational change in the tubulin that in an unknown
manner increases its affinity for neighboring tubulin molecules [69].
there is one taxol-binding site on every molecule of tubulin in a
microtubule, and the ability of taxol to increase microtubule
polymerization is associated with nearly 1:1 stoichiometric binding of
taxol to tubulin in microtubules. thus, if a typical microtubule
consists of approximately 10,000 tubulin molecules (and considering
that there are 1690 tubulin dimers per micrometer of microtubule
length), then the ability of taxol to increase microtubule
polymerization requires the binding of ~ 5,000 taxol molecules/
microtubule. however, in contrast with the large numbers of taxol
molecules required to increase microtubule polymerization, we found
that the binding of a relatively small numbers of taxol molecules (2050) to microtubules powerfully stabilizes the dynamics of the
microtubules (fig. 7b) without increasing microtubule polymerization [141]. for example, only one taxol molecule bound per several
hundred tubulin molecules in a microtubule can reduce the rate or
extent of microtubule shortening by ~ 50% [141]. suppression of
microtubule dynamics by taxol leads to mitotic block in the absence
of significant microtubule bundling [143]. in hela cells, mitosis is
half-maximally blocked at 8 nm taxol whereas there is no increase in
the cellular microtubule polymer mass below 10 nm taxol, and the
mass is half-maximally increased at 80 nm taxol [145]. as shown in

fig. (7). life history plots of microtubule dynamic instability in control cells
(a) or at the ic50 for mitotic arrest for taxol (7.5 nm) (b) and vinblastine (1
nm) (c). each line represents the change in length of a single microtubule over
time. the microtubule growth and shortening rates are derived by linear
regression of the slopes of each line. note how taxol and vinblastine suppress
the amplitude of the curves indicating a suppression of rates and lengths.

the clinical success of the taxanes has led to a search for other
compounds that enhance microtubule polymerization, yielding a
number of promising compounds including the epothilones,
discodermolide, sarcodictyins, eleutherobin, and laulimalide. some of
these compounds compete with taxol for binding to microtubules and
are said to bind at or near the taxane site (epothilones,
discodermolide, eleutherobins, sarcodictyins) but others, such as
laulimalide and peloruside, appear to bind to unique site(s) on
microtubules [146, 147].
kinetic suppression of microtubule dynamics: a common
mechanism of microtubule-targeted drugs
as with vinblastine and taxol, all of the microtubule-targeted
drugs studied to date suppress microtubule dynamics in cells at
concentrations that inhibit proliferation and block mitosis [8, 27, 42,
56, 130, 142, 143, 148]. the effects of several of these drugs on
microtubule dynamic instability in living cells at concentrations that
half-maximally inhibit mitosis are shown in table 4. while all of the
drugs significantly suppress microtubule growth rates and lengths,
they can be divided into two groups based on their effects on the rates
and extents of microtubule shortening. the “stabilizers” (taxol,

736 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8
table 4.

jordan and kamath

suppression of mt dynamic instability parameters in live cells at the mitotic ic50

parameter

vinblas-tine
1 nm

vinflunine
15 nm

 xxxd2025xxx 
1 nm

2- xxxg1394xxx 
1.2 m

taxol
7.5 nm

epothi-lone b
3.5 nm

discoderm-olide
83 nm

shortening rate

- 13 %

ns

ns

ns

- 57 %

- 44 %

- 30 %

shortening length

- 28 %

ns

ns

ns

- 63 %

- 67 %

- 54 %

growth rate

- 26 %

- 20 %

- 27 %

- 26 %

- 41 %

- 44 %

- 30 %

growth length

- 57 %

- 36 %

- 50 %

- 57 %

- 42 %

- 59 %

- 34 %

catastrophe frequency
(time-based)

ns

ns

ns

- 41 %

ns

ns

- 42 %

rescue frequency
(time-based)

ns

ns

ns

-17 %

+ 12 %

+62 %

+ 88 %

dynamicity

- 48 %

- 15 %

-28 %

-43 %

- 54 %

- 62 %

- 62 %

data were obtained in mcf7 cells (vinblastine,  xxxd2025xxx , 2me, and  xxxd2854xxx , taxol) and a549 cells (discodermolide) and are from kamath, unpublished; [8, 27, 42, 142]. ns = not
significant.

 xxxd2854xxx  and discodermolide) suppress both microtubule growth
and shortening with similar potency, whereas the “destabilizers”
(vinblastine, vinflunine,  xxxd2025xxx  and  xxxd26xxx ) potently suppress
microtubule growth, but shortening is suppressed to a lesser extent or
not at all. thus, all microtubule targeted drugs share the ability to
suppress microtubule growth, resulting in a decrease in microtubule
dynamicity (overall tubulin exchange at the microtubule ends), and
suppression of growth alone appears to be sufficient to prevent
mitotic progression.
several of the drugs possess unique effects that distinguish them
from other drugs within their class. for example, the effects of drugs
on the frequency of catastrophe and rescue (table 4) and on the
percentage of time microtubules spend in an attenuated or paused
state (not shown) can not be predicted based on their classification as
“stabilizers” or “destabilizers”. as noted above with vinblastine and
taxol, the drugs also bind to different sites on tubulin and on
microtubules with varying affinities and reversibility. all of these
factors contribute to differences in tumor specificity and drug
resistance. understanding the precise effects of each drug may allow
for the design of more effective treatment strategies and provide
means to overcome drug resistance.

do microtubule-targeted drugs suppress mitotic spindle
microtubule dynamics?
most studies of the effects of drugs on microtubule dynamics
have used either purified microtubule systems or fluorescentlylabeled microtubules in living cells in interphase. the question of
how the drugs affect microtubules in the critical stage of mitosis has
been more difficult to tackle. thus, using time-lapse microscopy, we
traced the movements of fluorescently labeled centromeres, which lie
very close to the ends of mitotic spindle microtubules where they
attach to chromosome kinetochores (fig. 8), to examine this question.
during mitotic metaphase, sister centromeres periodically stretch
apart and relax back together, under tension from the attached
microtubules. at the concentrations of taxol or vinblastine that block

microtubule end-binders versus side-binders: effects on
dynamic instability
the mode in which each drug binds to the microtubule lattice
may also provide insight into the differential effects of drugs on
microtubule stability and dynamics. for example, taxol and
 xxxd2854xxx  bind to the same or an overlapping site located on the
interior surface of the microtubule (fig. 5). these drugs are thought
to slow or prevent microtubule shortening by altering the
conformation of tubulin in a way that stabilizes microtubules against
the protofilament peeling that precedes depolymerization [39, 149,
150]. as a consequence of the slower shortening rate and high overall
microtubule stability, less free tubulin would be available in the
nearby region for microtubule growth, resulting in a slower growth
rate. at the mitotic ic50, vinblastine (and likely other vinca
alkaloids) may bind primarily to high affinity sites at the
microtubules ends (fig. 5) [132, 149]. these few drug molecules may
sterically and/or by conformational changes in the tubulin “cap” the
microtubule and slow the addition of new tubulin dimers [149]
resulting in a slower growth rate. once a vinblastine molecule
dissociates from the microtubule end, the microtubule is free to
shorten at its normal rate until another drug molecule binds. the
differential effects of vinblastine and vinflunine on microtubule
shortening may also be explained by subtle differences in drug
binding. for example, although vinblastine and vinflunine bind to the
same site, the potent ability of vinblastine to induce a conformational
change in tubulin which increases tubulin self-association might
explain why vinblastine decreases the mean shortening rate and the
mean pause duration while vinflunine does not.

fig. (8). fluorescent centromeres mark the plus-ends of kinetochore
microtubules allowing measurement of microtubule dynamics during mitosis.
schematic of a pair of chromatids that have achieved bipolar attachment to the
spindle via a bundle of kinetochore microtubules emanating from both spindle
poles. microtubules exert pulling and pushing forces on the chromatid pairs
which create tension across the kinetochores that is a necessary step in
signaling to start anaphase. in living cells, a gfp-tagged centromere binding
protein labels the kinetochore. as the centromeres stretch apart and relax by
forces generated by the microtubules, analysis of the change in
intercentromere distance over time provides an indirect measurement of
spindle microtubule dynamics and tension.

mitosis, we found that these movements were inhibited. fig. (9)
shows a time-lapse sequence of the positions of fluorescent sister
centromeres in a mitotic cell as the centromeres move under the
influence of the attached microtubules (which are not visible because
they have not been made fluorescent). for example, for taxol, the

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

737

fig. (9). time-lapse images of centromere dynamics in a live mitotic u2os cell. images of pairs of gfp-centromeres were collected from a single plane by
confocal microscopy at 5-s intervals. arrowheads indicate the position of a pair of sister centromeres at 120-s intervals. the centromeres of a pair stretch apart and
relax back together under the influence of dynamic microtubules and motor proteins (from [112]).

fig. (10). centromere stretching and relaxation decreases in taxol (or vinblastine, not shown) (from [111] cancer research).

rates and durations of the stretching and relaxation phases were
reduced as shown in fig. (10) [111]. there was less pulling tension
on the kinetochores, and the frequency of transitions between pulling
and pushing (or stretching and relaxation) was also reduced. similar
results were observed for vinca alkaloids [112]. the suppression was
highly correlated with inhibition of the transition from metaphase to
anaphase, thus indicating that suppression of microtubule dynamics
in mitosis is directly related to mitotic arrest.
the presence of abnormal spindles with uncongressed
chromosomes (fig. 1f) is highly predictive of suppression of
microtubule dynamics in interphase cells and suppression of
centromere dynamics in mitotic cells. suppression of dynamics has at
least two downstream effects on the spindle: it prevents the mitotic
spindle from assembling normally, and it reduces the tension at the
kinetochores of the chromosomes. the downstream effects of
prolonged mitotic arrest are frequent multinucleated cells and/or
apoptosis. although it is not yet possible to image the dynamics of
spindle microtubules during chromosome capture, based on our
understanding of the effects of drugs on microtubule dynamics it is
easy to imagine a scenario in which suppression of microtubule
growth alone would prevent microtubules from reaching sufficient

lengths to capture chromosomes at the opposite pole. mono-oriented
chromosomes would thus remain trapped at the poles inhibiting
mitotic progression. in addition, the microtubule stabilizing drugs
often induce mitotic cells with multiple spindle poles [151] (fig. 1g).
the precise mechanism by which these drugs cause multipolar
spindles is still unclear. taxotere has been shown to induce
disassociation of centrosomal components [152] and it is conceivable
that individual centrosomal components may be able to nucleate
additional asters in the absence of bonafide centrioles.
the importance of drug uptake and retention
in the efficacy of microtubule targeted
drugs
in addition to the binding of microtubule-targeted drugs to tubulin
and microtubules and their effects on dynamic instability, the rate and
extent of drug accumulation into cells and the degree of long-term
cellular drug retention can play key roles in drug efficacy and in
determining optimal scheduling. table 5, column 2, shows the
intracellular drug concentration of several antimitotic drugs after
incubation of the cells with a given concentration of drug (column 1)
for approximately 20 h. all microtubule-targeted drugs that have

738 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8
table 5.

jordan and kamath

drug uptake and retention in cells

drug concentration in medium
(nm)

concentration in cells ( m)

fold concentration increase
in cells over that in medium

intracellular concentration after
washout (time after wash)

retention after
washout (%)

8.3 ± 2.1

830

4.0 m ± 0.7 (24 h)

48
38

taxol
* 10
100

72 ± 6

720

27 ±7 m
(24 h)

1000

241 ± 27

240

39 ± 10 m (24 h)

16

* 0.6

0.04 ± 0.02

63

2

0.15 ± 0.08

75

6.5 ± 0.8 nm (24 h)

4

10

0.40 ± 0.01

40

37 ± 10 nm (24 h)

9

100

3.10 ± 0.09

31

*1.8

0.03 ± 0.003

19

10

0.16 ± 0.01

16

100

1.8 ± 0.08

18

1.3

430

4.2

140

0.18 ± 0.01

25

2.8 m
(5 min)

23

vinblastine

vincristine

vinorelbine
*3
vinflunine
* 30
colchicine
7
100

2.3 ± 0.2

23

 xxxd28xxx 
* 1.2 m

12

10

data are from [27, 41, 129, 142, 145, 153-155] all cells were hela, except that mcf7 cells were used with  xxxd28xxx . *approximate ic50 for proliferation.

been studied to date accumulate to high levels in cells, often to levels
that are tens or hundreds of fold higher than in the medium, as is
illustrated in column three of table 5. for example, incubation of
cells in 10 nm taxol results in an intracellular concentrations of 830
nm. similarly, incubation with 0.6 nm vinblastine results in 63 nm
intracellularly. in addition, the levels of accumulation can vary with
the cell and tissue type, perhaps as a result of the relative binding
affinity of the drugs for the expressed tubulin isotypes, as a result of
intracellular reservoirs such as lipid vesicles for accumulation of
drug, and certainly as a result of varying expression of proteins, such
as pgp, that can pump some drugs out of the cells.
the retention of drug, i.e., intracellular drug concentration after
multiple washes and maintenance of the cells in drug-free medium,
was determined as an approximation of the retention of drug in
tumors and is shown in table 5, columns 4 and 5.
a drug like taxol, that accumulates to very high (m) levels in
cells and is retained at high levels (nearly 50% retention), appears to
maintain mitotic block for relatively long periods of time. this can be
compared with vinblastine which accumulates to lesser degrees (high
nm), and is relatively easily washed out of cells, as shown by the
observation that it is retained at levels that are less than 10% of the
maximal intracellular levels. at a further extreme, the optimal
schedule for administration of a drug like 2me appears to be several
times per day, which can be directly related to its extremely rapid
uptake and loss (< 5min) (table 5) [27].

anti-angiogenic
and
vascular-disrupting
mechanisms of microtubule-targeted drugs
the tumor vasculature is an attractive target for cancer therapy.
the vasculature is easily accessible to blood-borne therapeutic agents,
and tumor cells generally die rapidly unless they are supplied with
oxygen and nutrients via the blood. there are two approaches to
inhibiting vascular function. one is to inhibit the process of
angiogenesis, or formation of new blood vessels, and the second is to
shut down existing tumor vasculature using vascular-disrupting
agents [12, 23].
microtubule-targeted vascular-disrupting agents
since the late 1990’s, the combretastatins and nacetylcolchicinol-o-phosphate, compounds that resemble colchicine
and bind in the colchicine domain on tubulin, have undergone
extensive development as vascular-targeting agents. several of them
(ca-4-p, ca-1-p, zd6126, oxi4503, and ave8062a), as well as
auristatin pe (tzt-1027, a dolastatin derivative) which binds in the
vinca domain, and  xxxd226xxx  ( xxxd226xxx )[12] are in clinical trials
(table 1).
when vascular-disrupting agents such as  xxxd1744xxx -a-4
phosphate (ca-4-p; 0.1-1 mum) are added to cultures of endothelial
cells, the microtubules rapidly depolymerize, the cells become round
within minutes, they bleb and detach from the substrate, actin stress

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?

fibers form (presumably as a result of signaling from the
depolymerizing microtubule cytoskeleton), and the cells die with little
or no evidence of apoptosis [156, 157].
observation of the process of vascular shut-down through
subcutaneously- implanted windowed chambers in rats indicates that,
often within 5 min of drug administration, the blood flow to the
interior of solid tumors is dramatically and rapidly reduced. within 1
h, the red cell velocity may drop by >95% [158]. small blood vessels
disappear, blood flow slows, red blood cells aggregate in stacks or
“rouleaux”, hemorrhaging from peripheral tumor vessels occurs,
vascular permeability increases, and the interior tumor cells die by
necrosis (reviewed in [12, 23]).
importantly, the vascular-disrupting agents that are currently
under development appear to damage tumor vasculature without
significantly harming normal tissues and vasculature [159]. the
source of this specificity is not known but has been suggested to be
attributable to differences between the mature vasculature of normal
tissues and the immature, poorly developed vasculature of tumors
[12, 158]. there are suggestions that endothelial cells of immature
vasculature may have a less well-developed actin cytoskeleton that
may make the cells more susceptible to collapse [160]. inherently
sluggish or variable blood flow in tumor vasculature may make the
tumor vessels particularly susceptible to damaging agents. in
addition, endothelial cells appear to concentrate some microtubuletargeted drugs, such as taxol, 3-11-fold more than nonendothelial
cells [161]. differences in endothelial cell proliferation rate in
tumors, in tubulin posttranslational modifications, in microtubuleassociated proteins, and in numbers of peri-endothelial vascular
support cells such as pericytes in tumor vasculature may also
contribute to the specificity of vascular targeting agents [12, 158].
since the targeted endothelial cells are non-tumor cells, one would
predict that they might be less susceptible to the development of
resistance to these drugs than genetically-unstable tumor cells.

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

the mechanisms responsible for the selective sensitivity of
vascular endothelial cells to microtubule-targeted drugs are not
known. one possibility is that the preferential uptake or retention of
drugs by endothelial cells might be involved in this selectivity. it has
been reported that endothelial cells take up many-fold higher
concentrations of taxol than do primary fibroblasts (imr-90) or some
cancer cells (pc-3 and 786-0) [161]. in addition, recently pasquier et
al. [165] and pourroy et al. [166] suggested that an enigmatic
enhancement of microtubule dynamics by concentrations of taxol and
vinflunine lower than the concentrations required to inhibit
proliferation might be responsible for suppression of directed motility
and capillary-like tube formation by endothelial cells. the
requirement for dynamic microtubules [167] in directed migration of
cells may also play an important part in the ability of microtubuletargeted agents to inhibit angiogenesis. interestingly, taxotere was
dramatically more potent than taxol at inhibiting migration of human
microvascular endothelial cells in a wounding migration assay
(ic50’s of 2 x 10-12 m vs. 10-7 m, respectively). however, this
differential effect was not observed with rat fat pad endothelial cells,
suggesting that different endothelial cell sources have different
operative mechanisms [164]. pasquier et al. [168] have recently
reviewed the current state of our relatively underdeveloped
understanding of the mechanism of action of microtubule-targeting
agents in angiogenesis.
summary
microtubule-targeted drugs are a large, successful, and
chemically-diverse group of natural-product cancer therapeutic agents
that have important characteristics in common as well as important
differences. they all bind to tubulin either in its soluble form or in
microtubules, they generally suppress microtubule dynamic
instability at low concentrations that block mitosis and inhibit cell
proliferation, and they alter microtubule polymer mass at higher
concentrations. they differ from one another in their binding sites on
tubulin and microtubules, the affinity and reversibility of binding,
their specific effects on microtubule dynamic instability, their levels
of cellular uptake and retention, and their tissue and cell specificity.
understanding their basic mechanisms provides the knowledge
necessary to design novel drugs that may overcome resistance and
toxic side effects and provide improved antitumor efficacy.

many anti-proliferative microtubule-targeted agents, including
colchicine, vincristine, vinblastine, and vinflunine damage tumor
vasculature in animals [162]. the difference between these classical
anti-mitotic anti-proliferative microtubule-targeted agents and the
novel agents that are undergoing clinical testing as vasculardisrupting agents may be that the effects of novel vascular-disrupting
agents are rapidly reversible [23]. the efficacy of a microtubuletargeted agent as either an antiproliferative agent or as a vascular
targeting agent (or both) may reside in its pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic characteristics, the reversibility of its binding to
tubulin, and its lack of long-term retention in cells. those agents that
enter cells rapidly, that rapidly and reversibly bind to tubulin or
microtubules, that rapidly depolymerize microtubules, and that are
rapidly metabolized or excreted, may act best as anti-vascular agents.
those that are retained in cells and induce long-term mitotic block
may work best as antiproliferative agents that induce apoptotic cell
death.

[1]

anti-angiogenic agents

[2]

for some time, evidence has been accumulating that many
microtubule targeted drugs can not only target proliferation of
rapidly-dividing tumor cells with high potency, but their efficacy may
also involve inhibiting formation of new blood vessels in tumors.
formation of new blood vessels involves both proliferation and
migration of endothelial cells, and both of these processes appear to
be extraordinarily sensitive to microtubule-targeted drugs. for
example, doses of taxanes and epothilones as low as 100 pm can
induce a strong preferential inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation
as compared with effects on tumor cells [163]. these results suggest
that prolonged exposure times and frequent dosing of low
concentrations of microtubule-targeted drugs might be important for
enhancing their antiangiogenic actions. such therapies are termed
“metronomic” dosing or “high time” chemotherapy [163, 164].

739

acknowledgements
we thank professor leslie wilson for years of warm and
intelligent support and encouragement, rigorous science, and
stimulating discussions. this work was supported by nih ca 57291
(maj) and a fellowship from the cancer center of santa barbara (kk).
references

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

giannakakou, p.; sackett, d.; fojo, t. tubulin/microtubules: still a
promising target for new chemotherapeutic agents. j. natl. cancer inst.
2000, 92,182-183.
jordan, m. a.; wilson, l. microtubules as a target for anticancer drugs. nat.
rev. cancer 2004, 4, 253-265.
duflos, a.; kruczynski, a.; barret, j. -m. novel aspects of natural and
modified vinca alkaloids. curr. med. chem. anti-cancer agents 2002, 2, 5570.
mano, m. vinorelbine in the management of breast cancer: new
perspectives, revived role in the era of targeted therapy. cancer treat. rev.
2006, 32, 106-118.
bennouna, j.; campone, m.; delord, j.; pinel, m. vinflunine: a novel
antitubulin agent in solid malignancies. exp. opin. investig. drugs 2005, 14,
1259-1267.
hill, b. t. vinflunine, a second generation novel vinca alkaloid with a
distinctive pharmacological profile, now in clinical development and
prospects for future mitotic blockers. curr. pharm. des. 2001, 7(13), 11991212.
d'agostino, g.; del campo, j.; mellado, b.; izquierdo, m.; minarik, t.; cirri,
l.; marini, l.; perez-gracia, j. l; scambia, g. a multicenter phase ii study
of the cryptophycin analog ly355703 in patients with platinum-resistant
ovarian cancer. int. j. gynecol. cancer 2006, 16, 71-76.

740 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

jordan, m. a.; kamath, k.; manna, t.; okouneva, t.; miller, h.; davis, c.;
littlefield, b. a.; wilson, l. the primary antimitotic mechanism of action of
the synthetic halichondrin  xxxd2025xxx  is suppression of microtubule growth. mol.
cancer ther. 2005, 4, 1086-1095.
kuznetsov, g.; towle, m. j.; cheng, h. t. k.; tendyke, k.; liu, d.; kishi,
y.; yu, m.; littlefield, b. a. induction of morphological and biochemical
apoptosis following prolonged mitotic blockage by halichondrin b
macrocyclic ketone analog  xxxd2025xxx . cancer res. 2004, 64, 5760-5766.
towle, m. j.; salvato, k. a.; budrow, j.; wels, b. f.; kuznetsov, g.; aalfs,
k. k.; welsh, s.; zheng, w.; seletzky, b. m.; palme, m. h.; habgood, g. j.;
singer, l. a.; dipietro, l. v.; wang, y.; chen, j. j.; quincy, d. a.; davis,
a.; yoshimatsu, k.; kishi, y.; yu, m. j.; littlefield, b. a. in vitro and in vivo
anticancer activities of synthetic macrocyclic ketone analogs of halichondrin
b. cancer res. 2001, 61, 1013-1021.
shimoyama, t.; hamano, t.; natsume, t.; koizumi, f.; kiura, k; tanimoto,
m.; nishio, k. reference profiling of the genomic response induced by an
antimicrotubule agent, tzt-1027 (soblidotin), in vitro. pharmacogenomics
j. 2006, 6, 388-396.
tozer, g.; kanthou, c. b. c.; baguley, b. disrupting tumour blood vessels.
nat. rev. cancer 2005, 5, 423-435.
rasila, k.; verschraegen, c. tasidotin hcl (genzyme). curr. opin. investig.
drugs 2005, 6, 631-638.
cunningham, c.; appleman, l. j.; kirvan-visovatti, m.; ryan, d. p.; regan,
e.; vukelja, s.; bonate, p. l.; ruvuna, f.; fram, r. j.; jekunen, a.; weitman,
s.; hammond, l. a.; eder, j. p., jr. phase i and pharmacokinetic study of the
dolastatin-15 analogue tasidotin (ilx651) administered intravenously on
days 1, 3, and 5 every 3 weeks in patients with advanced solid tumors. clin.
cancer res. 2005, 11, 7825-7833.
rawat, d.; joshi, m.; joshi, p.; atheaya, h. marine peptides and related
compounds in clinical trial. anticancer agents med. chem. 2006, 6, 33-40.
http://clinicaltrials.gov. website for ongoing clinical trials. 2006.
widdison, w.; wilhelm, s. d.; cavanagh, e. e.; whiteman, k. r.; leece, b.
a.; kovtun, y.; goldmacher, v. s.; xie, h.; steeves, r. m.; lutz, r. j.;
zhao, r.; wang, l.; blattler, w. a; chari, r. v. semisynthetic maytansine
analogues for the targeted treatment of cancer. j. med. chem. 2006, 49, 43924408.
smith, s. technology evaluation:cantuzumab mertansine, immunogen. curr.
opin. mol. ther. 2004, 6, 666-674.
cassady, j.; chan, k.; floss, h.; leistner, e. recent developments in the
maytansinoid antitumor agents. chem. pharm. bull. 2004, 52, 1-26.
erickson, h.; park, p. u.; widdison, w. c.; kovtun, y. v.; garrett, l. m.;
hoffman, k.; lutz, r. j.; goldmacher, v. s.; blattler, w. a. antibodymaytansinoid conjugates are activated in targeted cancer cells by lysosomal
degradation and linker-dependent intracellular processing. cancer res. 2006,
66, 4426-4433.
kovtun, y.; audette, c. a.; ye, y.; xie, h.; ruberti, m. f.; phinney, s. j.;
leece, b. a.; chittenden, t.; blattler, w. a; goldmacher, v. s. antibodydrug conjugates designed to eradicate tumors with homogeneous and
heterogeneous expression of the target antigen. cancer res. 2006, 66, 32143221.
russo, g. actinic keratoses, basal cell carcinoma, and squamous cell
carcinoma: uncommon treatment. clin. dermatol. 2005, 23, 581-586.
tozer, g. m.; kanthou, c.; parkins, c. s.; hill, s. a. the biology of the
combretastatins as tumour vascular targeting agents. int. j. exp. pathol. 2002,
83(1), 21-38.
chaplin, d.; horsman, m.; siemann, d. current development status of smallmolecule vascular disrupting agents. curr. opin. investig. drugs 2006, 7,
522-528.
mabjeesh, n. j.; escuin, d.; lavallee, t. m.; pribluda, v. s.; swartz, g. m.;
johnson, m. s.; willard, m. t.; zhong, h.; simons, j. w.; giannakakou, p.
 xxxd28xxx  inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis by disrupting microtubules
and dysregulating hif. cancer cell 2003, 3, 63-75.
lakhani, n. j.; sarkar, m. a.; venitz, j.; figg, w. d.  xxxd28xxx , a
promising anticancer agent. pharmacotherapy 2003, 23, 165-172.
kamath, k.; okouneva, t.; larson, g.; panda, d.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. a.
 xxxd28xxx  suppresses microtubule dynamics and arrests mitosis
without depolymerizing microtubules. mol. cancer ther. 2006, 5, 22252233.
mohan, r.; banerjee, m.; ray, a.; manna, t.; wilson l; owa, t.;
bhattacharyya, b.; panda, d. antimitotic sulfonamides inhibit microtubule
assembly dynamics and cancer cell proliferation. biochemistry 2006, 45,
5440-5449.
yee, k.; hagey, a.; verstovsek, s.; cortes, j.; garcia-manero, g.; o'brien,
s.; faderl, s.; thomas, d.; wierda, w.; kornblau s.; ferrajoli, a.; albitar,
m.; mckeegan, e.; grimm, d.; mueller, t.; holley-shanks, r. r.; sahelijo,
l.; gordon, g.; kantarjian, h.; giles, f. phase 1 study of abt-751, a novel
microtubule inhibitor, in patients with refractory hematologic malignancies.
clin. cancer res. 2005, 11, 6615-6624.
nicholson, b.; lloyd, g. k.; miller, b. r.; palladino, m. a.; kiso, y.;
hayashi, y.; neuteboom, s. t. npi-2358 is a tubulin-depolymerizing agent:
in-vitro evidence for activity as a tumor vascular-disrupting agent. anticancer
drugs 2006, 17, 25-31.
diaz, j. f.; andreu, j. m. assembly of purified gdp-tubulin into
microtubules induced by taxol and taxotere: reversibility, ligand
stoichiometry, and competition. biochemistry 1993, 32, 2747-2755.

jordan and kamath
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]
[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

manfredi, j. j.; parness, j.; horwitz, s. b. taxol binds to cell microtubules. j.
cell biol. 1982, 94, 688-696.
parness, j.; horwitz, s. b. taxol binds to polymerized tubulin in vitro. j. cell
biol. 1981, 91, 479-487.
attard, g.; greystoke, a.; kaye, s; de bono, j. update on tubulin-binding
agents. pathol. biol. (paris) 2006, 54, 72-84.
advani, r.; fisher, g. a.; lum, b. l.; jambalos, c.; cho, c. d.; cohen, m.;
gollerkeri, a.; sikic, b. i. phase i and pharmacokinetic study of bms188797, a new taxane analog, administered on a weekly schedule in patients
with advanced malignancies. clin. cancer res. 2003, 9, 5187-5194.
dang, c.; hudis, c. adjuvant taxanes in the treatment of breast cancer: no
longer at the tip of the iceberg. clin. breast cancer 2006, 7, 51-58.
belani, c. p.; langer, c.; tax 326 study group. t.s. first-line
chemotherapy for nsclc: an overview of relevant trials. lung cancer 2002,
38, 13-19.
larkin, j.; kaye, s. epothilones in the treatment of cancer. exp. opin.
investig. drugs 2006, 15, 691-702.
bollag, d. m.; mcqueney, p. a.; zhu, j.; hensens, o.; koupal, l.; liesch, j.;
goetz, m.; lazarides, e.; woods, c. m. epothilones, a new class of
microtubule-stabilizing agents with a taxol-like mechanism of action. cancer
res. 1995, 55, 2325-2333.
wartmann, m.; altmann, k. h. the biology and medicinal chemistry of
epothilones. curr. med. chem. anti-cancer agents 2002, 2(1), 123-148.
honore, s.; kamath, k.; braguer, d.; horwitz, s.; wilson, l.; briand, c.;
jordan, m. a. synergistic suppression of microtubule dynamics by
discodermolide and paclitaxel in non-small cell lung carcinoma cells. cancer
res. 2004, 64, 4957-4964.
honore, s.; kamath, k.; braguer, d.; wilson, l.; briand, c.; jordan, m. a.
suppression of microtubule dynamics by discodermolide by a novel
mechanism is associated with mitotic arrest and inhibition of tumor cell
proliferation. mol. cancer ther. 2003, 2, 1303-1311.
hung, d. t.; chen, j.; schreiber, s. l. (+)-discodermolide binds to
microtubules in stoichiometric ratio to tubulin dimers, blocks taxol binding
and results in mitotic arrest. chem. biol. 1996, 3, 287-293.
kavallaris, m.; verrills, n. m.; hill, b. t. anticancer therapy with novel
tubulin-interacting drugs. drug resist. updat. 2001, 4(6), 392-401.
kowalski, r. j.; giannakakou, p.; gunasekera, s. p.; longley, r. e.; day, b.
w.; hamel, e. the microtubule-stabilizing agent discodermolide
competitively inhibits the binding of paclitaxel (taxol) to tubulin polymers,
enhances tubulin nucleation reactions more potently than paclitaxel, and
inhibits the growth of paclitaxel-resistant cells. mol. pharmacol. 1997, 52,
613-622.
ter haar, e.; kowalski, r.; hamel, e.; lin, c.; longley, r.; gunasekera, s.;
rosenkranz, h.; day, b. w. discodermolide, a cytotoxic marine agent that
stabilizes microtubules more potently than taxol. biochemistry 1996, 35, 243250.
huang, g. s.; lopez-barcons, l.; freeze, b. s.; smith, iii, a.; goldberg, g.
l.; horwitz, s.; mcdaid, h. potentiation of taxol efficacy by discodermolide
in ovarian carcinoma xenograft-bearing mice. clin. cancer res. 2006, 12,
298-304.
dahllof, b.; billstron, a.; cabral, f.; hartley-asp, b.  xxxd2041xxx 
depolymerizes microtubules by binding to tubulin. cancer res. 1993, 53,
4573-4581.
hudes, g.; haas, n.; yeslow, g.; gillon, t.; gunnarsson, p.; ellman, m.;
nordle, o.; eriksson, b.; miller, l.; cisar, l.; kopreski, m.; viaro, d.;
hartley-asp, b. phase i clinical and pharmacologic trial of intravenous
 xxxd2041xxx  phosphate. j. clin. oncol. 2002, 20, 1115-1127.
hudes, g. r.; nathan, f.; khater, c.; haas, n.; cornfield, m.; giantonio, b.;
greenberg, r.; gomella, l.; litwin, s.; ross, e.; roethke, s.; mcaleer, c.
phase ii trial of 96-hour paclitaxel plus oral  xxxd2041xxx  phosphate in
metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. j. clin. oncol. 1997, 15,
3156-3163.
kelly, w.; zhu, a.; scher, h.; curley, t.; fallon, m.; slovin, s.; schwartz,
l.; larson, s.; tong, w.; hartley-asp, b.; pellizzoni, c.; rocchetti, m. dose
escalation study of intravenous  xxxd2041xxx  phosphate in combination with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with advanced prostate cancer. clin.
cancer res. 2003, 9, 2098-2107.
panda, d.; miller, h.; islam, k.; wilson, l. stabilization of microtubule
dynamics by  xxxd2041xxx  by binding to a novel site in tubulin: a possible
mechanistic basis for its antitumor action. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 1997,
94, 10560-10564.
smaletz, o.; galsky, m.; scher, h.; delacruz, a.; slovin, s.; morris, m.;
solit, d.; davar, u.; schwartz, l.; kelly, w. pilot study of  xxxd2854xxx 
analog ( xxxd2410xxx ) and  xxxd2041xxx  phosphate in patients with
progressive metastatic prostate cancer following castration. ann. oncol.
2003, 14, 1518-1524.
ling, y.; jiang, j.; holland, j.; perez-soler, r.  xxxd226xxx  produces
polymerization of microtubules and mitotic arrest before apoptosis in human
tumor cell lines. mol. pharmacol. 2002, 62, 529-538.
carre, m.; carles, g.; andre, n.; douillard, s.; ciccolini, j.; briand, c.;
braguer, d. involvement of microtubule and mitochondria in the antogonism
of  xxxd226xxx  on paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. biochem. pharmacol.
2002, 63, 1831-1842.
landen, j. w.; lang, r.; mcmahon, s. j.; rudan, n. m.; yvon, a. -m.;
adams, a. w.; sorcinelli, m. d.; campbell, r.; bonaccorsie, p.; ansel, j. c.;
archer, d. r.; wadsworth, p.; armstrong, c. a.; joshi, h. c. noscapine

how do microtubule-targeted drugs work?

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]
[61]

[62]
[63]
[64]

[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]

[74]

[75]
[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]
[80]

[81]

[82]
[83]
[84]

[85]

[86]
[87]

[88]

[89]

alters microtubule dynamics in living cells and inhibits the progression of
melanoma. cancer res. 2002, 62, 4109-4114.
zhou, j.; gupta, k.; aggarwal, s.; aneja, r.; chandra, r.; panda, d.; joshi,
h. c. brominated derivatives of noscapine are potent microtubule-interfering
agents that perturb mitosis and inhibit cell proliferation. mol. pharmacol.
2003, 63(4), 799-807.
mcintosh, j. r. the role of microtubules in chromosome movement. in:
microtubules; hyams, j. s.; lloyd, c. w., eds.; wiley-liss, inc: new york,
1994, pp. 413-434.
wordeman, l.; mitchison, t. j. dynamics of microtubule assembly in vivo.
in: microtubules; hyams, j. s.; lloyd, c. w., eds.; wiley-liss, inc: new
york, 1994, pp. 287-302.
mitchison, t. j.; kirschner, m. dynamic instability of microtubule growth.
nature 1984, 312, 237-242.
kerssemakers, j. w. j.; munteanu, e. l.; laan, l.; noetzel, t. l.; janson, m.
e.; dogterom, m. assembly dynamics of microtubules at molecular
resolution. nature 2006, 442, 709-712.
margolis, r. l.; wilson, l. opposite end assembly and disassembly of
microtubules at steady state in vitro. cell 1978, 13, 1-8.
margolis, r. l.; wilson, l. microtubule treadmilling: what goes around
comes around. bioessays 1998, 20, 830-836.
panda, d.; miller, h. p.; wilson, l. rapid treadmilling of map-free brain
microtubules in vitro and its suppression by tau. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa
1999, 96, 12459-12464.
rodionov, v. i.; borisy, g. g. microtubule treadmilling in vivo. science
1997, 275, 215-218.
shaw, s. l.; kamyar, r.; ehrhardt, d. w. sustained microtubule treadmilling
in arabidopsis cortical arrays. science 2003, 300, 1715-1718.
ehrhardt, d.; shaw, s. microtubule dynamics and organization in the plant
cortical array. annu. rev. plant biol. 2006, 57, 859-975.
chen, w.; zhang, d. kinetochore fibre dynamics outside the context of the
spindle during anaphase. nat. cell biol. 2004, 6, 227-231.
nogales, e. structural insights into microtubule function. annu. rev. biophys.
biomol. struct. 2001, 30, 397-420.
lodish, h.; baltimore, d.; berk, a.; zipursky, s. l.; matsudaira, p.; darnell,
j. molecular cell biology; 4th edition, freeman, w. h., new york, 1999.
wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. microtubule dynamics: taking aim at a moving
target. chem. biol. 1995, 2, 569-573.
caplow, m.; fee, l. concerning the chemical nature of tubulin subunits that
cap and stabilize microtubules. biochemistry 2003, 42, 2122-2126.
panda, d.; miller, h.; wilson, l. determination of the size and chemical
nature of the stabilizing cap at microtubule ends using modulators of
polymerization dynamics. biochemistry 2002, 41, 1609-1617.
salaycik, k. j.; fagerstrom, c. j.; murthy, k.; tulu, u. s.; wadsworth, p.
quantification of microtubule nucleation, growth and dynamics in woundedge cells. j. cell sci. 2005, 118, 4113-4122.
luduena, r. f. multiple forms of tubulin: different gene products and
covalent modifications. int. rev. cytol. 1998, 178, 207-275.
mckean, p.; vaughan, s.; gull, k. the extended tubulin superfamily. j. cell
sci. 2001, 114, 2723-2733.
verdier-pinard, p.; wang, f.; burd, b.; angeletti, r.; horwitz, s.; orr, g.
direct analysis of tubulin expression in cancer cell lines by electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry. biochemistry 2003, 42, 12019-12027.
feinstein, s.; wilson, l. inability of tau to properly regulate neuronal
microtubule dynamics: a loss-of-function mechanism by which tau might
mediate neuronal cell death. biochim. biophys. acta 2005, 1739, 268-279.
itoh, t.; hotani, h. microtubule dynamics and the regulation by microtubuleassociated proteins (maps). biol. sci. space 2004, 18, 116-117.
noetzel, t.; drechsel, d. n.; hyman, a. a.; kinoshita, k. a comparison of
the ability of xmap215 and tau to inhibit the microtubule destabilizing
activity of xkcm1. philos. trans. r. soc. lond. b. biol. sci. 2005, 360, 591594.
maney, t.; wagenbach, m.; wordeman, l. molecular dissection of the
microtubule depolymerizing activity of mitotic centromere-associated
kinesin. j. biol. chem. 2001, 276(37), 34753-34758.
desai, a.; verma, s.; mitchison, t. j.; walczak, c. e. kin i kinesins are
microtubule-destabilizing enzymes. cell 1999, 96(1), 69-78.
walczak, c. e. ran hits the ground running. nat. cell. biol. 2001, 3, e69 e70.
walczak, c. e.; mitchison, t. j.; desai, a. xkcm1: a xenopus kinesinrelated protein that regulates microtubule dynamics during mitotic spindle
assembly. cell 1996, 84, 37-47.
tirnauer, j. s.; canman, j. c.; salmon, e. d.; mitchison, t. j. eb1 targets to
kinetochores with attached polymerizing microtubules. mol. biol. cell 2002,
13, 4308-4316.
akhmanova, a.; hoogenraad, c. c. microtubule plus-end-tracking proteins:
mechanisms and functions. curr. opin. cell. biol. 2005, 17, 47-54.
maiato, h.; fairley, e.; rieder, c.; swedlow, j.; sunkel, c.; earnshaw, w. c.
human clasp1 is an outer kinetochore component that regulates spindle
microtubule dynamics. cell 2003, 113, 891-904.
arnal, i.; heichette, c.; diamantopoulos, g.; chretien, d. clip-170/tubulincurved oligomers coassemble at microtubule ends and promote rescues. curr.
biol. 2004, 14, 2086-2095.
kita, k.; wittmann, t.; nathke, i. s.; waterman-storer, c. m. adenomatous
polyposis coli on microtubule plus ends in cell extensions can promote

current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]
[94]

[95]

[96]
[97]
[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]
[105]

[106]

[107]
[108]
[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]
[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

741

microtubule net growth with or without eb1. mol. biol. cell. 2006, 17, 23312345.
han, g.; liu, b.; zhang, j.; zuo, w.; morris, n. r.; xiang, x. the
aspergillus cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain and nudf localize to
microtubule ends and affect microtubule dynamics. curr. biol. 2001, 11, 719724.
carazo-salas, r.; gruss, o. j.; mattaj, i. w.; karsenti, e. ran-gtp
coordinates regulation of microtubule nucleation and dynamics during
mitotic-spindle assembly. nat. cell biol. 2001, 3, 228-234.
manna, t.; thrower, d.; miller, h. p.; curmi, p.; wilson, l.  xxxg2220xxx 
strongly increases the minus end catastrophe frequency and induces rapid
treadmilling of bovine brain microtubules at steady state in vitro. j. biol.
chem. 2006, 281, 2071-2078.
cassimeris, l. the  xxxg2220xxx / xxxg2220xxx  family of microtubule
destabilizers. curr. opin. cell biol. 2002, 14, 18-24.
abal, m.; piel, m.; bouckson-castaing, v.; mogensen, m.; sibarita, j. b.;
bornens, m. microtubule release from the centrosome in migrating cells. j.
cell biol. 2002, 159, 731-737.
delgehyr, n.; sillibourne, j.; bornens, m. microtubule nucleation and
anchoring at the centrosome are independent processes linked by ninein
function. j. cell sci. 2005, 118, 1565-1575.
baas, p.; karabay, a.; qiang, l. microtubules cut and run. trends cell biol.
2005, 15, 518-524.
mcintosh, j.; grishchuk, e. l.; west, r. r. chromosome-microtubule
interactions during mitosis. annu. rev. cell dev. biol. 2002, 18, 193-219.
chang, w.; gruber, d.; chari, s.; kitazawa, h.; hamazumi, y.; hisanaga, s.;
bulinski, j. c. phosphorylation of  xxxg1365xxx  affects microtubule properties and
cell cycle progression. j. cell sci. 2001, 114(pt 15), 2879-2887.
ookata, k.; hisanaga, s.; bulinski, j. c.; murofushi, h.; aizawa, h.; itoh, t.
j.; hotani, h.; okumura, e.; tachibana, k.; kishimoto, t. cyclin b
interaction with  xxxg1365xxx  ( xxxg1365xxx ) targets  xxxg407xxx 
kinase to microtubules and is a potential regulator of m-phase microtubule
dynamics. j. cell. biol. 1995, 128, 849-862.
wilde, a.; lizarraga, s. b.; zhang, l.; wiese, c.; gliksman, n. r.; walczak,
c. e.; zheng, y. ran stimulates spindle assembly by altering microtubule
dynamics and the balance of motor activities. nat. cell biol. 2001, 3, 221227.
rusan, n. m.; fagerstrom, c. j.; yvon, a. -m. c.; wadsworth, p. cell cycledependent changes in microtubule dynamics in living cells expressing green
fluorescent protein- xxxg2347xxx . mol. biol. cell 2001, 12, 971-980.
hayden, j. j.; bowser, s. s.; rieder, c. kinetochores capture astral
microtubules during chromosome attachment to the mitotic spindle: direct
visualization in live newt cells. j. cell biol. 1990, 111, 1039-1045.
maddox, p.; desai, a.; oegema, k.; mitchison, t.; salmon, e. poleward
microtubule flux is a major component of spindle dynamics and anaphase a in
mitotic drosophila embryos. curr. biol. 2002, 12, 1670-1674.
mitchison, t. j. poleward microtubule flux in the mitotic spindle; evidence
from photoactivation of fluorescence. j. cell biol. 1989, 109, 637-652.
wilson, p. j.; forer, a. effects of nanomolar taxol on crane-fly spermatocyte
spindles indicate that acetylation of kinetochore microtubules can be used as
a marker of poleward tubulin flux. cell motil. cytoskeleton 1997, 37, 20-32.
nicklas, r. b.; ward, s. c.; gorbsky, g. j. kinetochore chemistry is sensitive
to tension and may link mitotic forces to a cell cycle checkpoint. j. cell biol.
1995, 130, 929-939.
li, x.; nicklas, r. b. mitotic forces control a cell-cycle checkpoint. nature
1995, 373, 630-632.
gorbsky, g. j. cell cycle checkpoints: arresting progress in mitosis.
bioessays 1997, 19, 193-197.
shelby, r. d.; hahn, k. m.; sullivan, k. f. dynamic elastic behavior of
alpha-satellite dna domains visualized in situ in living human cells. j. cell
biol. 1996, 135, 545-557.
rieder, c.; schultz, a.; cole, r.; sluder, g. anaphase onset in vertebrate
somatic cells is controlled by a checkpoint that monitors sister kinetochore
attachment to the spindle. j. cell biol. 1994, 127, 1301-1310.
kelling, j.; sullivan, k.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. suppression of
centromere dynamics by taxol in living osteosarcoma cells. cancer res.
2003, 63, 2794-2780.
okouneva, t.; hill, b. t.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. the effects of
vinflunine, vinorelbine, and vinblastine on centromere dynamics. mol.
cancer ther. 2003, 2, 427-436.
yu, h. regulation of apc–cdc20 by the spindle checkpoint. curr. opin.
cell biol. 2002, 14, 706-714.
skoufias, d. a.; andreassen, p.; lacroix, f.; wilson, l.; margolis, r. l.
mammalian mad2 and bub1/bubr1 recognize distinct spindle-attachment and
kinetochore-tension checkpoints. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 2001, 10, 44924497.
king, j. m.; nicklas, r. b. tension on chromosomes increases the number of
kinetochore microtubules but only within limits. j. cell sci. 2000, 113, 38153823.
nicklas, r. b.; campbell, m. s.; ward, s. c.; gorbsky, g. j. tensionsensitive kinetochore phosphorylation in vitro. j. cell. sci. 1998, 111, 31893196.
jordan, m. a.; wilson, l. microtubule polymerization dynamics, mitotic
block, and cell death by paclitaxel at low concentrations. in: taxane
anticancer agents; georg, g. i.; chen, t. t.; ojima, i.; vyas, d. m., eds;
american chemical society: washington, d.c., 1995, pp.138-153.

742 current cancer drug targets, 2007, vol. 7, no. 8
[118]

[119]

[120]
[121]
[122]

[123]
[124]
[125]
[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]
[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]
[135]
[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]
[142]
[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

jordan and kamath

jordan, m. a.; wendell, k. l.; gardiner, s.; derry, w. b.; copp, h.; wilson,
l. mitotic block induced in hela cells by low concentrations of paclitaxel
(taxol) results in abnormal mitotic exit and apoptotic cell death. cancer res.
1996, 56, 816-825.
weaver, b.; cleveland, d. decoding the links between mitosis, cancer, and
chemotherapy: the mitotic checkpoint, adaptation, and cell death. cancer
cell 2005, 8, 7-12.
hamel, e.; covell, d. g. antimitotic peptides and depsipeptides. curr. med.
chem. - anticancer agents 2002, 2, 19-53.
hoffman, j. c.; vaughn, k. c. mitotic disrupter herbicides act by a single
mechanism but vary in efficacy. protoplasma 1994, 179, 16-25.
jackson, s.; singletary, k. sulforaphane inhibits human mcf-7 mammary
cancer cell mitotic progression and tubulin polymerization. j. nutr. 2004,
134, 2229-2236.
lacey, e.; gill, j. h. biochemistry of benzimidazole resistance. acta trop.
1994, 56, 245-262.
boder, g. b.; paul, d. c.; williams, d. c. chlorpromazine inhibits mitosis of
mammalian cells. eur. j. cell biol. 1983, 31, 349-353.
cann, j. r.; hinman, n. d. interaction of chlorpromazine with brain
microtubule subunit protein. mol. pharmacol. 1975, 11, 256-267.
lobert, s.; ingram, j.; correia, j. additivity of dilantin and vinblastine
inhibitory effects on microtubule assembly. cancer res. 1999, 59, 48164822.
jordan, m. a. mechanism of action of antitumor drugs that interact with
microtubules and tubulin. curr. med. chem. - anti-cancer agents 2002, 2, 117.
jimenez-barbero, j.; amat-guerri, f.; snyder, j. p. the solid state, solution
and tubulin-bound conformations of agents that promote microtubule
stabilization. curr. med. chem. - anti-cancer agents 2002, 2(1), 91-122.
jordan, m. a.; thrower, d.; wilson, l. mechanism of inhibition of cell
proliferation by vinca alkaloids. cancer res. 1991, 51(8), 2212-2222.
dhamodharan, r. i.; jordan, m. a.; thrower, d.; wilson, l.; wadsworth, p.
vinblastine suppresses dynamics of individual microtubules in living cells.
mol. biol. cell 1995, 6, 1215-1229.
bai, r. b.; pettit, g. r.; hamel, e. binding of  xxxd1925xxx  to tubulin at a
distinct site for peptide antimitotic agents near the exchangeable nucleotide
and vinca alkaloid sites. j. biol. chem. 1990b, 265, 17141-17149.
jordan, m. a.; wilson, l. kinetic analysis of tubulin exchange at microtubule
ends at low vinblastine concentrations. biochemistry 1990, 29(11), 27302739.
wilson, l.; jordan, m. a.; morse, a.; margolis, r. l. interaction of
vinblastine with steady-state microtubules in vitro. j. mol. biol. 1982,
159,129-149.
lobert, s.; correia, j. energetics of vinca alkaloid interactions with tubulin.
in: methods in enzymology; 2000, pp.77-103.
na, g. c.; timasheff, s. n. stoichiometry of the vinblastine-induced selfassociation of calf brain tubulin. biochem. soc. trans. 1980, 8(6), 1347-1354.
na, g. c.; timasheff, s. n. thermodynamic linkage between tubulin selfassociation and the binding of vinblastine. biochemistry 1980, 19(7), 13471354.
jordan, m. a.; margolis, r. l.; himes, r. h.; wilson, l. identification of a
distinct class of vinblastine binding sites on microtubules. j. mol. biol. 1986,
187, 61-73.
singer, w. d.; jordan, m. a.; wilson, l.; himes, r. h. binding of
vinblastine to stabilized microtubules. mol. pharmacol. 1989, 36(3), 366370.
panda, d.; deluca, k.; williams, d.; jordan, m. a.; wilson, l.
antiproliferative mechanism of action of cryptophycin-52: kinetic
stabilization of microtubule dynamics by high affinity binding ot microtubule
ends. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 1998, 95, 9313-9318.
toso, r. j.; jordan, m. a.; farrell, k. w.; matsumoto, b.; wilson, l. kinetic
stabilization of microtubule dynamic instability in vitro by vinblastine.
biochemistry 1993, 32(5), 1285-1293.
derry, w. b.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. substoichiometric binding of taxol
suppresses microtubule dynamics. biochemistry 1995, 34, 2203-2211.
kamath, k.; jordan, m. a. suppression of microtubule dynamics by
 xxxd2854xxx  in living mcf7 cells. cancer res. 2003, 63, 6026-6031.
yvon, a. -m.; wadsworth, p.; jordan, m. a. taxol suppresses dynamics of
individual microtubules in living human tumor cells. mol. biol. cell 1999,
10, 947-949.
nogales, e.; wolf, s. g.; khan, i. a.; luduena, r. f.; downing, k. a.
structure of tubulin at 6.5a and location of the taxol-binding site. nature
1995, 375, 424-427.
jordan, m. a.; toso, r. j.; thrower, d.; wilson, l. mechanism of mitotic
block and inhibition of cell proliferation by taxol at low concentrations. proc.
natl. acad. sci. usa 1993, 90, 9552-9556.
gaitanos, t.; buey, r.; diaz, j.; northcote, p.; teesdale-spittle, p.; andreu,
j.; miller, j. peloruside a does not bind to the taxoid site on  xxxg2353xxx  and
retains its activity in multidrug-resistant cell lines. cancer res. 2004, 64,
5063-5067.

received: august, 04, 2006

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]
[152]

[153]
[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

pryor, d. e.; o'brate, a.; bilcer, g.; diaz, j. f.; wang, y.; wang, y.;
kabaki, m.; jung, m. k.; andreu, j. m.; ghosh, a. k.; giannakakou, p.;
hamel, e. the microtubule stabilizing agent laulimalide does not bind in the
taxoid site, kills cells resistant to paclitaxel and epothilones, and may not
require its epoxide moiety for activity. biochemistry 2002, 41, 9109-9115.
goncalves, a.; braguer, d.; kamath, k.; martello, l.; briand, c.; horwitz,
s.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. resistance to taxol in lung cancer cells
associated with increased microtubule dynamics. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa
2001, 98, 11737-11741.
wilson, l.; jordan, m. a. pharmacological probes of microtubule function.
in: microtubules; hyams, j.; lloyd, c., eds.; john wiley and sons, inc.: new
york, 1994. pp. 59-84.
downing, k. structural basis for the interaction of tubulin with proteins and
drugs that affect microtubule dynamics. annu. rev. cell. dev. biol. 2000, 16,
89-111.
chen, j. -g.; horwitz, s. b. differential mitotic responses to microtubulestabilizing and -destabilizing drugs. cancer res. 2002, 62, 1935-1938.
paoletti, a.; giocanti, n.; favaudon, v.; bornens, m. pulse treatment of
interphasic hela cells with nanomolar doses of docetaxel affects centrosome
organization and leads to catastrophic exit of mitosis. j. cell sci. 1997, 110,
2403-2415.
jordan, m. a.; wilson, l. the use and action of drugs in analyzing mitosis.
in: methods in cell biology; academic press, 1999. pp. 267-295.
jordan, m. a.; wilson, l. the use of drugs to study the role of microtubule
assembly dynamics in living cells. in: molecular motors and the
cytoskeleton, methods in enzymology; vallee, r., ed.; academic press,
1998. pp. 252-276.
ngan, v.; bellman, k.; hill, b.; wilson, l.; jordan, m. mechanism of mitotic
block and inhibition of cell proliferation by the semisynthetic vinca alkaloids
vinorelbine and its newer derivative vinflunine. mol. pharmacol. 2001, 60,
225-232.
holwell, s.; cooper, p.; thompson, m.; pettit, g. r.; lippert, l. w., 3rd.;
martin, s.; bibby, m. anti-tumor and anti-vascular effects of the novel
tubulin-binding agent  xxxd1744xxx  a-1 phosphate. anticancer res. 2002,
22, 3933-3940.
kanthou, c.; tozer, g. m. the tumor vascular targeting agent  xxxd1744xxx 
a-4-phosphate induces reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and early
membrane blebbing in human endothelial cells. blood 2002, 99, 2060-2069.
tozer, g. m.; prise, v. e.; wilson, j.; cemaza, m.; shan, s.; dewhirst, m.
w.; barber, p. r.; vojnovic, b.; chaplin, d. j. mechanisms associated with
tumor vascular shut-down induced by  xxxd1744xxx  a-4 phosphate:
intravital microscopy and measurement of vascular permeability. cancer res.
2001, 61, 6413-6422.
prise, v. e.; honess, d. j.; stratford, m. r.; wilson, j.; tozer, g. m. the
vascular response of tumor and normal tissues in the rat to the vascular
targeting agent,  xxxd1744xxx  a-4-phosphate, at clinically relevant doses.
int. j. oncol. 2002, 21, 717-726.
davis, p. d.; dougherty, g. j.; blakey, d. c.; galbraith, s. m.; tozer, g. m.;
holder, a. l.; naylor, m. a.; nolan, j.; stratford, m. r.; chaplin, d. j.; hill,
s. a. zd6126: a novel vascular-targeting agent that causes selective
destruction of tumor vasculature. cancer res. 2002, 62, 7247-7253.
merchan, j.; jayaram, d. r.; supko, j. g.; he, x.; bubley, g.; sukhatme, v.
increased endothelial uptake of paclitaxel as a potential mechanism for its
antiangiogenic effects: potentiation by cox-2 inhibition. int. j. cancer 2005,
113, 490-498.
holwell, s.; hill, b.; bibby, m. anti-vascular effects of vinflunine in the
mac 15a transplantable adenocarcinoma model. br. j. cancer 2001, 84,
290-295.
bocci, g.; nicolaou, k.; kerbel, r. protracted low-dose effects on human
endothelial cell proliferation and survival in vitro reveal a selective
antiangiogenic window for various chemotherapeutic drugs. cancer res.
2002, 62, 6938-6943.
hotchkiss, k. a.; ashton, a. w.; mahmood, r.; russell, r. g.; sparano, j.
a.; schwartz, e. l. inhibition of endothelial cell function in vitro and
angiogenesis in vivo by docetaxel (taxotere): association with impaired
repositioning of the microtubule organizing center. mol. cancer ther. 2002,
1(13), 1191-1200.
pasquier, e.; honore, s.; pourroy, b.; jordan, m.; lehmann, m.; briand, c.;
braguer, d. antiangiogenic concentrations of paclitaxel induce an increase in
microtubule dynamics in endothelial cells but not in cancer cells. cancer res.
2005, 65, 2433-2440.
pourroy, b.; honore, s.; pasquier, e.; bourgarel-rey, v.; kruczynski, a.;
briand, c.; braguer, d. antiangiogenic concentrations of vinflunine increase
the interphase microtubule dynamics and decrease the motility of endothelial
cells. cancer res. 2006, 66, 3256-3263.
liao, g.; nagasaki, t.; gundersen, g. g. low concentrations of  xxxd2745xxx 
interfere with fibroblast locomotion without significantly affecting
microtubule level: implications for the role of dynamic microtubules in cell
locomotion. j. cell sci. 1995, 108, 3473-3483.
pasquier, e.; honore, s.; braguer, d. microtubule-targeting agents in
angiogenesis: where do we stand? drug resist. updat. 2006, 9, 74-86.

revised: september 07, 2007

accepted: september, 07, 2007

