kasuistik

false negative  xxxd201xxx  test in two patients with
horner syndrome
falsch negativer apraclonidintest bei zwei patienten mit horner syndrom

autoren

a. kawasaki, f.-x. borruat

institut

department of neuro-ophthalmology, hpital ophtalmique jules gonin, lausanne, switzerland (chairman: professor
leonidas zografos)

schlsselwçrter
" apraclonidin
l
" pupille
l
" okulosympathetischer
l
defekt
" horner-syndrom
l

zusammenfassung

abstract

!

!

hintergrund: die miotische pupille eines sympathisch denervierten auges dilatiert wegen der
denervationshypersensibilitt nach gabe eines
topischen, verdnnten oder schwachen alpha-1agonisten. die reversion einer anisokorie nach
topischem apraclonidin gilt als positiver test zur
diagnose eines einseitigen horner-syndroms.
anamnese und befund: zwei patientinnen mit
einem kokainbesttigten okulosympathischen
defekt (horner-syndrom) wurden an unterschiedlichen tagen mit 1%igen topischem apraclonidin untersucht.
therapie und verlauf: bei einer patientin erweiterte sich die pupille geringfgig, jedoch nicht
ausreichend, um die ursprngliche anisokorie
rckgngig zu machen; hingegen wies sie eine
ipsilaterale lidretraktion auf. kein sichtbarer effekt von apraclonidin wurde am kontralateralen,
nichtbetroffenen auge beobachtet. bei der zweiten patientin gab es keine pupillre reaktion auf
apraclonidin, jedoch bildete sich die ptosis zurck.
schlussfolgerung: keine der zwei patientinnen
zeigten eine aufhebung der anisokorie unter
apraclonidin, obwohl apraclonidin zur diagnose
eines horner-syndroms bereits eingesetzt wird.
bei diesen beiden patientinnen mit einem besttigten okulosympathischen defekt galt der apraclonidintest fr das horner-syndrom als „negativ“. beide patientinnen zeigten allerdings
diskrete pupillen- und/oder lidvernderungen
als antwort auf apraclonidin, die mit einer denervationshypersensbilitt bereinstimmten. da
nicht bei allen patienten mit einem einseitigen
okulosympathischen defekt eine aufhebung der
anisokorie nach topischem apraclonidin auftritt,
sollten spezifischere parameter zur definition
eines positiven testresultats entwickelt werden,
um apraclonidin als diagnosetest fr das horner-syndom zu verbessern.

background: because of denervation supersensitivity, a miotic pupil in a sympathetically-denervated eye dilates in response to a dilute or
weak alpha-1-agonist drug. a reversal of anisocoria after topical  xxxd201xxx  is considered as
a positive test result that diagnoses a unilateral
horner syndrome.
history and signs: two women aged 34 and 46
years with a cocaine-confirmed oculosympathetic defect (horner syndrome) were tested with 1%
topical  xxxd201xxx  on separate days.
therapy and outcome: in one patient, her miotic horner pupil dilated marginally but not
enough to reverse the baseline anisocoria. additionally, the upper lid on the same side retracted. there was no discernable effect of  xxxd201xxx  on the normal, contralateral eye. in the
second patient, there was no pupillary response
to  xxxd201xxx  but there was resolution of her
ptosis.
conclusions: neither patient demonstrated a reversal of anisocoria, the current criterion for diagnosing a horner syndrome using  xxxd201xxx . thus, these two patients with an
established oculosympathetic defect were said
to have a “negative test” for horner syndrome.
yet both women showed subtle pupil and/or lid
changes in response to  xxxd201xxx  that were
consistent with sympathetic denervation supersensitivity. reversal of anisocoria following topical  xxxd201xxx  does not occur in all patients
with a unilateral oculosympathetic defect and
more specific parameters for defining a positive
test result might optimize  xxxd201xxx ’s utility
as a diagnostic test for horner syndrome.

key words
"  xxxd201xxx 
l
" pupil
l
" oculosympathetic defect
l
" horner syndrome
l

eingereicht 29.8.2007
akzeptiert 29.10.2007
bibliografie
doi 10.1055/s-2008-1027349
klin monatsbl augenheilkd
2008; 225: 520 – 522  georg
thieme verlag kg stuttgart ·
new york · issn 0023-2165
korrespondenzadresse
aki kawasaki, md
department of neuro-ophthalmology, hpital ophtalmique
jules gonin
avenue de france 15
1004 lausanne, switzerland
tel.: ++ 41/21/6 26 86 60
fax: ++ 41/21/6 26 86 66
aki.kawasaki@ophtal.vd.ch

kawasaki a, borruat fx. false negative  xxxd201xxx … klin monatsbl augenheilkd 2008; 225: 520 – 522

downloaded by: rutgers university. copyrighted material.

520

kasuistik

fig. 2 ocular effects of  xxxd201xxx  in patient 2. (top) baseline photograph taken in roomlight shows a mild ptosis of the left upper lid but no
anisocoria. however, pupillography on the same day confirmed the presence of a pupillary dilation lag on the left side consistent with a left horner syndrome. (bottom) thirty minutes after 1% topical  xxxd201xxx ,
there is resolution of left ptosis but no change in the pupil size of either
eye.

background

case 2

!

a 34-year-old woman had acute neck pain and left ptosis. examination revealed 2 mm left upper lid ptosis and a smaller
left pupil. cocaine testing confirmed a left oculosympathetic
defect, and investigations revealed a dissection of the left internal carotid artery. six months later, she still had mild ptosis
on the left side but no observable anisocoria in bright roomlight or in darkness. however, pupillometry revealed a left pupillary dilation lag, confirming oculosympathetic dysfunction.
" fig. 2).
the patient was tested with topical  xxxd201xxx  (l

in 2000, morales and colleagues proposed topical  xxxd201xxx 
as a pharmacological test for diagnosing horner syndrome [4].
the test takes advantage of a secondary property of  xxxd201xxx , its weak alpha-1 adrenergic agonist action, and the principle of receptor supersensitivity in denervated tissues to detect
sympathetic dysfunction in the eye. in persons with normally
innervated eyes, the alpha-1 action of  xxxd201xxx  is generally
too weak to cause much effect on the baseline pupil size. in persons with horner syndrome,  xxxd201xxx  causes pupillary dilation in the eye lacking sympathetic innervation because of denervation supersensitivity of the iris dilator. in previous series,
this asymmetric effect of  xxxd201xxx  on a normal eye and a
sympathetically-denervated eye has resulted in the horner pupil becoming the dilated, larger pupil and consequently, a reversal of anisocoria has become the criterion for a “positive”  xxxd201xxx  test [1, 2]. we describe two patients with a horner
syndrome and a “negative”  xxxd201xxx  test who nonetheless
demonstrated subtle ocular changes to  xxxd201xxx  consistent
with sympathetic denervation supersensitivity.

history and signs
!

case 1
a 46-year-old woman noted painless drooping of her right upper lid. examination revealed right upper and lower lid ptosis
and an anisocoria (pupils were 3.0 mm od and 4.0 mm os in
roomlight). pharmacological testing with cocaine and hydroxyamphetamine confirmed a postganglionic oculosympathetic defect (horner syndrome) on the right side. imaging studies
revealed no pathological lesion to explain her horner syndrome. three years later, her medical status and examination
were unchanged, and pupillometry showed a right pupillary
dilation lag, confirming persistence of an oculosympathetic
defect. at this point, she was tested with topical  xxxd201xxx 
" fig. 1).
(l

therapy and outcome
both patients were said to have a “negative”  xxxd201xxx  test
result because neither demonstrated a reversal of their baseline anisocoria. the negative  xxxd201xxx  result was a puzzling and contradictory finding as both patients had clinical
findings of an oculosympathetic defect and a positive cocaine
test, the current pharmacological gold standard test for diagnosing horner syndrome. on closer inspection, both women
did in fact show subtle pupil and/or lid changes on the side
of their horner syndrome that suggested denervation supersensitivity. in the first patient, her right horner pupil was dilated by 1.0 mm and her right upper and lower lid retracted.
" fig. 1).
the left pupil was unchanged in size (l
in the second patient, there was resolution of her left ptosis after
instillation of topical  xxxd201xxx  even though there was no
" fig. 2).
observable pupillary effect in either eye (l

discussion
!

the reversal of anisocoria with  xxxd201xxx  in patients with
horner syndrome depends on several factors: the magnitude
of baseline anisocoria, the extent of pharmacological mydriasis in the denervated eye and any pupil effect of  xxxd201xxx 
on the normal eye. it has been noted that  xxxd201xxx  occasionally causes a small mydriasis on normal eyes, a factor that
could potentially impede the reversal of anisocoria in horner
patients. additionally, if a patient with horner syndrome has

kawasaki a, borruat fx. false negative  xxxd201xxx … klin monatsbl augenheilkd 2008; 225: 520 – 522

downloaded by: rutgers university. copyrighted material.

fig. 1 ocular effects of  xxxd201xxx  in patient 1. (top) baseline photograph taken in roomlight shows right miosis and ptosis of the upper and
lower lid consistent with a right horner syndrome. (bottom) thirty minutes after instillation of 1% topical  xxxd201xxx  in both eyes, the right
pupil is mildly larger than previously whereas the left pupil has not
changed in size and both the upper and lower lid are retracted, resulting in
observable resolution of baseline anisocoria and ptosis.

521

kasuistik

a large baseline anisocoria and experiences only a small mydriatic effect in the denervated eye, the magnitude of anisocoria will diminish but not necessarily reverse.
development of adrenergic supersensitivity in a sympathetically-denervated eye is not limited to the iris dilator muscle. garibaldi et al. proposed that the tarsal muscles of the lids also upregulate adrenergic receptors following denervation and thus,
resolution of ptosis in response to  xxxd201xxx  might serve as
an additional marker for detecting oculosympathetic dysfunction [3]. indeed, the ptosis of these two patients resolved after
 xxxd201xxx  instillation and one patient also demonstrated a
mild degree of pupillary dilation on the sympathetically-denervated side. these ocular responses to  xxxd201xxx  are consistent with sympathetic denervation supersensitivity.
amongst patients with horner syndrome, there may exist individual differences in the level of denervation supersensitivity
which may result in a range of ocular responses to  xxxd201xxx . such differences may be, in part, related to the extent of
sympathetic injury (partial versus complete horner syndrome)
and/or the level of circulating catecholamines. we believe that
a singular criterion (reversal of anisocoria) to determine a “positive”  xxxd201xxx  test may be too restrictive and lead to under-

detection of horner syndrome. using a single criterion, our two
patients demonstrate that a negative  xxxd201xxx  test would
not be adequate to rule out a horner syndrome in a clinically
suspicious patient, and in such a case, cocaine testing must be
performed. given the growing popularity of  xxxd201xxx  as a
diagnostic test for horner syndrome, a better definition of outcome parameters for the pupil and lid is needed to optimize its
sensitivity and specificity.
conflict of interest: none

references
1 brown sm, aouchiche r, freedman ka. the utility of 0.5%  xxxd201xxx 
in the diagnosis of horner syndrome. arch ophthalmol 2003; 121:
1201–1203
2 freedman ka, brown sm. topical  xxxd201xxx  in the diagnosis of suspected horner syndrome. j neuro-ophthalmol 2005; 25: 83–85
3 garibaldi dc, hindman hb, grant mp et al. effect of 0.5 %  xxxd201xxx 
on ptosis in horner syndrome. ophthal plast reconstr surg 2006; 22:
53–55
4 morales j, brown sm, abdul-rahim as et al. ocular effects of  xxxd201xxx  in horner syndrome. arch ophthalmol 2000; 118: 951–954

kawasaki a, borruat fx. false negative  xxxd201xxx … klin monatsbl augenheilkd 2008; 225: 520 – 522

downloaded by: rutgers university. copyrighted material.

522

