cell. mol. life sci. 65 (2008) 2875 – 2896
1420-682x/08/182875-22
doi 10.1007/s00018-008-8123-1
 birkhuser verlag, basel, 2008

cellular and molecular life sciences

review
 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase – the rk family of proteins
j. park and r. s. gupta*
department of biochemistry and biomedical sciences, mcmaster university, hamilton (canada) l8n 3z5,
fax: +1 905 522 9033, e-mail: gupta@mcmaster.ca
received 10 march 2008; received after revision 18 april 2008; accepted 22 april 2008
online first 14 june 2008
abstract. ribokinase (rk) and  xxxg79xxx 
(ak) catalyze the phosphorylation of ribose and
adenosine to ribose-5-phosphate and amp, respectively. belonging to the rk family of proteins, these
enzymes share a number of unique structural and
functional elements. extensive work has been carried
out on many aspects of these enzymes in recent years,
and we summarize the wealth of information currently
available on them. the topics covered include descriptions of the primary and three-dimensional

structures of ak and rk, their phylogenetic relationships, biochemical aspects of these enzymes including
their reaction mechanisms and ionic requirements,
and also work on certain inhibitors of these enzymes.
the cellular metabolism and transport of ribose and
adenosine are also briefly discussed, as well as the
beneficial effects of ribose and adenosine in physiology and how these effects can be harnessed for
pharmacological purposes.

keywords.  xxxg79xxx , ribokinase, nxxe motif, gene structure and mutants, enzyme inhibitors, pfkb
family of proteins, phosphate dependency, adenosine and ribose metabolism.

introduction
ribokinase (rk) and  xxxg79xxx  (ak) are two
important enzymes belonging to the rk family of
proteins that share a number of unique primary and
tertiary structural elements. rk catalyzes the phosphorylation of ribose to ribose-5-phosphate (r-5-p),
using atp as a phosphate donor: ribose + atp ! r5-p + adp. this is the first step in ribose metabolism
and functions to trap ribose within the cell after its
uptake. the phosphorylated sugar can then enter the
pentose phosphate pathway (ppp) for energy production, or be used as a carbon source for the synthesis of
nucleotides, histidine, and tryptophan [1, 2].  xxxg79xxx  (ak) catalyzes the phosphorylation of
adenosine to amp, also using atp as a phosphate

* corresponding author.

donor: adenosine + atp ! amp + adp. as one of
the most abundant nucleoside kinases in mammalian
tissues [3, 4], ak is the first enzyme in the anabolic
pathway of adenosine utilization. hence, it plays a key
role in the regulation of intracellular and extracellular
levels of adenosine, which exhibits a potent neuromodulating property [5, 6]. interestingly, both ak and
rk are implicated in tissue-protective mechanisms
against various ischemic insults.
although rk and ak were discovered more than 50
years ago [7, 8], and extensive work has been carried
out on different aspects of these enzymes, there is no
review available that summarizes the wealth of
information on them. the purpose of this review is
to introduce readers to the excellent work covering
different aspects of rk and ak.

2876

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

figure 1. conserved signature sequences of the rk family enzymes. conserved amino acid residues are shown capitalized in the
alignment. abbreviations for the enzymes: rbsk, ribokinase; adk,  xxxg79xxx ; k1pf, 1-phosphofructokinase; khk,
ketohexokinase; kdgk, 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconokinase; lacc, tagatose-6-phosphate kinase; frld, fructoselysine kinase; ingk,
inosine kinase; and hlde, bifunctional enzyme d-hepta-d-heptose-7-phosphate kinase / d-hepta-d-heptose-1-phosphate adenosyltransferase. abbreviations for the species: ecoli, escherichia coli; bacsu, bacillus subtilis; myctu, mycobacterium tuberculosis;
mycpn, mycoplasma pneumoniae; and strpn, streptococcus pneumoniae.

overview of the rk family of proteins
rk genes have been found in both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, and sequence comparisons have shown
that they belong to the pfkb family of carbohydrate
kinases [9], which phosphorylate the hydroxymethyl
groups of a variety of sugar moieties. the pfkb family
of enzymes, thus, is also referred to as the rk family,
and forms one of the three non-homologous branches
of sugar kinases, along with the hexokinase family and
the galactokinase family [9]. initially, the rk family
consisted of a small number of evolutionarily related
enzymes. beside rks from escherichia coli and yeast,
other members of this group included fructokinase,
1-phosphofructokinase,
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase
(pfkb or pfk2), tagatose-6-phosphate kinase, and
inosine kinase (ingk) [9]. since then, many other
enzymes have been added to the rk family, including
ak [10, 11] and 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconokinase
[12].
the members of the rk family are identified by the
presence of two highly conserved sequence motifs
(fig. 1). the first motif is found in a glycine-rich area
located in the n-terminal region of these enzymes.
this motif includes two consecutive glycine residues
that form part of the hinge between the lid domain and
the aba domain (see next section) [13 – 16]. the
second motif, which is found in the c-terminal region,
is involved in atp binding and the formation of an
anion hole [13 – 16]. this motif also contains a
conserved  xxxd233xxx  residue which serves as a
catalytic base [13 – 16]. a search of the swiss-prot
entries (release 54.5 of 13 november, 2007) with the

above two sequence motifs (prosite [17, 18]
accession numbers ps00583 and ps00584, respectively) resulted in 213 overlapping hits. these matches
included all of the previously mentioned enzymes of
the rk family, as well as new members such as
fructoselysine kinase and the bifunctional enzyme dhepta-d-heptose-7-phosphate kinase / d-hepta-dheptose-1-phosphate adenosyltransferase from various sources. the list also includes a number of
uncharacterized sugar kinases, mostly of bacterial
sources.
although the overall sequence identity between the
members of the rk family is less than 30 %, their
crystal structures are very similar [13 – 16]. retaining
the overall structure composed of the large aba
sandwich domain and the small lid domain, enzymes
in this group differ only to a small extent with respect
to the sugar substrate-binding moiety and peripheral
structures. on the other hand, the two other families
of sugar kinases, hexokinase and galactokinase, have
vastly different three-dimensional structures from
that of the rk family, showing different frequencies
and orders of a-helices and b-strands [19, 20]. at the
sequence level, the enzymes of these three families do
not show significant sequence similarity [9].
despite large differences in their primary and tertiary
structures, some enzymes in the hexokinase and rk
families show similar substrate specificity and carry
out identical functions. for instance, fructokinases
from zymomonas mobilis, streptococcus mutans,
lactococcus lactis and bacillus subtilis [21 – 24] belong
to the hexokinase family, showing all of the characteristic sequence patterns of this family. the other

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

review article

2877

figure 2. phylogenetic tree of
rk family enzymes. the tree
was constructed using the program clustalx (version 1.83)
with full-length sequences as inputs, and the number of bootstrap
trials was 1000.  xxxg79xxx 
from m. tuberculosis is shown
boxed in red. abbreviations:
scrk, fructokinase; k6pf2, 6phosphofructo-2-kinase;
salty, salmonella typhimurium; vibal, vibrio alginolyticus; shifl, shigella flexnery;
rhilo,
rhizobium
loti;
strco, streptomyces coelicolor; toxgo, toxoplasma gondii;
lacla, lactococcus lactis;
clope, clostridium perfringens; entfa, enterococcus faecalis; rhoca, rhodobacter
capsulatus; and mycge, mycoplasma genitalium. please refer
to the legend for figure 1 for
other abbreviations.

fructokinases, such as the ones from e. coli, klebsiella
pneumoniae, salmonella typhimurium, vibrio alginolyticus and potato [25 – 27], belong to the rk family,
and do not show significant sequence similarity to the
fructokinases of the hexokinase family. these enzymes have likely resulted from adaptations of different structural frameworks for the same function, i.e.
convergent evolution [9].
one can also observe convergent evolution leading to
similar substrate specificity within one structural
family. for instance, the ability to utilize adenosine
as a substrate appears to have arisen at least twice in
the rk family. ak activity until recently was only
found in eukaryotic organisms. however, a recently
identified enzyme from mycobacterium tuberculosis
has been denoted as the first, and thus far the only
bacterial ak [28]. sequence alignment indicates that
ak from m. tuberculosis contains areas which are
conserved in other aks, including residues involved in
the binding of the substrates [28]. the m. tuberculosis
enzyme, however, shows greater overall sequence
similarity (representing both identical and conserved
substitutions) with rk and fructokinase (35 %) than it

does with other aks (less than 24 %) [28]. aks from
other sources, on the other hand, show more than 50 %
sequence similarity with each other. in a phylogenetic
tree for the rk family of proteins, m. tuberculosis ak
branches with the rks and fructokinases, while other
aks form a separate branch in the tree (fig. 2) [28].
the substrate specificity of the m. tuberculosis enzyme, when measured in terms of catalytic efficiency
(kcat/km), is also very different from that of other
eukaryotic aks. while human ak favours adenosine
approximately 900-fold over ribose as a substrate, m.
tuberculosis ak does so only about 9-fold. furthermore, the m. tuberculosis enzyme can also phosphorylate fructose as effectively as it can phosphorylate
ribose [park and gupta, unpublished data]. thus, the
exact role and the preferred substrate(s) of this
putative m. tuberculosis ak in vivo remain to be
determined. however, based upon the results of
sequence alignment and biochemical studies, as well
as the fact that ak is not found in other bacteria, the
ak activity exhibited by the m. tuberculosis enzyme
appears to have resulted from convergent evolution.

2878

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

figure 3. structure of an e. coli ribokinase subunit. (a) ribbon diagram showing the closed form of the enzyme, bound with the
substrates, ribose (red) and adp (magenta). the aba domain and the lid domain are boxed and labeled. the image was constructed using
pymol (version 0.93) with the pdb file 1rkd, and coloured according to the residue number (orange at the n-terminus and blue at the cterminus). (b) topology diagram showing the organization and lengths of a-helices and b-strands. the helices and strands are labeled in
corresponding colors, as seen in the ribbon diagram. residue numbers indicate the start and end of each secondary structure.

the rk family of proteins/enzymes has adapted to
very broad substrate specificity within a distinct
overall structural framework. low sequence similarity
between the family members, as well as their broad
distribution throughout all three domains of life,
supports the idea that the common ancestor of the
rk family enzymes diverged from their ancestor at a
fairly early stage of evolution.

structural aspects of rk and ak
structure of rk
the first three-dimensional crystal structure of rk
was determined in 1998, with the e. coli protein [29].
rk exists in solution as a homodimer [30], and each
monomer consists of two domains (fig. 3) [29]. the
large domain is formed by a nine-stranded b-sheet,
which is flanked by 10 a-helices. this aba sandwich
domain provides most of the specific binding interactions for the substrates, ribose and atp [29]. the
smaller domain, which is composed of four b-strands,
acts as a lid over the active site (fig. 3a). the outer
face of this b-sheet provides an interface for the dimer
interaction, through which the two b-sheets of the
dimer pack orthogonally to each other, forming a
flattened b-barrel [29]. the cross-over segment of
each subunit also contributes in forming the active site
of the dimer partner. the substrate ribose binds in the
cleft between the aba sandwich domain and the

smaller b-sheet (lid) domain [29]. the nucleotide
binding site is located in a groove in the aba subunit
near the ribose-binding site, but is not entirely covered
by the smaller lid-like domain [29]. the anion hole, a
feature shared by all members of the rk family [13 –
15], is created by the main-chain nitrogen atoms of
residues 252 – 255, and is present adjacent to the active
site [29].
comparison of the apo structure of rk to its
substrate-bound forms shows a drastic conformational
alteration [16, 29]. although the internal configuration of the aba sandwich domain and the lid domain
remain essentially the same, their spatial relationship
is vastly different. this conformational change can be
described as an opening and closing of the lid domain,
if the aba domain is taken as a point of reference [16].
in this case, the apo structure takes the open
conformation, exposing the ribose-binding site. the
substrate-bound structure, on the contrary, takes the
closed conformation, in which the bound ribose is
almost completely buried under the small lid domain.
measurements of the ca-torsion angles show that lid
opening affects the main-chain conformation of
residues 39 – 41, 96 and 113 [16]. these residues form
a hinge between the two domains and include the gg
switch, another structural feature shared by all
members of the rk family [13 – 16].
different structures of rk suggest that the large
conformational change plays an important role in the
function of the enzyme. based on these structures,

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

review article

2879

figure 4. structure of  xxxg79xxx . (a) ribbon diagram of human ak showing two bound adenosine molecules (red and magenta),
with the enzyme structure coloured in a rainbow scheme (orange at the n-terminus and blue at the c-terminus). (b) close-up view of
toxoplasma gondii ak active site. bound adenosine and  xxxd2933xxx  are shown in red and magenta, respectively. a number of other
important structural features are also shown in this structure: (i) the surface of the anion hole (in blue); (ii) the surface which the gg switch
makes (in cyan); the catalytic base asp318 (in yellow); and arg136 of the lid domain which shows a close contact with the bound nucleotide
(in green). the diagrams were constructed with the pdb files 1bx4 (human) and 1lii (t. gondii), using pymol (version 0.93).

sigrell et al. [16, 29] have proposed a mechanism by
which the rk reaction proceeds. initially in the open
form, the enzyme allows the entry of ribose, which
binds to the active site in the aba sandwich domain.
ribose binding induces closing of the lid, which is
likely to increase the enzyme affinity for the second
substrate atp. the residue asp255 is believed to
function as the catalytic base which abstracts a proton
from the o5’-hydroxyl group of ribose. the negatively
charged o5’ atom then makes a nucleophilic attack on
the g-phosphate of atp, resulting in a pentacovalent
transition state. this transition state is stabilized by
the anion hole in which the g-phosphate of atp is
positioned. subsequent movements of the lid domain
are supposed to induce the breakdown of the transition state, after which the enzyme takes the open
conformation again. the products, r-5-p and adp
are released and the enzyme is ready for another
round of catalysis. this sequence of events suggests an
ordered bi bi reaction mechanism, similar to those
proposed for other carbohydrate kinases, which may
also show induced fit upon sugar binding [20].
structure of ak
the human form of ak was characterized by mathews et al. [14], soon after the rk structure was solved
[29]. the active form of ak is a monomer, which is
also composed of an aba sandwich domain and a

smaller lid domain (fig. 4a) [14]. the aba fold
contains a central nine-stranded b-sheet and 10
flanking a-helices, and forms the core of the overall
structure. the lid domain is composed of a fivestranded b-sheet flanked by two a-helices on the side
exposed to the solvent. this structure differs from the
rk structure [16, 29] in that ak has two additional ahelices and an additional b-strand in the lid domain.
overall, ak shows a remarkable structural homology
to rk (compare figs. 3a and 4a), despite low
sequence identity.
when the structures of ak [14] and rk [16] are
superimposed, the substrates and their interacting
partners occupy similar three-dimensional space. the
residues involved in binding of the sugar substrates
show a moderate level of conservation between the
two enzymes. phe302 of ak and phe257 of rk, which
are involved in hydrophobic contacts with the substrates, are absolutely conserved in the rk family [14,
16]. on the contrary, ala136, leu16, and phe170 of
ak differ from the corresponding residues of rk,
enabling adenosine binding instead of ribose [14, 16].
in ak, ala136 replaces ile112 of rk and allows for
more room necessary for larger adenosine. leu16 of
ak replaces asn14, forming part of the hydrophobic
pocket for the purine base. phe170 replaces glu143 of
rk and introduces stacking interaction with the
adenine base of adenosine. the residues involved in

2880

j. park and r. s. gupta

atp binding, on the other hand, show a high level of
identity between the two enzymes. these residues
include asn196, asn223, glu226, thr265, and gly267
of ak that correspond to asn166, asn187, glu190,
thr223, and gly225 in rk [14, 16]. these residues are
also conserved in the other members of the rk family
[14].
further insight into ak structure and function was
provided when the toxoplasma gondii (a parasitic
protozoan) ak structure was solved [15]. in this study,
the structures of both the apo and substrate-bound
forms were solved, and their comparison revealed
drastic conformational alterations. the most striking
change is the 308 hinge bending caused by the binding
of adenosine, which brings the large and small
domains together [15]. this bending is likely brought
about by the gg switch formed by residues gly68 and
gly69, which undergo large torsional changes as they
interact with adenosine (fig. 4b) [15]. a similar
bending motion is observed in rk upon ribose
binding, but of a smaller magnitude (178) [16].
subsequent atp ( xxxd2933xxx  in the crystal structure)
binding to the adenosine-enzyme complex induces
less dramatic but nonetheless important conformational changes [15]. as a result, an anion hole is
created around the b- and g-phosphates of the atp,
which is further stabilized by residue arg136 (fig. 4b)
[15].
based on these observations, schumacher et al. [15]
have proposed a detailed catalytic mechanism for ak.
the first step involves the binding of adenosine to ak
in the open form. the binding of adenosine turns on
the gg switch, which results in the hinge bending and
the subsequent burial of the substrate. the closing of
the lid then increases the enzyme affinity towards
atp, which induces formation of the anion hole in the
active site. the catalytic base asp318 (asp300 in
human ak) deprotonates the 5’-hydroxyl group of
adenosine, which then attacks the g-phosphate of
atp. the anion hole induces and stabilizes the
pentacovalent transition state, typical of an in-line
sn2 displacement reaction. mg2+ bound with the atp,
on the other hand, functions to neutralize the negative
charges on the nucleotide and to enhance the leaving
group ability of adp. upon completion of the
catalysis, the substrates part the enzyme in the order
of adp and amp, since the adenosine-binding site is
more deeply buried in the structure.

biochemistry of rk and ak
ionic requirements of rk and ak
although their structures vary, carbohydrate kinases
are thought to function by similar catalytic mecha-

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

nisms. all known carbohydrate kinases require divalent cations, such as magnesium, which act as an
electrophilic catalyst for the transfer of the phosphate
group [31]. divalent cations are thought to neutralize
the negative charges on the phosphate groups of the
nucleotide, and the actual substrate of these enzymes
is the chelate of the metal and atp [31]. rk, as a
carbohydrate kinase, also requires divalent cations for
its catalytic activity. it was shown that, besides
magnesium, other metal ions such as mn2+, co2+,
ca2+, ni2+, and cu2+ could also satisfy the divalent
cation requirement of rk [32]. for both of the
mammalian (calf liver) and bacterial (e. coli and
salmonella typhimurium) forms of rk, no activity was
seen in the absence of divalent metal ions [7, 32 – 35].
many of the atp-utilizing enzymes show an additional requirement for monovalent cations, such as
potassium and cesium. two general mechanisms have
been proposed for this type of enzyme activation: i)
direct (catalytic) and ii) indirect (conformational)
mechanisms [36, 37]. rk also requires monovalent
cations for activation. for instance, e. coli rk is
activated by potassium and cesium with an apparent
kd of 5 mm and 17 mm, respectively [31]. this enzyme
is also activated by nh4+ [33], and a similar pattern of
ionic effects was observed in s. typhimurium rk [32].
a structural analysis of e. coli rk by andersson et al.
[31] suggests that rk is an example of an enzyme
which is activated by monovalent cations via a
conformational change (indirect mechanism) [37].
the structure of rk in the presence of cesium shows
that the ion binds between the two loops adjacent to
the anion hole of the active site (at residues 249 – 251
and 285 – 294). it is proposed that the interaction
between the monovalent ion and these residues assists
formation of the anion hole [31]. the enzyme is then
activated for catalysis, as the anion hole functions to
induce and stabilize the transition state.
the true phosphate-donating substrate of ak is also
the complex of atp and a divalent metal ion. in
support of this concept, the absence of magnesium
resulted in a lack of enzyme activity in human
placental ak [38]. in the presence of magnesium,
optimal activity appeared at ph values at which atp
and the divalent cation exist primarily in the complexed form [38]. it has been demonstrated that, as
seen in rk, other divalent metal ions such as mn2+,
ca2+, co2+, and ni2+ can substitute mg2+ for ak
activity [39]. aks preference for divalent cations,
however, seems to be species- and/or tissue typespecific, as enzymes of different sources show dissimilar responses to varied metal ions [39].
of universal observation in studies with enzymes of
various sources is the effect of free magnesium on the
activity of ak. in a reaction mixture, atp exists in

cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 65, 2008

2881

table 1. substrate specificity of rk for various simple sugars.
relative enzyme activity
varied substrate
d-ribose
2-deoxy-d-ribose
d-erythrose
d-threose
d-arabinose
d-ribulose
d-xylulose
d-xylose
d-fructose
a

b

c
d

e. coli a

s. typhimurium b

l. major a

calf b

humana

100 (309.7)
31
–
–
0.74
–
–
1.06
0.28

100
80
<3
–
<3
<3
–
<3
–

100 (36.0)
–c
0d
0
0
–
0
–
0

100
75
–
–
0
0
–
0
0

100 (40.58)
–
–
–
4
–
–
0.4
0.1

the relative activity of these enzymes was calculated based on catalytic efficiency (kcat/km), which was determined for each sugar
substrate. the catalytic efficiency values at 100 % activity of these enzymes are shown in the parentheses (in s1mm1).
the relative activity of these enzymes was calculated based on reaction rates measured at a single concentration of each substrate (10
mm and 1 mm for the s. typhimurium and calf liver enzymes, respectively).
compound not tested for the enzyme.
in the original literature, authors reported no activity instead of providing numeric values.

several different states of ionization depending on the
ph of the solution. mg2+ binds to atp4, the fully
dissociated species of atp, and forms mgatp2, the
true substrate of ak. an excess amount of mgcl2 in a
reaction results in saturation of available atp4, and
thus presence of free mg2+ ions. interestingly, the
activity of ak increases as the level of free mg2+ in the
reaction increases [38 – 44]. once passed the optimal
concentration, however, free mg2+ leads to inhibition
of ak [38 – 44]. this observation suggests that ak
represents an example of an atp-utilizing enzyme,
which requires an additional effect of divalent cation
for optimal catalysis. other examples of such enzymes
include  xxxd2937xxx  ( xxxd2937xxx ) synthetase [45 – 47]. the secondary divalent ion in this
group of enzymes is generally known to adjust the
protein conformation and/or to interact with the other
substrate at the active site [48].
substrate specificity of rk and ak
rk shows high specificity towards its phosphateaccepting substrates. while the enzyme boasts extremely efficient phosphorylation of d-ribose and 2deoxy-d-ribose, other simple sugars have shown to be
poor substrates [7, 32 – 35]. table 1 summarizes the
results of the substrate specificity studies carried out
with rks of different sources. these data suggest that
rk is not only inefficient in phosphorylating tetroses
and hexoses, but is also highly sensitive to substitution
or variation of the configuration except at the c-2
position of the pentoses. other compounds tested
include ribose-2-phosphate, ribose-3-phosphate, adenosine, thymidine, cytidine, 2-deoxyadenosine, 2deoxycytidine, 2-deoxyguanosine, and 2-deoxyuridine, which have shown no substrate activity [7, 49].
phosphoryl donor specificity of rk, in comparison to
that for the sugar substrate, has not been as exten-

sively studied. ctp, added instead of atp to a
reaction, resulted in comparable enzymatic activity
in calf liver rk [7]. in e. coli rk, gtp displayed
activity, but at a level which was two orders of
magnitude lower versus atp [33]. s. typhimurium
rk, on the other hand, was shown to accept several
ribonucleotides (itp, gtp, ctp) and deoxyribonucleotides ( xxxd1148xxx ,  xxxd1837xxx , dctp) as good phosphoryl
donors, in addition to atp [32]. other compounds,
including utp, ttp, xtp, phosphoenolpyruvate, and
acetyl phosphate, did not act as phosphate donors for
this enzyme [32].
unlike rk, ak shows remarkably broad specificity
for the phosphate-accepting substrate. alteration of
the ribosyl moiety of adenosine is well tolerated,
although this decreases catalytic efficiencies by twoto fivefold [50]. the 3’-hydroxyl and 4’-hydroxylmethyl groups may be in either trans or cis conformation, but the presence of a 2’-hydroxyl group in the
trans position is an important structural requirement.
for example, 2’-deoxyadenosine, which lacks the 2’hydroxyl group, is a poor substrate of ak [50].
however, ak is still important for 2’-deoxyadenosine
salvage in trypanosoma brucei [51] and in mammalian
cell lines deficient in  xxxg611xxx  [52].
substitution or addition of functional groups in the
purine base moiety can also be well accepted. in fact,
compounds such as 8-azaadenosine show even higher
phosphorylation efficiency than the natural substrate,
adenosine [50]. the nucleosides and their analogues,
which are efficiently phosphorylated by ak, generally
differ from adenosine at the 2-, 6-, 7-, 8-, and 9substituents [50, 53, 54]. with respect to the phosphate-donating substrate, atp and gtp are the
preferred nucleotides for ak, although a number of
other compounds can substitute in the catalytic
reaction [40, 43, 54, 55].

2882

j. park and r. s. gupta

substrate inhibition and reaction mechanism of ak
the ak reaction is unique because the substrate
adenosine, which is phosphorylated by the enzyme,
shares the same structural base as the phosphoryl
group donor, atp. consequently, both adenosine and
its phosphorylated product amp bind to the atp site
[56], resulting in enzyme inhibition. as this complicates the inhibition pattern of the enzyme, ak
represents an example of an enzyme whose catalytic
mechanism is difficult to determine using biochemical
methods. indeed, numerous kinetic studies have failed
to reach a consensus in this regard. chang et al. [57],
for instance, suggested a two-site ping-pong mechanism, while several others claimed ordered bi bi
mechanisms [38, 58, 59]. the order of substrate
binding and product release determined in each of
these studies also differed from one another. the
information obtained from the structures of human
[14] and t. gondii ak [15], on the other hand, allowed
clear understanding of the reaction mechanism of the
enzyme. as previously described, an ordered bi bi
mechanism was suggested, in which adenosine is the
first substrate to bind, and amp the last product to be
released [15]. this reaction mechanism is in good
agreement with the result of the biochemical studies
by palella et al. [38] and rotllan et al. [43].
adenosine-amp exchange activity in ak
another interesting aspect of ak is the adenosineamp exchange activity exhibited by this enzyme. in
characterizing purified ak from rat liver, mimouni et
al. [59, 60] discovered that when radioactive adenosine and non-labeled amp were added to the enzyme,
the result was formation of labeled amp. this
exchange reaction, which was dependent on the
presence of adp and mg2+ [59], was also seen with
ak from other sources [61]. although the exact
mechanism of adenosine-amp exchange activity is
not clearly understood, it can be explained with the
backward reaction of ak. in the exchange reaction,
adp serves as a carrier compound which shuttles a
phosphate group from one adenosine to another, and
thus is absolutely required [59]. similar to the
adenosine-phosphorylating activity of ak, the adenosine-amp exchange activity of the enzyme also
shows a dependence upon the presence of pentavalent
ions and free mg2+, indicating that these two activities
are related.

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

regulation of rk and ak by inorganic phosphate
phosphate or pentavalent ions dependency of rk and
ak
another important biochemical characteristic of rk
and ak that has been discovered in recent years is that
their catalytic activities show a nearly complete
dependence upon the presence of pentavalent ions
(pvis) such as phosphate. this property was first
demonstrated with chinese hamster ak in 1996 [62]
and with e. coli rk in 2001 [63]. the addition of
inorganic phosphate in both cases led to an increase in
the maximum velocity of the enzymes, as well as a
decrease in the km for their substrates, adenosine and
ribose [42, 44, 63]. interestingly, other pvis such as
arsenate and vanadate were also able to substitute for
phosphate as activators of these enzymes, showing
similar kinetic effects [42, 44, 63]. aks isolated from
different sources (viz. human, chinese hamster,
spinach, yeast, leishmania donovani and trypanosoma brucei) were all stimulated by inorganic phosphate, indicating that pvis dependency is a conserved
property of the enzyme [42, 51, 64]. however, there
can be some species variation in the kinetic details of
pvi dependency, as phosphate was found to slightly
increase (two-fold) the km for adenosine for t. brucei
ak [51].
in addition to ak and rk, there are three other
enzymes which have previously been reported to
exhibit phosphate dependency: 6-phosphofructo-1kinase (ec 2.7.1.11) [65], 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase
(ec 2.7.1.105) [66], and  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase (ec 2.7.6.1) [47]. like ak and
rk, these enzymes are all involved in the transfer of
phosphate from atp to a sugar-derived substrate.
furthermore, inorganic phosphate affects all of these
enzymes in a manner similar as seen for ak and rk,
resulting in increased vmax of the enzymes and reduced
km for the sugar substrates within similar concentration ranges. it is interesting that all of these enzymes
are involved in the production of essential metabolites, which is sensitive to the state of cellular energy. it
fits then that the activities of these enzymes are
regulated by inorganic phosphate, which provides an
important index of the cellular energy status. the
concentration of inorganic phosphate in guinea pig
hearts, for example, was 1.7, 7.1, and 13.9 mm under
normal, mildly hypoxic, and severely hypoxic conditions, respectively [67]. inorganic phosphate results in
half maximal velocity of ak and rk at about 2 mm,
and maximal velocity at about 10 mm concentration
[35, 68, 69]. the physiological level of inorganic
phosphate therefore allows a full range of regulation
for ak and rk.

cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 65, 2008

2883

table 2. molecular structures of ak activators and inhibitors.
activators

phosphorylated compounds that are activators and
inhibitors of ak and rk
the activation of ak and rk by phosphate and other
pvis has led to an examination of the effect of other
phosphorylated compounds on the activities of these
enzymes. these studies have identified many phosphorylated compounds which activate ak and rk
[35, 68, 69]. some of these compounds are shown in
table 2. kinetic studies with the activator compounds
showed that they act by a mechanism similar to that
seen with phosphate, resulting in increased vmax of the
enzyme and reduced km for adenosine [35, 68, 69].
most of the phosphorylated activators are important
cellular metabolites (mostly high-energy metabo-

inhibitors

lites), and thus may have a physiologically relevant
role as regulators of phosphate-dependent enzymes.
interestingly, a number of other compounds that are
structurally related to the activators were found to
inhibit ak and rk (table 2) [35, 68, 69]. the inhibitor
compounds acted in a competitive manner with
respect to the activating phosphate, indicating that
they are binding to the same site on these enzymes [35,
68, 69].
comparison of the chemical structures of the activators and inhibitors of ak and rk has identified
certain distinguishing features [69]. the simplest
activating compounds, such as phosphate, arsenate,
and vanadate, contain a pentavalent core atom which

2884

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

figure 5. nxxe motif. (a) close-up view of e. coli ribokinase showing asn187 (cyan) and glu190 (blue) from the nxxe motif, and the
bound phosphate (yellow). this phosphate has shown to form direct and indirect hydrogen bonds with the residues of the nxxe motif.
ribose (red) and adp (magenta) are also shown in the structure. (b) sequence alignment showing the conserved region in various
enzymes from the rk family.

is connected to four oxygen atoms. higher electronegativity of oxygen results in a partial positive charge
on the pentavalent atoms of these compounds. all of
the other activators have the general structure o32px-r, in which the x atom is oxygen or nitrogen (table
2). the electronegativity of the x atom in these
compounds is further stabilized by the r group due to
the inductive effect. as a result, these compounds also
have a partial positive charge on the core pentavalent
atoms (table 2) [69]. in contrast to the activators, the
inhibitors of ak have a methylene (-ch2-) group
adjacent to the core phosphorous atoms. due to the
electron-donating characteristic of this group, the
partial positive charges on the core pentavalent atoms
of these compounds are weaker than those in the
activating compounds. the partial charge on the core
pentavalent atom was calculated to be 1.29 – 1.37 for
the activators and 0.95 – 1.17 for the inhibitors [69].
the hypothesis is then that both the activators and
inhibitors, sharing similar structures, can bind to the
phosphate regulatory site on ak and rk [69].
although bound to the regulatory site, the inhibitor
compounds cannot promote catalysis due to the low
net positive charge on the core pentavalent atom.
the nxxe motif and its role in phosphate and
magnesium activation of ak and rk
a crystal structure of rk has been solved with a
bound phosphate in the active site, which makes close
contacts (direct and indirect hydrogen bonds) with the
residues asn187 and glu190 (fig. 5a) [29]. these
residues are highly conserved in the rk family
(fig. 5b) [42]. for instance, the corresponding resi-

dues are conserved in ak (asn223 and glu226 in
human, and asn239 and glu242 in chinese hamster),
and occupy similar three-dimensional space [14, 29].
in the crystal structure of human ak these residues
form hydrogen bonds with a bound  xxxd2531xxx 
through a bridging water molecule [14]. we have
proposed that asparagine and  xxxd2431xxx  residues
at these positions constitute a new sequence motif,
nxxe, which is a common characteristic of the rk
family [42]. the importance of the nxxe motif in
phosphate activation of ak has been studied by sitedirected mutagenesis [42]. unlike the wild-type
enzyme, which showed negligible activity in the
absence of phosphate, the n239q and e242d mutants
showed substantial activity without phosphate. addition of phosphate did not cause significant stimulation
in these cases. in contrast to these mutants, the n239l
and e242l mutants of ak showed no significant
activity both in the absence and presence of phosphate.
the dependence of ak activity on free magnesium, as
well as the presence of a bound  xxxd2531xxx  in the
human ak structure [14], suggests a requirement of a
catalytic mg2+ at the active site. the e242d and
n239q mutants showed lower affinity for free mg2+,
indicating that the effect of free mg2+ on ak activity is
closely related to that of the phosphate ion [42].
recently, a mutation in the glu190 residue of e. coli 6phosphofructo-2-kinase, which corresponds to glu242
in cho ak, was also reported to result in an enzyme
with an altered mg2+ requirement [70]. these results
indicate that the asn and glu residues of the nxxe
motif are required for proper binding of the catalytic

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

mg2+ ion at the active sites in these enzymes. although
the exact role of this  xxxd2531xxx  is not yet clear, it
is speculated that it helps in the formation of the
transition state of the reaction by increasing the
electrophilicity of the g-phosphorous atom of the
nucleotide [70, 71].
based on these observations, a model describing the
role of activating phosphate and free mg2+ in ak
catalysis has been proposed [68]. in this model
(fig. 6), when a phosphate or an activator compound
binds to the nxxe motif, it facilitates binding of free
mg2+ and also the substrate adenosine to the active
site. the binding of adenosine induces closing of the
lid domain and increases the enzymes affinity for the
second substrate atp. while the catalytic residue
asp316 deprotonates the 5’-hydroxyl end of adenosine, the activator compound enhances the electrophilicity of the b-phosphorous in atp by withdrawing
charge via its interaction with the non-bridging oxygen of the b-phosphate. here, the net positive charge
on the core pentavalent atom of the activator is
important for its interaction with the oxygen atoms.
the catalytic  xxxd2531xxx , on the other hand, may
have a similar interaction with the g-phosphate of
atp. due to the increased electronegativity of the band g-phosphorous atoms then, the electrons on the
bridging oxygen are drawn towards the phosphorous
atoms, making the bonds between them weak and
elongated. the deprotonated 5’-hydroxyl end of
adenosine subsequently attacks the positive center
of the g-phosphate, forming the transition state. in the
final step, the g-phosphate is transferred to adenosine,
and the products amp and adp are released.
it is reasonable to assume that the catalytic steps of the
rk reaction also proceed as described for ak, based
on several observations: (i) inorganic phosphate,
arsenate, and vanadate all have very similar effects
on the kinetics of both enzymes [44, 62, 63]. (ii) other
phosphorylated activators of ak also activate rk,
whereas the structurally related inhibitors of ak all
inhibit rk, without exception [68, 69]. (iii) the
nxxe motif, which has shown to be important for
phosphate activation in ak, is absolutely conserved in
rk [42]. (iv) the tertiary structures of ak and rk are
extremely similar, showing a high level of conservation especially at the catalytic site [14, 29]. the fact
that the nxxe motif is conserved in members of the
rk family suggests that other enzymes from this
family might also share catalytic mechanisms in
common with ak and rk.

review article

2885

studies of mutants affected in ak and gene structures
of ak and rk
isolation and characterization of mutants affected in
ak
as previously discussed, ak shows a very broad
specificity for its nucleoside substrate, allowing phosphorylation of numerous adenosine analogues. some
of these compounds, such as toyocamycin and tubercidin, are highly toxic to various cell types, and a
number of others exhibit antibacterial, antifungal,
antiviral, and antineoplastic properties [72 – 75].
based upon their chemical structures, the adenosine
analogues can be grouped into two broad classes.
compounds such as toyocamycin and tubercidin, and
also adenosine, contain a carbon-nitrogen bond in the
ribosidic linkage, and are referred to as n-nucleosides.
other analogues such as  xxxd2156xxx  a,  xxxd2156xxx  b, and
9-deazaadenosine, where a carbon-carbon bond links
the ribose sugar to the purine base, are referred to as
c-nucleosides [76].
mutants of mammalian cells resistant to toxic levels of
adenosine analogues have been selected from several
cell types and species [77 – 80] (see [73] for the
summary of additional studies and references). the
most commonly observed mutants from different cell
lines are affected in ak, and they are unable to
convert adenosine analogues into phosphorylated
forms, which are correlated with their cytotoxicity
[73]. most of these mutants contain no detectable ak
activity in cell extracts, and they exhibit high level of
cross-resistance to various n- as well as c-adenosine
analogues [73, 81]. the resistance phenotype of these
mutants behaves recessively in cell hybrids formed
with sensitive cells. such mutants are referred to as
class a mutants. interestingly, in the cho cell, the
spontaneous frequency of class a mutants is unusually high (10–4 to 10–5 mutations/cell/generation which
is about 100- to 10,000-fold higher than the frequency
of similar mutants in other cell lines) [73, 82]. the
genetic basis for this phenomenon is not fully understood, but this could be related to the differences in the
number of functional ak gene copies in various cell
lines [83]. it has been suggested that cho cells, where
such mutants were obtained at high rates, contain only
a single functional ak gene copy [82].
another interesting kind of mutant affected in ak
has been obtained in cho cells by selecting in the
presence of c-nucleosides  xxxd2156xxx  a and b [81].
these novel mutants (referred to as class b) exhibit
cross-resistance to, and are unable to phosphorylate,
various c-adenosine analogues, while remaining sensitive and fully capable of phosphorylating n-adenosine analogues [84]. the genetic lesion in these
mutants thus specifically prevents the phosphoryla-

2886

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase
figure 6. a model showing the
activating effect of inorganic
phosphate and interactions between different ligands at the
active site of ak. initially, binding of the activator facilitates
binding of free mg2+ as well as
the substrate adenosine to the
active site. this induces closing of
the lid domain, which in turn
increases the enzyme affinity for
the second substrate atp. (a)
once atp is bound, the activator
compound enhances the electrophilicity of the b-phosphorous
atom by withdrawing charge via
its interaction with the nonbridging oxygen of the b-phosphate. the net positive charge on
the core pentavalent atom of the
activator compound is important
for its interaction with the oxygen
atom. the catalytic magnesium
ion, on the other hand, may have
a similar interaction with the gphosphate of atp. due to the
increased electronegativity of the
b- and g-phosphorous atoms, the
electrons on the bridging oxygen
are drawn towards the phosphorous atoms, making the bonds
between the b- and g-phosphate
weak and elongated. in the
meantime, the catalytic residue
asp316 deprotonates the 5’-hydroxyl end of adenosine. (b) the
positive center of the g-phosphate attracts the negative
charge developed on the 5’-hydroxyl of adenosine after proton
abstraction by the catalytic base
asp316. arg148 helps stabilize
the negative charges on the nonbridging oxygens of the g-phosphate. (c) the g-phosphate is
transferred to adenosine. the
arginine residue flips back, and
the products adp and amp are
released. the positions of the
substrates, ligands, and amino
acid residues in this figure are
based on the structural data for
ak and rk. the thick, hatched
lines indicate hydrogen bonds.
the x atom in the activating
compound generally is oxygen
or nitrogen.

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

tion of c-adenosine analogues without any effect on
n-adenosine analogues. what is also intriguing with
the class b mutants is that, although these cells are
sensitive to n-nucleosides, no ak activity (using
adenosine, a n-nucleoside) could be detected in their
cell extracts [84]. some other mutants affected in ak
(class c) show reduced phosphorylation and affinity
of certain adenosine analogues to which they exhibit
increased resistance [73].
gene structure of ak
the sequence of ak cdna from human and chinese
hamster cells was first determined in 1996 [10, 11].
subsequent work on ak gene structure has revealed
that ak genes in mammalian organisms are extremely
large [83, 85]. human ak is estimated to be >550 kb
long, and the genes from rat, mouse, and chinese
hamster are also very large [83, 85]. both human and
chinese hamster ak genes have identical structures,
consisting of 11 exons whose length ranges from 36 to
173 bps and total 1.1 kb [83, 85]. the lengths of the
intervening introns in the human genome varies from
4.2 kb to >126 kb [83, 85]. the ratio of the noncoding
to coding sequence for human ak (i.e. >550) is the
highest known for any gene in mammalian or other
organisms. in contrast to the mammalian genes, ak
genes in other eukaryotic organisms are small [83].
saccharomyces cerevisiae and schizosaccharomyces
pombe, for instance, have no introns in their ak genes.
in drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans, the ak genes are only 1.5 and 1.3 kb long,
containing two and four small introns, respectively.
arabidopsis thaliana, on the other hand, has 10 small
introns, which makes the overall length of the ak
gene 2.4 kb long [83].
another unusual feature of ak gene structure in
mammalian cells is that in various species (viz. human,
mouse, and chinese hamster) it is closely linked to the
gene for the m3a subunit of the clathrin adaptor
protein-3 (ap-3 m3a gene) [83, 85]. in all of these
species, the genes for these two proteins are linked in a
head-to-head fashion, and are transcribed from a
single bi-directional promoter. the possible significance of the close linkage of these two genes and their
sharing a common promoter is presently not clear.
the knowledge of ak gene structure has permitted
characterization of mutants affected in ak at molecular levels. southern and northern blot analyses on a
number of class a mutants of cho cells show that
they contain large deletions leading to loss of several
introns and exons [10, 83]. it is possible that the
unusually large size of the ak gene and of its
intervening introns is responsible for these deletions
and also the high spontaneous frequency of the class
a mutants. interestingly, in a number of these

review article

2887

mutants, the deletion affecting the ak gene also
extends into the neighboring ap-3 m3a gene, leading
to loss of all of its introns and exons [85]. the ap-3
m3a adaptor protein is involved in vesicle-mediated
protein sorting, and an alteration in this protein has
been observed in hermansky-pudlak syndrome, a
genetic disorder characterized by defective lysosomerelated organelles [86, 87].
gene structure of rk
recently, the gene for rk in human cells has been
characterized [35]. the human rk gene, which is
located on chromosome 2, is approximately 110 kb
and comprises 8 exons that vary in length from 63 to
189 nucleotides. interestingly, human rk shows a
much higher degree of sequence identity to the rk
sequences from protists species (viz. trypanosoma
cruzi and entamoeba histolytica) and various bacteria
(viz. e. coli, bukholderia cepacia, etc.) in comparison
with the homologues from plants (arabidopsis thaliana) and fungi (saccharomyces cerevisiae) [35]. these
results are unexpected as fungi and plants are more
closely related to the animals than bacteria [88]. it is
thus possible that rks from plant and fungi species
have originated independently from those in animal
and protist species. it is also possible that the plant and
fungi rk sequences, which have not been characterized biochemically, may correspond to some other
sugar kinases.
studies with transgenic mice affected in ak
in contrast to other enzymes involved in the purine
salvage pathway, such as  xxxg62xxx , purine
 xxxg1792xxx , and hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase (fig. 7a), whose deficiency leads to a variety of genetic disorders in humans
[89], no disease linked to the ak locus has been
identified [90, 91]. however, in transgenic ak/
mice, lack of ak has been shown to result in the
development of acute neonatal hepatic steatosis,
which leads to early postnatal mortality [92]. two
abnormalities of hepatic metabolism have been suggested to contribute in the development of steatosis in
these mice: atp depletion and inhibition of transmethylation reactions [91]. the absence of ak leads
to loss of adenine nucleotides in favour of accumulation of adenosine. this leads to reduced metabolic
capacity of mitochondria in the liver, which contributes to the development of steatosis [91]. adenosine is
also an important by-product of the transmethylation
reactions catalyzed by various s- xxxd3156xxx 
(sam)-dependent methyltransferases (fig. 7b) [91].
this reaction produces s- xxxd3157xxx 
(sah), which is hydrolyzed by sah-hydrolase into
homocysteine and adenosine. if adenosine is not

2888

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase
figure 7. metabolic pathways of
purine nucleotides. (a) synthesis
of purine nucleotides. for both
purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, ribose-5-phosphate is pyrophosphorylated to form 5-phosphoribose-1-pyrophosphate
( xxxd2937xxx ), by  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase
(enzyme 1). the detailed steps
of de novo purine synthesis leading from  xxxd2937xxx  to imp are omitted. the enzymes of the salvage
pathway, such as  xxxg179xxx  (enzyme
2) and hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase (enzyme 3), regenerate nucleoside
monophosphates from purine
bases and  xxxd2937xxx  (dotted arrows).
amp can be also formed by
phosphorylation of adenosine by
ak (enzyme 4). (b) adenosine
metabolism: pathways and enzymes involved. enzymes: 1,
ecto-5’-nucleotidase (e-n); 2,  xxxg62xxx  (both ectoand plasma forms); 3, ak; 4, 5’nucleotidase (c-ni); 5, adenosine
deaminase; 6, amp-deaminase;
7, sah-hydrolase; 8, various
methyl-transferases; 9, 5’-nucleotidase (c-nii) or alkaline phosphatase. abbreviations: sah, sadenosylhomocysteine and sam
s- xxxd3156xxx .

promptly removed by the action of ak, this will result
in accumulation of sah, which in turn inhibits various
transmethylation reactions that are crucial for a wide
variety of cellular processes [93, 94]. thus, although
ak is a salvage pathway enzyme, its cellular function
is essential for the growth of organisms. this provides
plausible explanations for the early postnatal lethality
of ak-/- mice and also why mutants affected in ak
have not been obtained in humans.
boison and co-workers have carried out extensive
work in recent years on the role of adenosine and ak
in the development of epilepsy in a mouse model
system [90, 95, 96]. according to these authors, the
underlying pathogenic mechanism of epileptogenesis
is astrocyte dysfunction that leads to overexpression
of ak. the increased expression of ak in turn
reduces ambient adenosine, which plays a central role
as the inhibitory neuromodulator and endogenous

anticonvulsant in neuronal cells. their studies with
transgenic mice that either overexpress or underexpress ak in the brain, where the incidence of
epileptic seizure is either enhanced or greatly reduced,
provide strong suggestive evidence for the ak
hypothesis of epileptogenesis [90, 95, 97 – 99].

ribose metabolism and its importance
ribose metabolism
d-ribose is one of the most abundant and important
sugars in biological systems [100]. before entering the
metabolic pathway, ribose needs to be phosphorylated
by rk. the resulting ribose-5-phosphate (r-5-p) is
then used for synthesis of nucleotides and other cofactors, or for energy production. ribose has received
much attention in recent years, as a metabolic supple-

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

ment for the heart [101]. under normal conditions,
energy-rich nucleotides are continuously produced in
the heart to fulfill metabolic requirements. an absolutely essential compound in the production of purine
and pyrimidine nucleotides is phosphoribosyl-5-pyrophosphate ( xxxd2937xxx ), which is generated from r-5-p by
the enzyme  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase. in de novo synthesis
(fig. 7a),  xxxd2937xxx  undergoes a series of reactions with
other metabolic precursors, such as amino acids, co2,
and nh3, in order to produce nucleotides [102]. in the
salvage pathway (fig. 7a),  xxxd2937xxx  is used to salvage
and recycle the free purine and pyrimidine bases
resulting from nucleotide catabolism [102]. under
pathologic cardiac conditions such as ischemia, however, the availability of  xxxd2937xxx  is limited, thus hampering nucleotide synthesis [103, 104]. nucleosides and
bases produced via degradation of nucleotides then
diffuse into the vascular space, and become lost from
the tissue during reperfusion [105]. the repletion of
nucleotides following ischemic insults has shown to be
important in the recovery of mechanical function of
the heart [102]. supply of ribose, which is metabolized
into r-5-p, the immediate precursor of  xxxd2937xxx , thus
enhances the cells ability to regenerate atp and
helps restore proper function.
the beneficial effects of supplemental ribose on the
cardiovascular system have been extensively studied
during the past three decades. in numerous animal
models of cardiac and cerebral ischemia, cardiac
hypertrophy, and cardiomyopathy, ribose administration has shown to recover and enhance diastolic
function by replenishing myocardial adenine nucleotides [106 – 108]. subsequent investigations with
human subjects have also demonstrated cardio-protective effects of supplemental ribose. patients with
severe coronary artery disease have shown significantly increased tolerance to exercise-induced ischemia when treated with oral ribose [109]. in patients
undergoing aortic valve replacement, supplementation of ribose prevented deterioration of the left
ventricular function which was commonly seen in the
untreated control group [110]. furthermore, administration of ribose in congestive heart failure patients
significantly improved diastolic function and ventilatory efficiency, leading to an improvement in quality
of life [111, 112]. showing no signs of adverse
reactions in a number of toxicity studies [113, 114],
the safety of ribose as a nutriceutical has been well
accepted.
ribose transport
despite its importance, phosphorylation of free ribose
following its transport into the cell is a little-investigated pathway in mammals. however, a substantial
body of knowledge about ribose transport is available

review article

2889

in a bacterial system. in e. coli, ribose transport is
controlled by the rbs operon, which encodes six
proteins, rbsdacbkr [115]. these proteins are
normally expressed at a low level, but induced in the
presence of ribose [1]. the general pathway is as
follows [115]. (i) ribose enters the periplasm through
pores in the outer membrane. (ii) ribose is recognized
and bound by rbsb, which then binds to the rbsac
membrane complex. (iii) atp hydrolysis by rbsa on
the cytoplasmic side of the membrane brings ribose
into the cell. once in the cytoplasm, ribose undergoes
a conformational change by the action of rbsd. this is
a necessary step in ribose utilization, since rk (rbsk)
binds to ribose in its furan form [29], whereas rbsb
binds to the pyran form [116].
in eukaryotic cells, ribose transport has only been
characterized in the parasitic protozoa leishmania
[117, 118]. in contrast to its bacterial counterpart,
ribose transport in leishmania species does not occur
by an active transport mechanism, as it is insensitive to
metabolic inhibitors and uncoupling agents [117].
instead, a carrier-facilitated transport mechanism has
been suggested, as free intracellular ribose exchanges
diffusively with exogenous deoxyribose [117]. rk
from leishmania major was recently cloned, sequenced, and characterized as the first enzyme of its
kind in the leishmania genus [34].

adenosine metabolism and related therapeutic
applications
adenosine metabolism
the  xxxd2705xxx  adenosine shows neuromodulating properties with a broad range of physiological
responses in mammalian tissues via interaction with
adenosine receptors. much recent interest in adenosine metabolism has arisen from the discovery that
adenosine receptor-mediated signals are involved in
the protection of cells and tissues undergoing ischemic
stress. under normal oxygenated conditions, the rate
of atp catabolism and anabolism are equal, and the
concentration of atp is maintained at a much higher
level (at least 10 times higher) than that of adp [119,
120]. under conditions of tissue stress or trauma, such
as ischemia or hypoxia, however, the oxygen supply is
inadequate for oxidative phosphorylation of adp to
regenerate atp, and the atp/adp ratio is compromised. the increasing concentration of adp results in
an increase in the concentration of amp, which in turn
is hydrolyzed to adenosine [121, 122]. due to the
increased cytosolic concentration, adenosine is released into the extracellular space, where it can bind to
adenosine receptors. the protective effects of adenosine receptor-mediated responses include coronary

2890

j. park and r. s. gupta

vasodilation, neuronal activity reduction, platelet
aggregation inhibition, anti-inflammatory activity,
angiogenesis, and ischemic preconditioning [123 –
129]. for this reason, adenosine has been variously
called as signal of life and bodys natural defense.
interstitial concentrations of adenosine have been
found as high as 30 mm within the myocardium [130],
30 mm in the brain [131], and 100 mm in the spinal cord
[132], during a hypoxic episode. the cytosolic concentration of adenosine under normoxic conditions,
on the other hand, was estimated to range between
0.01 and 0.1 mm [133, 134]. the concentration of
adenosine is tightly regulated by ak and adenosine
deaminase (ada), which catalyze the phosphorylation and deamination of adenosine, respectively
(fig. 7b). the km of ada for adenosine is in the
range of 25 – 150 mm [135, 136], whereas that for ak is
in the range of 25 nm – 1 mm [11, 137 – 139]. since the
km of ak for adenosine is much lower than that of
ada, ak is the principal enzyme responsible for
regulating the level of adenosine.
while the ak and ada are the main enzymes
responsible for the catabolism of adenosine, there are
three enzymes which are involved in the formation of
adenosine. the most important source of adenosine
quantitatively is the amp-selective cytosolic 5’-nucleotidase (c-ni), which has been suggested to be
responsible for approximately 76 % of adenosine
production in mammalian cells (fig. 7b) [140, 141].
another important enzyme responsible for the production of adenosine via hydrolysis of amp is ecto-5’nucleotidase (e-n) [142], a glycoprotein found primarily in the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells
[143]. the contribution of e-n to the total pool of
adenosine in mammalian cells is estimated to be
between 24 and 30 % [144, 145]. in addition to these
two enzymes, adenosine can also be produced from sadenosylhomocysteine (sah) via sah-hydrolase
(fig. 7b). the reaction catalyzed by sah-hydrolase
is reversible, and the direction of its activity is
dependent on the local concentrations of homocysteine [146]. the enzyme however, generally favours
the hydrolysis of sah as both homocysteine and
adenosine are rapidly metabolized [147].
adenosine transport
because adenosine is hydrophilic, it requires specialized transport systems for its movement across the
plasma membrane. there have been two major classes
of nucleoside transport systems described in mammalian cells, the equilibrative (ent) and the concentrative (cnt) nucleoside transporters [100, 148, 149].
the equilibrative system can mediate the transport of
adenosine and other nucleosides in both directions,
according to the nucleoside concentration gradient

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

across the cell membrane. thus far, four transporter
proteins belonging to the equilibrative system have
been cloned and identified, which are widely distributed in various cell types [149]. in contrast to the
equilibrative system, the concentrative system mediates nucleoside transport in a uni-directional manner,
coupled to that of the sodium ion. six functionally
different nucleoside transport activities belonging to
this class have been identified, of which three have
been characterized at the protein/gene level [148,
149]. the requirement for a na+ gradient is generally
specific for these transporters, and their substrate
specificity differs greatly from one another [148].
in contrast to the mammalian cells, all of the protozoan nucleoside transporters identified to date belong
to the ent family, showing sequence and topology
homology to the members of mammalian ents [150].
nucleoside transporters are important in the biochemistry of parasitic protozoa due to their absolute
reliance upon the salvage of preformed purines from
their vertebrate and invertebrate hosts. the first genes
for protozoan nucleoside transporters were cloned
from leishmania donovani by functional complementation of an adenosine-pyrimidine transport-deficient
mutant [151]. since then, a number of additional
adenosine/nucleoside transporters have been identified in organisms such as leishmania major, trypanosoma brucei, toxoplasma gondii, and plasmodium
falciparum [150, 152].
inhibitors of ak as therapeutic agents
as mentioned, adenosine shows a broad range of
tissue-protective effects as an endogenous neuromodulator. the nucleoside is released into the extracellular space at specific sites during conditions of
physiological stress and trauma, including ischemia,
seizures, inflammation, and pain [153]. by activating
various adenosine receptors on the cell surface,
adenosine acts to limit tissue damaging and restore
normal function [154]. utilization of exogenous
adenosine for pharmacological purposes, however, is
difficult to achieve due to its short half-life in the
interstitial fluid, which is of the order of seconds [155].
inhibition of ak, on the other hand, provides a means
to amplify the tissue-protective effects of adenosine
by helping maintain its elevated level in the extracellular compartment. since the release of endogenous
adenosine is highly localized to tissues under stress,
the effects of ak inhibition may only be pronounced
at these specific sites [156]. in view of this potential as
a pharmacological agent, there has been a great
interest and effort to identify and optimize ak
inhibitors.
one of the most extensively characterized groups of
ak inhibitors consists of structural analogues of

cell. mol. life sci.

vol. 65, 2008

adenosine, such as 5’-amino,5’-deoxyadenosine
(5’nh2dado), 5- xxxd2378xxx  (5it) and 5’deoxy,5- xxxd2378xxx  (5’d-5it). with ic50 values
on the order of several nanomoles, these compounds
are highly potent in inhibiting ak in vitro [157].
although these compounds have shown positive
effects in several animal models of pain, seizure, and
ischemia [158 – 161], their pharmacological utility is
largely compromised due to short plasma half-lives,
poor bio-availability, lack of target selectivity, and the
potential to form cytotoxic metabolites [161, 162]. in
an effort to optimize these ak inhibitors for better in
vivo properties, a large series of 5’nh2dado and 5it
derivatives were synthesized and tested [161, 163,
164]. as a result of rounds of structure-activity
relationship studies, a number of diaryltubercidin
analogues were identified as potent inhibitors of ak.
compounds such as gp790 and gp3966, for example,
showed inhibition of human recombinant ak at low
nanomolar concentrations [161, 163, 164]. when
tested for anticonvulsant, anti-inflammatory, and
analgesic properties in animal models, these compounds showed high efficacy with relatively mild
adverse effects [161, 163, 164].
in addition to optimizing nucleoside analogue ak
inhibitors, there has been a great effort in identifying
novel, non-nucleoside ak inhibitors. some of the
most promising non-nucleoside ak inhibitors belong
to two different classes, the pyridopyrimidine and the
alkynylpyrimidine derivatives. these two groups of
compounds were derived from an initial high-throughput screening lead [157], and have been subjected to
rigorous rounds of structure-activity relationship
studies [165 – 169]. compound abt-702, an example
of pyridopyrimidine for instance, shows an ic50 value
of 1.7 nm in vitro, and is comparably as efficient as
morphine in animal models of pain [157]. an alkynylpyrimidine compound, 5-(4-(dimethylamino)phenyl)-6-(6-morpholin-4-ylpyridin-3-ylethynyl)pyrimidin-4-ylamine, which shows levels of efficacy similar to abt-702 [157], was recently crystallized with
human ak [157]. both the pyridopyrimidine and
alkynylpyrimidine derivatives, in animal studies,
showed little effect on motor coordination, mean
arterial pressure, and heart rate, at effective doses for
pain relief [165 – 169]. other recently identified nonnucleoside ak inhibitors include n-(5,6-diphenylfuro[2,3-d]pyrimidin-4-yl)-propionamide and 2-[2(3,4-dihydroxy-phenyl)-5-phenyl-1h-imidazol-4-yl]fluoren-9-one [64]. both of these compounds potently
inhibited human ak in vitro and in cultured cells in a
concentration-dependent manner [64].

review article

2891

conclusion and future directions
rk and ak were discovered more than 50 years ago,
and there has been much progress in understanding
these two important enzymes within the last decade or
so. the structures of both rk and ak from various
bacterial and eukaryotic sources have been solved,
and have provided crucial information regarding
ligand binding and reaction mechanisms. the mechanism of phosphate (or pvi) dependency, a unique
catalytic property shared by rk and ak, is finally
starting to emerge after recent biochemical studies.
both these enzymes carry out important metabolic
reactions, and the therapeutic potentials of the
substrates of these enzymes, ribose and adenosine,
are now well recognized. the gene structures of rk
and ak in mammalian systems have also become
known within the last decade and have revealed
several interesting features, opening the door for
further studies. recently, ak was identified as a key
target for the prediction and prevention of epilepsy in
a mouse model system, and these studies need to be
extended to humans.
although much work has been done with respect to
ribose transport and its phosphorylation in bacterial
systems, its eukaryotic counterpart is poorly understood. in light of the cardio-protective effects of
supplemental ribose, ribose transport in mammalian
systems, especially in humans, needs to be investigated
in greater detail. in recent years, many inhibitors of
ak have been identified which need to be further
evaluated in clinical settings. if proven effective, ak
inhibitors will represent a new group of drugs with
analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-epileptogenic
properties, as well as cardio-protective properties.
another potentially interesting area for future studies
is the phosphate (or pvi) dependency of other
enzymes. as mentioned in this work, there are several
enzymes which also show phosphate dependency, such
as 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase, 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase, and  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase,
whose exact phosphate activation mechanisms are
not known. some of these enzymes, 6-phosphofructo2-kinase in particular, belong to the rk family of
enzymes, and share similar primary and tertiary
structures with rk and ak. the phosphate activation
mechanism of ak described in this work may apply to
additional enzymes with a common structural basis.
acknowledgements. the work from the authors lab in this area has
been supported by a research grant (t-6177) from the heart and
stroke foundation of canada.

2892

j. park and r. s. gupta

1 anderson, a. and cooper, r. a. (1969) the significance of
ribokinase for ribose utilization by escherichia coli. biochim.
biophys.  xxxg52xxx . 177, 163 – 165.
2 lopilato, j. e., garwin, j. l., emr, s. d., silhavy, t. j., and
beckwith, j. r. (1984) d-ribose metabolism in escherichia
coli k-12: genetics, regulation, and transport. j. bacteriol. 158,
665 – 673.
3 snyder, f. f. and lukey, t. (1982) kinetic considerations for
the regulation of adenosine and deoxyadenosine metabolism
in mouse and human tissues based on a thymocyte model.
biochim. biophys. acta. 696, 299 – 307.
4 krenitsky, t. a., miller, r. l., and fyfe, j. a. (1974) levels of
nucleoside and nucleotide kinases in rhesus monkey tissues.
biochem. pharmacol. 23, 70 – 72.
5 dunwiddie, t. v. and masino, s. a. (2001) the role and
regulation of adenosine in the central nervous system. annu.
rev. neurosci. 24, 31 – 55.
6 newby, a. c. (1985) the role of  xxxg79xxx  in regulating adenosine concentration. biochem. j., 226, 343 – 344.
7 agranoff, b. w. and brady, r. o. (1956) purification and
properties of calf liver ribokinase. j. biol. chem. 219, 221 –
229.
8 caputto, r. (1951) the enzymatic synthesis of  xxxd81xxx ;
adenosinekinase. j. biol. chem. 189, 801 – 814.
9 bork, p., sander, c., and valencia, a. (1993) convergent
evolution of similar enzymatic function on different protein
folds: the hexokinase, ribokinase, and galactokinase families
of sugar kinases. protein sci. 2, 31 – 40.
10 singh, b., hao, w., wu, z., eigl, b., and gupta, r. s. (1996)
cloning and characterization of cdna for  xxxg79xxx 
from mammalian (chinese hamster, mouse, human and rat)
species. high frequency mutants of chinese hamster ovary
cells involve structural alterations in the gene. eur. j. biochem. 241, 564 – 571.
11 spychala, j., datta, n. s., takabayashi, k., datta, m., fox,
i. h., gribbin, t., and mitchell, b. s. (1996) cloning of human
 xxxg79xxx  cdna: sequence similarity to microbial
ribokinases and fructokinases. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa.,
93, 1232 – 1237.
12 hugouvieux-cotte-pattat, n., nasser, w., and robert-baudouy, j. (1994) molecular characterization of the erwinia
chrysanthemi kdgk gene involved in pectin degradation.
j. bacteriol. 176, 2386 – 2392.
13 arnfors, l., hansen, t., schonheit, p., ladenstein, r., and
meining, w. (2006) structure of methanocaldococcus jannaschii nucleoside kinase: an archaeal member of the rk family.
acta. crystallogr. d. biol. crystallogr. 62, 1085 – 1097.
14 mathews, i. i., erion, m. d., and ealick, s. e. (1998) structure
of human  xxxg79xxx  at 1.5 a resolution. biochemistry,
37, 15607 – 15620.
15 schumacher, m. a., scott, d. m., mathews, i. i., ealick, s. e.,
roos, d. s., ullman, b., and brennan, r. g. (2000) crystal
structures of toxoplasma gondii  xxxg79xxx  reveal a
novel catalytic mechanism and prodrug binding. j. mol. biol.
296, 549 – 567.
16 sigrell, j. a., cameron, a. d., and mowbray, s. l. (1999)
induced fit on sugar binding activates ribokinase. j. mol. biol.
290, 1009 – 1018.
17 bairoch, a. (1991) prosite: a dictionary of sites and
patterns in proteins. nucleic acids res. 19 suppl, 2241 – 2245.
18 hulo, n., bairoch, a., bulliard, v., cerutti, l., cuche, b. a.,
castro, e. d., lachaize, c., langendijk-genevaux, p. s., and
sigrist, c. j. (2008) the 20 years of prosite. nucleic acids
res. 36,  xxxd245xxx - xxxd249xxx .
19 holden, h. m., thoden, j. b., timson, d. j., and reece, r. j.
(2004) galactokinase: structure, function and role in type ii
galactosemia. cell. mol. life sci. 61, 2471 – 2484.
20 kawai, s., mukai, t., mori, s., mikami, b., and murata, k.
(2005) hypothesis: structures, evolution, and ancestor of
glucose kinases in the hexokinase family. j. biosci. bioeng. 99,
320 – 330.

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase
21 luesink, e. j., marugg, j. d., kuipers, o. p., and de vos, w. m.
(1999) characterization of the divergent sacbk and sacar
operons, involved in sucrose utilization by lactococcus lactis.
j. bacteriol. 181, 1924 – 1926.
22 sadaie, y., yata, k., fujita, m., sagai, h., itaya, m.,
kasahara, y., and ogasawara, n. (1997) nucleotide sequence
and analysis of the  xxxd2908xxx -rrne-groesl region of the bacillus
subtilis chromosome. microbiology, 143 (pt 6), 1861 – 1866.
23 sato, y., yamamoto, y., kizaki, h., and kuramitsu, h. k.
(1993) isolation, characterization and sequence analysis of the
scrk gene encoding fructokinase of streptococcus mutans.
j. gen. microbiol. 139, 921 – 927.
24 zembrzuski, b., chilco, p., liu, x. l., liu, j., conway, t., and
scopes, r. (1992) cloning, sequencing, and expression of the
zymomonas mobilis fructokinase gene and structural comparison of the enzyme with other hexose kinases. j. bacteriol.
174, 3455 – 3460.
25 aulkemeyer, p., ebner, r., heilenmann, g., jahreis, k.,
schmid, k., wrieden, s., and lengeler, j. w. (1991) molecular
analysis of two fructokinases involved in sucrose metabolism
of enteric bacteria. mol. microbiol. 5, 2913 – 2922.
26 blatch, g. l., scholle, r. r., and woods, d. r. (1990)
nucleotide sequence and analysis of the vibrio alginolyticus
sucrose uptake-encoding region. gene, 95, 17 – 23.
27 smith, s. b., taylor, m. a., burch, l. r., and davies, h. v.
(1993) primary structure and characterization of a cdna
clone of fructokinase from potato (solanum tuberosum l. cv
record). plant physiol. 102, 1043.
28 long, m. c., escuyer, v., and parker, w. b. (2003) identification and characterization of a unique  xxxg79xxx 
from mycobacterium tuberculosis. j. bacteriol. 185, 6548 –
6555.
29 sigrell, j. a., cameron, a. d., jones, t. a., and mowbray,
s. l. (1998) structure of escherichia coli ribokinase in
complex with ribose and dinucleotide determined to 1.8 a
resolution: insights into a new family of kinase structures.
structure, 6, 183 – 193.
30 sigrell, j. a., cameron, a. d., jones, t. a., and mowbray,
s. l. (1997) purification, characterization, and crystallization
of escherichia coli ribokinase. protein sci. 6, 2474 – 2476.
31 andersson, c. e. and mowbray, s. l. (2002) activation of
ribokinase by monovalent cations. j. mol. biol. 315, 409 – 419.
32 schimmel, s. d., hoffee, p., and horecker, b. l. (1974)
deoxyribokinase from salmonella typhimurium. purification
and properties. arch. biochem. biophys. 164, 560 – 570.
33 chuvikovsky, d. v., esipov, r. s., skoblov, y. s., chupova,
l. a., muravyova, t. i., miroshnikov, a. i., lapinjoki, s., and
mikhailopulo, i. a. (2006) ribokinase from e. coli: expression, purification, and substrate specificity. bioorg. med.
chem. 14, 6327 – 6332.
34 ogbunude, p. o., lamour, n., and barrett, m. p. (2007)
molecular cloning, expression and characterization of ribokinase of leishmania major. acta biochim. biophys. sin.
(shanghai), 39, 462 – 466.
35 park, j., van koeverden, p., singh, b., and gupta, r. s. (2007)
identification and characterization of human ribokinase and
comparison of its properties with e. coli ribokinase and
human  xxxg79xxx . febs lett. 581, 3211 – 3216.
36 suelter, c. h. (1970) enzymes activated by monovalent
cations. science, 168, 789 – 795.
37 di cera, e. (2006) a structural perspective on enzymes
activated by monovalent cations. j. biol. chem. 281, 1305 –
1308.
38 palella, t. d., andres, c. m., and fox, i. h. (1980) human
placental  xxxg79xxx . kinetic mechanism and inhibition. j. biol. chem. 255, 5264 – 5269.
39 miller, r. l., adamczyk, d. l., and miller, w. h. (1979)
 xxxg79xxx  from rabbit liver. i. purification by affinity
chromatography and properties. j. biol. chem. 254, 2339 –
2345.

cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 65, 2008

40 chang, c. h., brockman, r. w., and bennett, l. l., jr. (1980)
 xxxg79xxx  from l1210 cells. purification and some
properties of the enzyme. j. biol. chem. 255, 2366 – 2371.
41 fisher, m. n. and newsholme, e. a. (1984) properties of rat
heart  xxxg79xxx . biochem. j., 221, 521 – 528.
42 maj, m. c., singh, b., and gupta, r. s. (2002) pentavalent
ions dependency is a conserved property of  xxxg79xxx 
from diverse sources: identification of a novel motif implicated in phosphate and  xxxd2531xxx  binding and substrate
inhibition. biochemistry, 41, 4059 – 4069.
43 rotllan, p. and miras portugal, m. t. (1985)  xxxg79xxx 
from bovine adrenal medulla. eur. j. biochem. 151, 365 – 371.
44 maj, m., singh, b., and gupta, r. s. (2000) the influence of
inorganic phosphate on the activity of  xxxg79xxx .
biochim. biophys. acta 1476, 33 – 42.
45 arnvig, k., hove-jensen, b., and switzer, r. l. (1990)
purification and properties of phosphoribosyl-diphosphate
synthetase from bacillus subtilis. eur. j. biochem. 192, 195 –
200.
46 hove-jensen, b., harlow, k. w., king, c. j., and switzer,
r. l. (1986)  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase of
escherichia coli. properties of the purified enzyme and
primary structure of the prs gene. j. biol. chem. 261, 6765 –
6771.
47 switzer, r. l. (1969) regulation and mechanism of  xxxd2937xxx  synthetase. i. purification and
properties of the enzyme from salmonella typhimurium.
j. biol. chem. 244, 2854 – 2863.
48 mildvan, a. s. (1987) role of magnesium and other divalent
cations in atp-utilizing enzymes. magnesium, 6, 28 – 33.
49 ginsburg, a. (1959) a deoxyribokinase from lactobacillus
plantarum. j. biol. chem. 234, 481 – 487.
50 bennett, l. l., jr. and hill, d. l. (1975) structural requirements for activity of nucleosides as substrates for adenosine
kinase: orientation of substituents on the pentofuranosyl ring.
mol. pharmacol. 11, 803 – 808.
51 vodnala, m., fijolek, a., rofougaran, r., mosimann, m.,
mser, p., and hofer, a. (2008)  xxxg79xxx  mediates
high affinity adenosine salvage in trypanosoma brucei.
j. biol. chem. 283, 5380 – 5388.
52 hershfield, m. s., fetter, j. e., small, w. c., bagnara, a. s.,
williams, s. r., ullman, b., martin, d. w., jr., wasson, d. b.,
and carson, d. a. (1982) effects of mutational loss of
 xxxg79xxx  and  xxxg611xxx  on deoxyatp
accumulation and deoxyadenosine toxicity in cultured cem
human t-lymphoblastoid cells. j. biol. chem. 257, 6380 – 6386.
53 lindberg, b., klenow, h., and hansen, k. (1967) some
properties of partially purified mammalian  xxxg79xxx .
j. biol. chem. 242, 350 – 356.
54 miller, r. l., adamczyk, d. l., miller, w. h., koszalka,
g. w., rideout, j. l., beacham, l. m., iii, chao, e. y.,
haggerty, j. j., krenitsky, t. a., and elion, g. b. (1979)
 xxxg79xxx  from rabbit liver. ii. substrate and inhibitor
specificity. j. biol. chem. 254, 2346 – 2352.
55 miller, r. l., adamczyk, d. l., rideout, j. l., and krenitsky,
t. a. (1982) purification, characterization, substrate and
inhibitor specificity of  xxxg79xxx  from several eimeria
species. mol. biochem. parasitol. 6, 209 – 223.
56 pelicano, h., maury, g., elalaoui, a., shafiee, m., imbach,
j. l., goody, r. s., and divita, g. (1997) study of the
substrate-binding properties of bovine liver  xxxg79xxx 
and inhibition by fluorescent nucleoside analogues. eur.
j. biochem. 248, 930 – 937.
57 chang, c. h., cha, s., brockman, r. w., and bennett, l. l.,
jr. (1983) kinetic studies of  xxxg79xxx  from l1210
cells: a model enzyme with a two-site ping-pong mechanism.
biochemistry, 22, 600 – 611.
58 henderson, j. f., mikoshiba, a., chu, s. y., and caldwell,
i. c. (1972) kinetic studies of  xxxg79xxx  from ehrlich
ascites tumor cells. j. biol. chem. 247, 1972 – 1975.
59 mimouni, m., bontemps, f., and van den berghe, g. (1994)
kinetic studies of rat liver  xxxg79xxx . explanation of

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71
72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

2893

exchange reaction between adenosine and amp. j. biol.
chem. 269, 17820 – 17825.
mimouni, m., bontemps, f., and van den berghe, g. (1994)
production of adenosine and nucleoside analogues by an
exchange reaction catalyzed by  xxxg79xxx . adv. exp.
med. biol. 370, 613 – 616.
gupta, r. s. (1996) adenosine-amp exchange activity is an
integral part of the mammalian  xxxg79xxx . biochem.
mol. biol. int. 39, 493 – 502.
hao, w. and gupta, r. s. (1996) pentavalent ions dependency
of mammalian  xxxg79xxx . biochem. mol. biol. int. 38,
889 – 899.
maj, m. c. and gupta, r. s. (2001) the effect of inorganic
phosphate on the activity of bacterial ribokinase. j. protein
chem. 20, 139 – 144.
park, j., vaidyanathan, g., singh, b., and gupta, r. s. (2007)
identification and biochemical studies on novel non-nucleoside inhibitors of the enzyme  xxxg79xxx . protein j., 26,
203 – 212.
hofer, h. w., allen, b. l., kaeini, m. r., pette, d., and
harris, b. g. (1982) phosphofructokinase from ascaris suum.
regulatory kinetic studies and activity near physiological
conditions. j. biol. chem. 257, 3801 – 3806.
laloux, m., van schaftingen, e., francois, j., and hers, h. g.
(1985) phosphate dependency of phosphofructokinase 2. eur.
j. biochem. 148, 155 – 159.
gorman, m. w., he, m. x., hall, c. s., and sparks, h. v.
(1997) inorganic phosphate as regulator of adenosine formation in isolated guinea pig hearts. am. j. physiol. 272,
h913- xxxd1945xxx .
park, j., singh, b., maj, m. c., and gupta, r. s. (2004)
phosphorylated derivatives that activate or inhibit mammalian  xxxg79xxx  provide insights into the role of
pentavalent ions in ak catalysis. protein j., 23, 167 – 177.
park, j., singh, b., and gupta, r. s. (2006) inhibition of
 xxxg79xxx  by phosphonate and bisphosphonate derivatives. mol. cell. biochem. 283, 11 – 21.
parducci, r. e., cabrera, r., baez, m., and guixe, v. (2006)
evidence for a catalytic mg2+ ion and effect of phosphate on
the activity of escherichia coli phosphofructokinase-2: regulatory properties of a rk family member. biochemistry, 45,
9291 – 9299.
matte, a., tari, l. w., and delbaere, l. t. (1998) how do
kinases transfer phosphoryl groups? structure, 6, 413 – 419.
bloch, a. (1975) the structure of nucleosides in relation to
their biological and and biochemical activity: a summary.
ann. n. y. acad. sci. 255, 576 – 596.
gupta, r. s. (1989)  xxxd2705xxx  analogs. in: drug
resistance in mammalian cells, gupta, r. s. (ed.), pp. 89 –
110, crc press, boca raton, fl.
robins, r. k. and revankar, g. r. (1985) purine analogs and
related nucleosides and nucleotides as antitumor agents. med.
res. rev. 5, 273 – 296.
suhadolnik, r. j. (1979) naturally occurring nucleoside and
nucleotide antibiotics. prog. nucleic acid res. mol. biol. 22,
193 – 291.
daves, g. d., jr. and cheng, c. c. (1976) the chemistry and
biochemistry of c-nucleosides. prog. med. chem. 13, 303 –
349.
caldwell, i. c., henderson, j. f., and patterson, a. r. (1967)
resistance to  xxxd2705xxx  analogues in an ascites
tumor. can. j. biochem. 45, 735 – 744.
suttle, d. p., harkrader, r. j., and jackson, r. c. (1981)
pyrazofurin-resistant hepatoma cells deficient in adenosine
kinase. eur. j. cancer, 17, 43 – 51.
chan, t. s., creagan, r. p., and reardon, m. p. (1978)
 xxxg79xxx  as a new selective marker in somatic cell
genetics: isolation of  xxxg79xxx -deficient mouse cell
lines and human-mouse hybrid cell lines containing adenosine
kinase. somatic cell genet. 4, 1 – 12.

2894

j. park and r. s. gupta

80 cass, c. e., selner, m., and phillips, j. r. (1983) resistance to
9-beta-d-arabinofuranosyladenine in cultured leukemia l
1210 cells. cancer res. 43, 4791 – 4798.
81 mehta, k. d. and gupta, r. s. (1985) chinese hamster ovary
cell mutants specifically affected in the phosphorylation of cpurine nucleosides. can. j. biochem. cell. biol. 63, 1044 –
1048.
82 gupta, r. s. and siminovitch, l. (1978) genetic and biochemical studies with the adenosine analogs toyocamycin and
tubercidin: mutation at the  xxxg79xxx  locus in chinese
hamster cells. somatic cell genet. 4, 715 – 735.
83 singh, b., lin, a., wu, z. c., and gupta, r. s. (2001) gene
structure for  xxxg79xxx  in chinese hamster and
human: high-frequency mutants of cho cells involve deletions of several introns and exons. dna cell biol. 20, 53 – 65.
84 mehta, k. d. and gupta, r. s. (1983)  xxxd2156xxx  b-resistant
mutants of chinese hamster ovary cells: novel genetic and
biochemical phenotype affecting  xxxg79xxx . mol. cell.
biol. 3, 1468 – 1477.
85 singh, b. and gupta, r. s. (2004) genomic organization and
linkage via a bidirectional promoter of the ap-3 (adaptor
protein-3) mu3a and ak ( xxxg79xxx ) genes: deletion
mutants of ak in chinese hamster cells extend into the ap-3
mu3a gene. biochem. j., 378, 519 – 528.
86 dellangelica, e. c., mullins, c., caplan, s., and bonifacino,
j. s. (2000) lysosome-related organelles. faseb j., 14, 1265 –
1278.
87 dellangelica, e. c., aguilar, r. c., wolins, n., hazelwood,
s., gahl, w. a., and bonifacino, j. s. (2000) molecular
characterization of the protein encoded by the hermanskypudlak syndrome type 1 gene. j. biol. chem. 275, 1300 – 1306.
88 baldauf, s. l., roger, a. j., wenk-siefert, i., and doolittle,
w. f. (2000) a kingdom-level phylogeny of eukaryotes based
on combined protein data. science 290, 972 – 977.
89 boss, g. r. and seegmiller, j. e. (1982) genetic defects in
human purine and pyrimidine metabolism. annu. rev. genet.
16, 297 – 328.
90 boison, d. (2008) the  xxxg79xxx  hypothesis of
epileptogenesis. prog. neurobiol. 84, 249 – 262.
91 boison, d., scheurer, l., zumsteg, v., rulicke, t., litynski,
p., fowler, b., brandner, s., and mohler, h. (2002) neonatal
hepatic steatosis by disruption of the  xxxg79xxx  gene.
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 99, 6985 – 6990.
92 satran, l., sharp, h. l., schenken, j. r., and krivit, w. (1969)
fatal neonatal heptic steatosis: a new familial disorder.
j. pediatr. 75, 39 – 46.
93 paik, w. k., paik, d. c., and kim, s. (2007) historical review:
the field of protein methylation. trends biochem. sci. 32,
146 – 152.
94 sulewska, a., niklinska, w., kozlowski, m., minarowski, l.,
naumnik, w., niklinski, j., dabrowska, k., and chyczewski,
l. (2007) dna methylation in states of cell physiology and
pathology. folia. histochem. cytobiol. 45, 149 – 158.
95 li, t., ren, g., lusardi, t., wilz, a., lan, j. q., iwasato, t.,
itohara, s., simon, r. p., and boison, d. (2008) adenosine
kinase is a target for the prediction and prevention of
epileptogenesis in mice. j. clin. invest. 118, 571 – 582.
96 boison, d. (2006)  xxxg79xxx , epilepsy and stroke:
mechanisms and therapies. trends pharmacol. sci. 27, 652 –
658.
97 pignataro, g., maysami, s., studer, f. e., wilz, a., simon,
r. p., and boison, d. (2008) downregulation of hippocampal
 xxxg79xxx  after focal ischemia as potential endogenous
neuroprotective mechanism. j. cereb. blood flow metab. 28,
17 – 23.
98 yee, b. k., singer, p., chen, j. f., feldon, j., and boison, d.
(2007) transgenic overexpression of  xxxg79xxx  in
brain leads to multiple learning impairments and altered
sensitivity to psychomimetic drugs. eur. j. neurosci. 26, 3237 –
3252.
99 gouder, n., scheurer, l., fritschy, j. m., and boison, d.
(2004) overexpression of  xxxg79xxx  in epileptic

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

100

101

102

103
104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

hippocampus contributes to epileptogenesis. j. neurosci. 24,
692 – 701.
tozzi, m. g., camici, m., mascia, l., sgarrella, f., and ipata,
p. l. (2006) pentose phosphates in nucleoside interconversion
and catabolism. febs j., 273, 1089 – 1101.
pauly, d. f., johnson, c., and st cyr, j. a. (2003) the benefits
of ribose in cardiovascular disease. med. hypotheses 60, 149 –
151.
taegtmeyer, h., roberts, a. f., and raine, a. e. (1985)
energy metabolism in reperfused heart muscle: metabolic
correlates to return of function. j. am. coll. cardiol. 6, 864 –
870.
zimmer, h. g. (1983) normalization of depressed heart
function in rats by ribose. science 220, 81 – 82.
zimmer, h. g. and ibel, h. (1984) ribose accelerates the
repletion of the atp pool during recovery from reversible
ischemia of the rat myocardium. j. mol. cell. cardiol. 16,
863 – 866.
pauly, d. f. and pepine, c. j. (2000) d-ribose as a supplement
for cardiac energy metabolism. j. cardiovasc. pharmacol.
ther. 5, 249 – 258.
lamberts, r. r., caldenhoven, e., lansink, m., witte, g.,
vaessen, r. j., st cyr, j. a., and stienen, g. j. (2007)
preservation of diastolic function in monocrotaline-induced
right ventricular hypertrophy in rats. am. j. physiol. heart
circ. physiol. 293, h1869-h1876.
pasque, m. k., spray, t. l., pellom, g. l., van trigt, p.,
peyton, r. b., currie, w. d., and wechsler, a. s. (1982)
ribose-enhanced myocardial recovery following ischemia in
the isolated working rat heart. j. thorac. cardiovasc. surg. 83,
390 – 398.
st cyr, j. a., bianco, r. w., schneider, j. r., mahoney, j. r.,
jr., tveter, k., einzig, s., and foker, j. e. (1989) enhanced
high energy phosphate recovery with ribose infusion after
global myocardial ischemia in a canine model. j. surg. res. 46,
157 – 162.
pliml, w., von arnim, t., stablein, a., hofmann, h., zimmer,
h. g., and erdmann, e. (1992) effects of ribose on exerciseinduced ischaemia in stable coronary artery disease. lancet,
340, 507 – 510.
vance, r., einzig, s., kreisler, k., and st cyr, j. (2007) dribose maintains ejection fraction following aortic valve
surgery. faseb j., 14, a419.
omran, h., illien, s., maccarter, d., st cyr, j., and luderitz,
b. (2003) d-ribose improves diastolic function and quality of
life in congestive heart failure patients: a prospective
feasibility study. eur. j. heart fail. 5, 615 – 619.
vijay, n., mac cater, d., washam, m., and st cyr, j. (2005)
ventilatory efficiency improves with d-ribose in congestive
heart failure patients. jmcc 38, 820.
griffiths, j. c., borzelleca, j. f., and st cyr, j. (2007) lack of
oral embryotoxicity/teratogenicity with d-ribose in wistar
rats. food chem. toxicol. 45, 388 – 395.
griffiths, j. c., borzelleca, j. f., and st cyr, j. (2007) subchronic (13-week) oral toxicity study with d-ribose in wistar
rats. food chem. toxicol. 45, 144 – 152.
iida, a., harayama, s., iino, t., and hazelbauer, g. l. (1984)
molecular cloning and characterization of genes required for
ribose transport and utilization in escherichia coli k-12.
j. bacteriol. 158, 674 – 682.
mowbray, s. l. and cole, l. b. (1992) 1.7 a x-ray structure of
the periplasmic ribose receptor from escherichia coli. j. mol.
biol. 225, 155 – 175.
pastakia, k. b. and dwyer, d. m. (1987) identification and
characterization of a ribose transport system in leishmania
donovani promastigotes. mol. biochem. parasitol. 26, 175 –
181.
maugeri, d. a., cazzulo, j. j., burchmore, r. j., barrett,
m. p., and ogbunude, p. o. (2003) pentose phosphate metabolism in leishmania mexicana. mol. biochem. parasitol. 130,
117 – 125.

cell. mol. life sci.

review article

vol. 65, 2008

119 decking, u. k., schlieper, g., kroll, k., and schrader, j.
(1997) hypoxia-induced inhibition of  xxxg79xxx 
potentiates cardiac adenosine release. circ. res. 81, 154 – 164.
120 traut, t. w. (1994) physiological concentrations of purines
and pyrimidines. mol. cell. biochem. 140, 1 – 22.
121 bak, m. i. and ingwall, j. s. (1998) regulation of cardiac
amp-specific 5-nucleotidase during ischemia mediates atp
resynthesis on reflow. am. j. physiol. 274, c992 – 1001.
122 gustafson, l. a. and kroll, k. (1998) downregulation of 5nucleotidase in rabbit heart during coronary underperfusion.
am. j. physiol. 274, h529-h538.
123 berne, r. m. (1980) the role of adenosine in the regulation of
coronary blood flow. circ. res. 47, 807 – 813.
124 dawicki, d. d., agarwal, k. c., and parks, r. e., jr. (1985)
role of adenosine uptake and metabolism by blood cells in
the antiplatelet actions of  xxxd1914xxx , dilazep and nitrobenzylthioinosine. biochem. pharmacol. 34, 3965 – 3972.
125 grisham, m. b., hernandez, l. a., and granger, d. n. (1989)
adenosine inhibits ischemia-reperfusion-induced leukocyte
adherence and extravasation. am. j. physiol. 257, h1334h1339.
126 grover, g. j., sleph, p. g., and dzwonczyk, s. (1992) role of
myocardial atp-sensitive potassium channels in mediating
preconditioning in the dog heart and their possible interaction
with adenosine a1-receptors. circulation 86, 1310 – 1316.
127 gunther, g. r. and herring, m. b. (1991) inhibition of
neutrophil superoxide production by adenosine released
from vascular endothelial cells. ann. vasc. surg. 5, 325 – 330.
128 schrader, j., haddy, f. j., and gerlach, e. (1977) release of
adenosine, inosine and hypoxanthine from the isolated guinea
pig heart during hypoxia, flow-autoregulation and reactive
hyperemia. pflugers. arch. 369, 1 – 6.
129 schrader, j., baumann, g., and gerlach, e. (1977) adenosine
as inhibitor of myocardial effects of catecholamines. pflugers
arch. 372, 29 – 35.
130 manthei, s. a., reiling, c. m., and van wylen, d. g. (1998)
dual cardiac microdialysis to assess drug-induced changes in
interstitial purine metabolites:  xxxg62xxx  inhibition versus  xxxg79xxx  inhibition. cardiovasc. res. 37,
171 – 178.
131 latini, s., bordoni, f., pedata, f., and corradetti, r. (1999)
extracellular adenosine concentrations during in vitro ischaemia in rat hippocampal slices. br. j. pharmacol. 127, 729 –
739.
132 mcadoo, d. j., robak, g., xu, g. y., and hughes, m. g.
(2000) adenosine release upon spinal cord injury. brain res.
854, 152 – 157.
133 deussen, a., stappert, m., schafer, s., and kelm, m. (1999)
quantification of extracellular and intracellular adenosine
production: understanding the transmembranous concentration gradient. circulation 99, 2041 – 2047.
134 kroll, k., deussen, a., and sweet, i. r. (1992) comprehensive model of transport and metabolism of adenosine and sadenosylhomocysteine in the guinea pig heart. circ. res. 71,
590 – 604.
135 singh, l. s. and sharma, r. (2000) purification and characterization of intestinal  xxxg62xxx  from mice. mol.
cell. biochem. 204, 127 – 134.
136 ford, h., jr., dai, f., mu, l., siddiqui, m. a., nicklaus, m. c.,
anderson, l., marquez, v. e., and barchi, j. j., jr. (2000)
 xxxg62xxx  prefers a distinct sugar ring conformation for binding and catalysis: kinetic and structural studies.
biochemistry 39, 2581 – 2592.
137 de jong, j. w. (1977) partial purification and properties of
rat-heart  xxxg79xxx . arch. int. physiol. biochim. 85,
557 – 569.
138 drabikowska, a. k., halec, l., and shugar, d. (1985)
purification and properties of  xxxg79xxx  from rat
liver: separation from deoxyadenosine kinase activity. z.
naturforsch. [c], 40, 34 – 41.
139 sahin, b., kansy, j. w., nairn, a. c., spychala, j., ealick,
s. e., fienberg, a. a., greene, r. w., and bibb, j. a. (2004)

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148
149

150

151

152

153

154
155

156

157

158

2895

molecular characterization of recombinant mouse adenosine
kinase and evaluation as a target for protein phosphorylation.
eur. j. biochem. 271, 3547 – 3555.
sala-newby, g. b., skladanowski, a. c., and newby, a. c.
(1999) the mechanism of adenosine formation in cells.
cloning of cytosolic 5-nucleotidase-i. j. biol. chem. 274,
17789 – 17793.
garvey, e. p. and prus, k. l. (1999) a specific inhibitor of
heart cytosolic 5-nucleotidase i attenuates hydrolysis of
adenosine 5-monophosphate in primary rat myocytes. arch.
biochem. biophys. 364, 235 – 240.
darvish, a., pomerantz, r. w., zografides, p. g., and metting, p. j. (1996) contribution of cytosolic and membranebound 5-nucleotidases to cardiac adenosine production. am.
j. physiol. 271, h2162-h2167.
misumi, y., ogata, s., ohkubo, k., hirose, s., and ikehara, y.
(1990) primary structure of human placental 5-nucleotidase
and identification of the glycolipid anchor in the mature form.
eur. j. biochem. 191, 563 – 569.
deussen, a., bading, b., kelm, m., and schrader, j. (1993)
formation and salvage of adenosine by macrovascular
endothelial cells. am. j. physiol. 264, h692-h700.
mattig, s. and deussen, a. (2001) significance of adenosine
metabolism of coronary smooth muscle cells. am. j. physiol.
heart circ. physiol. 280, h117-h124.
loncar, r., flesche, c. w., and deussen, a. (1997) determinants of the s- xxxd3157xxx  (sah) technique for
the local assessment of cardiac free cytosolic adenosine.
j. mol. cell. cardiol. 29, 1289 – 1305.
deussen, a., borst, m., and schrader, j. (1988) formation of
s- xxxd3157xxx  in the heart. i: an index of free
intracellular adenosine. circ. res. 63, 240 – 249.
thorn, j. a. and jarvis, s. m. (1996) adenosine transporters.
gen. pharmacol. 27, 613 – 620.
podgorska, m., kocbuch, k., and pawelczyk, t. (2005) recent
advances in studies on biochemical and structural properties
of equilibrative and concentrative nucleoside transporters.
acta. biochim. pol. 52, 749 – 758.
landfear, s. m., ullman, b., carter, n. s., and sanchez, m. a.
(2004) nucleoside and nucleobase transporters in parasitic
protozoa. eukaryot. cell 3, 245 – 254.
vasudevan, g., carter, n. s., drew, m. e., beverley, s. m.,
sanchez, m. a., seyfang, a., ullman, b., and landfear, s. m.
(1998) cloning of leishmania nucleoside transporter genes
by rescue of a transport-deficient mutant. proc. natl. acad.
sci. usa, 95, 9873 – 9878.
carter, n. s., landfear, s. m., and ullman, b. (2001) nucleoside transporters of parasitic protozoa. trends parasitol. 17,
142 – 145.
williams, m. and jarvis, m. f. (2000) purinergic and pyrimidinergic receptors as potential drug targets. biochem. pharmacol. 59, 1173 – 1185.
ralevic, v. and burnstock, g. (1998) receptors for purines
and pyrimidines. pharmacol. rev. 50, 413 – 492.
moser, g. h., schrader, j., and deussen, a. (1989) turnover
of adenosine in plasma of human and dog blood. am. j.
physiol. 256, c799-c806.
kowaluk, e. a. and jarvis, m. f. (2000) therapeutic potential
of  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors. expert. opin. investig. drugs,
9, 551 – 564.
jarvis, m. f., yu, h., kohlhaas, k., alexander, k., lee, c. h.,
jiang, m., bhagwat, s. s., williams, m., and kowaluk, e. a.
(2000) abt-702 (4-amino-5-(3-bromophenyl)-7-(6-morpholinopyridin-3-yl) xxxd3047xxx [2, 3-d]pyrimidine), a novel orally
effective  xxxg79xxx  inhibitor with analgesic and antiinflammatory properties: i. in vitro characterization and
acute antinociceptive effects in the mouse. j. pharmacol. exp.
ther. 295, 1156 – 1164.
jiang, n., kowaluk, e. a., lee, c. h., mazdiyasni, h., and
chopp, m. (1997)  xxxg79xxx  inhibition protects brain
against transient focal ischemia in rats. eur. j. pharmacol. 320,
131 – 137.

2896

j. park and r. s. gupta

 xxxg79xxx  and ribokinase

159 kowaluk, e. a., kohlhaas, k. l., bannon, a., gunther, k.,
lynch, j. j., iii, and jarvis, m. f. (1999) characterization of
the effects of  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors on acute thermal
nociception in mice. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 63, 83 – 91.
160 miller, l. p., jelovich, l. a., yao, l., dare, j., ugarkar, b.,
and foster, a. c. (1996) pre- and peristroke treatment with
the  xxxg79xxx  inhibitor, 5-deoxyiodotubercidin, significantly reduces infarct volume after temporary occlusion of
the middle cerebral artery in rats. neurosci. lett. 220, 73 – 76.
161 wiesner, j. b., ugarkar, b. g., castellino, a. j., barankiewicz, j., dumas, d. p., gruber, h. e., foster, a. c., and erion,
m. d. (1999)  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors as a novel approach
to anticonvulsant therapy. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 289,
1669 – 1677.
162 cottam, h. b., wasson, d. b., shih, h. c., raychaudhuri, a.,
di pasquale, g., and carson, d. a. (1993) new adenosine
kinase inhibitors with oral antiinflammatory activity: synthesis and biological evaluation. j. med. chem. 36, 3424 –
3430.
163 boyer, s. h., ugarkar, b. g., solbach, j., kopcho, j., matelich, m. c., ollis, k., gomez-galeno, j. e., mendonca, r.,
tsuchiya, m., nagahisa, a. et al. (2005)  xxxg79xxx 
inhibitors. 5. synthesis, enzyme inhibition, and analgesic
activity of diaryl- xxxd2033xxx -furanosyltubercidin analogues.
j. med. chem. 48, 6430 – 6441.
164 ugarkar, b. g., castellino, a. j., dare, j. s., ramirez-weinhouse, m., kopcho, j. j., rosengren, s., and erion, m. d.
(2003)  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors. 3. synthesis, sar, and
antiinflammatory activity of a series of l-lyxofuranosyl
nucleosides. j. med. chem. 46, 4750 – 4760.

165 matulenko, m. a., lee, c. h., jiang, m., frey, r. r., cowart,
m. d., bayburt, e. k., didomenico, s., gfesser, g. a.,
gomtsyan, a., zheng, g. z. et al. (2005) 5-(3-bromophenyl)-7-(6-morpholin-4-ylpyridin-3-yl) xxxd3047xxx [2,3-d]pyrimidin-4
-ylamine: structure-activity relationships of 7-substituted
heteroaryl analogs as non-nucleoside  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors. bioorg. med. chem. 13, 3705 – 3720.
166 zheng, g. z., mao, y., lee, c. h., pratt, j. k., koenig, j. r.,
perner, r. j., cowart, m. d., gfesser, g. a., mcgaraughty,
s., chu, k. l. et al. (2003)  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors: polar
7-substitutent of pyridopyrimidine derivatives improving
their locomotor selectivity. bioorg. med. chem. lett. 13,
3041 – 3044.
167 muchmore, s. w., smith, r. a., stewart, a. o., cowart,
m. d., gomtsyan, a., matulenko, m. a., yu, h., severin,
j. m., bhagwat, s. s., lee, c. h. et al. (2006) crystal structures of human  xxxg79xxx  inhibitor complexes reveal
two distinct binding modes. j. med. chem. 49, 6726 – 6731.
168 gomtsyan, a., didomenico, s., lee, c. h., matulenko,
m. a., kim, k., kowaluk, e. a., wismer, c. t., mikusa, j.,
yu, h., kohlhaas, k., jarvis, m. f. et al. (2002) design,
synthesis, and structure-activity relationship of 6-alkynylpyrimidines as potent  xxxg79xxx  inhibitors. j. med. chem.
45, 3639 – 3648.
169 lee, c. h., jiang, m., cowart, m., gfesser, g., perner, r.,
kim, k. h., gu, y. g., williams, m., jarvis, m. f., kowaluk,
e. a. et al. (2001) discovery of 4-amino-5-(3-bromophenyl)7-(6-morpholino-pyridin-3-yl) xxxd3047xxx [2,3-d]pyrimi dine, an
orally active, non-nucleoside  xxxg79xxx  inhibitor.
j. med. chem. 44, 2133 – 2138.

to access this journal online:
http://www.birkhauser.ch/cmls

