 

 

© 1991 s. karger ag, basel

cardiology 1991;78:226-235 0008~6312/91/0783~-022682.75/0

mechanisms of lipid-lowering agents!

cesare r. sirtori, cristina manzoni, maria r. lovati

institute of pharmacological sciences, university of milan, italy

key words.  xxxd1684xxx  -  xxxd1741xxx  - neomycin - fibric acid derivatives +
 xxxd2715xxx  -  xxxd3014xxx  -  xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors -  xxxd1863xxx  -
b-sitosterol - metformin - tiadenol - panthetine

abstract. lipid-lowering agents are used with the purpose of ameliorating hyperlipopro-
teinemias, in order to prevent arterial disease. lipid-lowering drugs can be classified into
absorbable agents and into nonabsorbable compounds, acting within the gastrointestinal
lumen. absorbable drugs (fibric acids,  xxxd2715xxx ,  xxxd3014xxx ,  xxxg1060xxx  inhib-
itors) reduce plasma very-low-density lipoproteins (vldl) and/or low-density lipoproteins
(ldl) by a variety of mechanisms. fibric acids, in particular, act by stimulating the catab-
olism of vldl and also, as a consequence, improving ldl delipidation, thus favoring
receptor uptake,  xxxd2715xxx  and acipimox interfere with the biosynthesis of ldl and can
also improve the clearance of vldl/ldl.  xxxd3014xxx  acts by a newly described mechanism,
i.e. accelerating reverse transport of cholesteryl esters from high-density lipoproteins to low-
er-density lipoproteins. finally,  xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors, interfering with the biosyn-
thesis of cholesterol, can induce an increased expression of liver high-affinity lipoprotein
receptors. nonabsorbable agents (anion-exchange resins, neomycin, b-sitosterol) interrupt
the recirculation of bile acids and/or reduce the absorption of cholesterol with the gut. they
display a selective activity on hypercholesterolemia, again by increasing  xxxg1318xxx 
expression. the choice of one or more lipid-lowering agents will depend upon the patient’s
phenotype, determining responsiveness to the pharmacological treatment.

introduction

lipid-lowering agents are pharmacologi-
cal compounds affecting absorption, synthe-
sis and catabolism of the major circulating
lipids, i.e. cholesterol and triglycerides car-
ried by lipoproteins. the rationale of lipid-

lowering treatments is that elevated levels of
lipids/lipoproteins in plasma are associated
with an increased prevalence of cardiovascu-
lar disease, considered as a major cause of

' paper presented at the workshop ‘triglycerides
and atherosclerosis’, vienna, may 26, 1990.
lipid-lowering agents

 

death in western countries. in recent years,
clinical intervention trials [1, 2] have indi-
cated that drug treatments lowering plasma
lipids can reduce the risk of arterial disease
associated with hyperlipoproteinemia.

clinical treatment of
hyperlipoproteinemias

the therapeutic approach to patients with
elevated lipid levels is generally the combi-
nation of different strategies, i.e. dietary
changes and also the elimination of other
risk factors which may worsen the prognosis
of the metabolic disorder, e.g. cessation or
reduction of smoking, proper management
of hypertension and physical exercise.

the major dietary changes aim at the
reduction of overweight and at the con-
trolled intake of nutrients, generally linked
to increased plasma lipid levels. a reduction
of body weight may lead to an improved
control of several forms of hypertriglyceri-
demia; the same goal can be achieved by a
reduction of ethanol. in the case of hyper-
cholesterolemia, the total amount of dietary
fat is correlated with raised cholesterol lev-
els: saturated fats (of animal origin) are
among the most potent causative factors in
hypercholesterolemia [3]. in addition to
these, animal protein intake may be a signif-
icant factor in many hypercholesterolemic
patients: the change from animal to vegeta-
ble proteins as the major dietary protein may
frequently lead to the correction of hyper-
cholesterolemia [4].

drugs are to be administered when all of
the above therapeutic approaches are ex-
hausted. drugs for hyperlipoproteinemia are
not numerous, and some belong to other

therapeutic classes. from a pharmacological
point of view, lipid-lowering agents can be
classified into nonsystemic and systemic
agents. the former generally act at the intes-
tinal level, by affecting the absorption/excre-
tion of neutral and acidic steroids; the latter
act by a variety of mechanisms, from activa-
tion of lipoprotein catabolism (e.g. fibric
acid derivatives) to the antagonism of cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  biosynthesis ( xxxg1060xxx 
inhibitors). the different groups of drugs
may share, to a large extent, their major indi-
cations, but each drug has its specific targets
of activity. moreover, the pattern of side
effects and/or contraindications may favor
the selection of a particular agent in specific
clinical syndromes.

nonsystemic lipid-lowering drugs

the major nonabsorbable agents are the
anion-exchange resins, which bind bile acids
in the intestine, and the antibiotic neomycin,
stimulating the intestinal loss of both bile
acids and neutral sterols.

anion-exchange resins

 xxxd1684xxx  and  xxxd1741xxx , although
characterized by different chemical struc-
tures, exert a similar activity on intestinal
bile acid reabsorption.

these drugs are not absorbed, but can
bind bile acids in the intestine, thus favoring
their fecal loss. normally, daily intestinal
loss of bile acids is seldom above | g; follow-
ing treatment with  xxxd1684xxx , it goes
up to 2-3 g/day. the loss of bile acids leads
to a reduction of the body pools of cholester-
ol. this may bring about a regression of ten-
don xanthomas and possibly of atheroscle-
sirtori/manzoni/lovati

 

rotic lesions [5]. another consequence is a
compensatory increase in cell-surface low-
density-lipoprotein (ldl) receptors in the
liver, together with an increased activity of
 xxxg1060xxx , the key enzyme in
cholesterol biosynthesis. increased receptor
activity leads to an enhanced uptake of ldl
from plasma, with a reduction of ldl cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  levels [6].

neomycin

neomycin is an aminoglycoside antibi-
otic generally used for the prevention of he-
patic coma. as a side activity, a significant
cholesterol reduction was noted in treated
patients. such an activity can be of thera-
peutic interest in hypercholesterolemic pa-
tients with normal liver function. it appears
that the cholesterol reduction is independent
of the antimicrobial activity. neomycin
seems to perturb the formation of micelles of
bile acids and neutral sterols, thus notably
leading to a significant loss of neutral sterols
from the feces [7].

administration of neomycin is not always
well tolerated, because the small absorption
of the compound may lead to a possible
damage of the kidney function; subjective
side effects are also often reported (itching,
abnormalities in intestinal function).

systemic lipid-lowering drugs

systemic lipid-lowering agents comprise a
variety of chemical structures, with widely
different mechanisms of action. some of the
agents, e.g. fibric acids, have been in use for
many years and are still the mainstay of ther-
apy in most countries: some others, i.e.
 xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors, are quite
new, and their long-term activity and safety

still need evaluation; finally others, e.g. nico-
 xxxd2715xxx  acid (na) are slowly losing their share
of therapeutic use.

fibric acid derivatives

fibric acid derivatives or ‘fibrates’ consti-
tute a rather large series of compounds, char-
acterized by the presence of an aryloxy
acidic moiety. the prototype fibrate, clofi-
brate (cpib), was initially tested more than
25 years ago and found to be effective in
numerous animal models of hyperlipidemia.
following  xxxd1724xxx , several other fibrates
have been made available, particularly beza-
fibrate,  xxxd2096xxx , gemfibrozil, ciprofibrate
and beclobrate.

fibrates exert a well-characterized stimu-
latory activity on the catabolism of triglycer-
ide-rich lipoproteins (very-low-density lipo-
proteins; vldl). this mechanism is exerted
via an increased activity of the enzyme lipo-
protein lipase, responsible for triglyceride
hydrolysis in vldl [8]. besides the in-
creased catabolism, the rate of direct re-
moval of vldl, intermediate-density lipo-
proteins (idl) and ldl may also be in-
creased.

by activating lipoprotein catabolism, fi-
brates can effectively reduce vldl triglyc-
erides in patients with elevated levels. this
effect occurs in over 80% of treated patients
and may bring triglyceridemia to normal val-
ues in the large majority. the consequences
of increased vldl catabolism are a rise of
high-density lipoproteins (hdl) cholesterol
(fig. 1), occurring in most patients and, in
some hypertriglyceridemic patients, also a
paradoxical rise of ldl cholesterol [9].
whereas this latter effect is not of major sig-
nificance, the hdl cholesterol rise is likely
to be associated with the lowered cardiovas-
cular risk in treated patients [2].
lipid-lowering agents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. major pathways of lipoprotein metabolism.
both the intestine and the liver produce large lipopro-
teins, rich in triglycerides, chylomicrons and vldl
respectively. both are hydrolyzed in plasma by lipo-
protein lipase (lpl) to remnants and to idl. chylo-
micron remnants are taken up by the liver via specific
receptors. idl are further lipolyzed, in normolipemic
individuals, to ldl. ldl are also taken up by the

 

the effect of fibrates on total serum cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  levels is less clearcut. these com-
pounds significantly reduce cholesterolemia,
particularly in patients with relatively
marked elevations (familial type iia) and
normal triglyceridemia [10]. pharmacoki-
netic studies have shown that in these pa-
tients plasma levels of  xxxd1724xxx , for exam-
ple, are significantly higher than in normoli-
pemic or hypertriglyceridemic patients. an-
other hypothesis links the activity of ldl
cholesterol levels to the improved delipida-
tion of ldl, because of the increased lipo-
protein lipase activity, thus leading to a bet-
ter interaction with the ldl receptors [11].

new aspects of fibrate activity are related
to nonlipid parameters. in particular, some

liver, as well as by peripheral cells via high-affinity
receptors (absent in homozygous type ii hypercholes-
terolemia). finally, hdl remove free cholesterol from
cells and from lipolyzed vldl, converting it into cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  esters, cholesterol esters in hdl have a dual
fate: they are either transferred to the liver, via a bind-
ing protein, or reconverted to vldl and ldl via a
 xxxg432xxx  (cetp).

fibrates display a potent plasma — fibrinogen-
reducing activity [12]. this finding has a par-
ticular significance in view of the clearcut
correlation between fibrinogenemia and car-
diovascular risk. in addition, scattered re-
ports indicate a potential activity of fibrates
on platelet aggregation, reducing sensitivity
to different aggregants, in treated patients.
finally, fibric acids may correct the reduced
fibrinolytic activity in diabetes and type iv
hyperlipoproteinemia [13]. long-acting fi-
brates are, therefore, more effective in hyper-
cholesterolemia, whereas compounds with a
shorter half-life are more effective in type iv.
gemfibrozil seems to be most effective in
raising hdl and apo a-l,  xxxd2096xxx  and
beclobrate in reducing apo b concentrations.

  
v
s$

sirtori/manzoni/lovati

 

clinical experience suggests, however, that
resistance to a treatment with one fibrate
does not exclude sensitivity to another.

although comparative data on the differ-
ent fibrates may be difficult to analyze, clin-
ical experience suggests the following:

(1) the use of  xxxd1724xxx  is now probably to
be restricted only to the very sensitive type
ii hyperlipoproteinemic patients;

(2) the hypotriglyceridemic effect of all
the fibrates is rather similar, possibly some-
what better for  xxxd331xxx  and gemfibrozil:

(3) the hdl and apo a-i raising proper-
ties are most marked with gemfibrozil and
 xxxd2096xxx ;

(4) the most effective plasma cholesterol
reduction is usually achieved with the long-
acting fibrates, ciprofibrate,  xxxd2096xxx  and
beclobrate, although the other agents are
about as effective. interestingly, severe type
ila hypercholesterolemic patients are gener-
ally more sensitive to fibrates than patients
with only marginally elevated cholestero-
lemia;

(5) the selective activity of these agents on
plasma fibrinogen levels suggests a possible
use in patients with elevated fibrinogenemia;
a potential use in the induction of fibrinoly-
sis has also been suggested, and

(6) the risk profile, particularly of the
newer agents, is generally reassuring; more
data are needed on the relative antithrom-
botic effectiveness of these drugs.

 xxxd2715xxx 

na (niacin) corresponds to  xxxd2716xxx , a
group b vitamin. its activity on plasma lip-
ids at very high doses (in excess of 2 g/day)
has been shown over 30 years ago. since
then, the use of na has been found effective
in numerous forms of hyperlipoproteinemia
[14].

this compound exerts its effect by:

(1) inhibition on lipolysis in the adipose
tissue, preventing utilization of free fatty
acids for the synthesis of triglyceride-rich
lipoproteins;

(2) a consequent decrease in the hepatic
release of vldl, and

(3) inhibition of  xxxg1329xxx , prevent-
ing the transformation of the more efficient
hdl, subfraction to the less efficient
hdl.

other mechanisms, e.g. reduced ldl
synthesis are less clearly demonstrated. the
primary indications for na are, therefore,
combined hyperlipidemias and isolated hy-
percholesterolemia. typical changes after
standard doses of na (2-8 g/day) are reduc-
tions of plasma triglycerides and cholesterol
of 30-40% and 15-20%, respectively. ldl
cholesterol levels may be reduced by 20% or
more. differently from most other lipid-low-
ering agents, high-dose na can markedly re-
duce the plasma levels of lp(a), a recently
studied atherogenic lipoprotein fraction
[15]. for this reason na has potentially the
widest range of therapeutic activity.

unfortunately, these beneficial effects are
counteracted by very serious side effects, e.g.
impaired glucose tolerance, hyperuricemia,
gastrointestinal intolerance, gastritis, abnor-
mal liver function tests and the occasional
development of severe toxic hepatitis. sub-
jectively, the administration of na is accom-
panied by severe flushing and, occasionally,
by nausea.

 xxxd3014xxx 

 xxxd3014xxx  was initially developed as a po-
tent antioxidant compound, being chemi-
cally related to b-hydroxytoluene, about 30
years ago. lipid-lowering properties in ani-
mals have been described more recently [16].
lipid-lowering agents

 

 

8 8 8

-a total chol., %

fig. 2. correlation between the
decrease in thickness of achilles” o
tendon (a att) and the reduction

 

in total cholesterol (—a total chol.) a
and hdl cholesterol (-a hdl
chol.) [19].

 

 

 

 xxxd3014xxx  has rather unusual properties ver-
sus other lipid-lowering agents; it is, in fact,
mainly carried by lipoproteins (ldl) and,
because of its lipophilia, it may persist for a
prolonged time in the adipose tissue. more-
over, it can cause a marked reduction of
hdl cholesterol. initial studies on  xxxd3014xxx 
showed that this compound may affect cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  absorption and, by unknown mecha-
nisms, increase the catabolism of ldl and
decrease the synthesis of hdl apolipopro-
teins [17]. other studies show that  xxxd3014xxx ,
being incorporated into ldl, may affect the
metabolic properties of ldl, i.e. improve
receptor and nonreceptor clearance. for this
reason,  xxxd3014xxx  may be effective also in
patients with no available ldl receptors,
such as homozygous type ii, as well as in
patients with mild hypercholesterolemia as-
sociated with xanthomas or xanthelasmas.
more recent studies have focussed into
two directions. because of the similarity
with b-hydroxytoluene, it has been suggested
that a potent antioxidant activity in plasma
may reduce ldl peroxidation, a major fac-
tor increasing atherogenesis [18]. another
hypothesis relates to the remarkable reduc-
tion in hdl cholesterol after  xxxd3014xxx . this
reduction, paradoxically, occurs in the face

of very evident decreases in the size of ten-
don xanthomas and xanthelasmas in treated
patients [19] (fig. 2). recent clinical data in-
dicate that  xxxd3014xxx  may improve the func-
tion of the cholesteryl ester transport protein
(fig. 1), delivering cholesteryl esters from
hdl to lower-density lipoproteins [20]. the
drug is generally ineffective in hypertriglyc-
eridemia.

 xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors

inhibitors of  xxxg1060xxx  consti-
tute a novel class of lipid-lowering agents,
with a selective activity on cholesterol bio-
synthesis. these agents were initially ex-
tracted from the penicillum species [21] and,
later on, from aspergillus and monascus.

three  xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors:
lovastatin (previously  xxxd2510xxx ), simvasta-
tin (previously  xxxd3204xxx ) and pravastatin
( xxxd2998xxx ) have undergone extensive clini-
cal developments in recent years; lovastatin
is currently available on the us market, and
the two other agents are now available in
most european countries and in japan. all
 xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors have a
chemical structure with a moiety resembling
hydroxymethylglutaric acid. in the available
reductase inhibitors, the hmg-resembling
sirtori/manzoni/lovati

 

 

acetyl coa + acetoacetyl coa

(seana |
j. hmg coa,
=| *
do seniors
dx
mn

avails pp

 

wn

 

plasma ldl

 

 xxxd2397xxx  ——> isopenteny| adenine
(trna)

 xxxd2194xxx  dolichol
haem a
farnesy!-pp_ a
ubiquinone
t kw ky saualens farnesylatet proteins
: wu (ras, lamin b, oth ~ .
i (fras; lamin 8. others) fig. 3. steps of cholesterol bio-
es 4 sutiachamated synthesis (*),  xxxg1060xxx 
i ¢ geena inhibitors selectively inhibit the
bile acids metabolic step converting hmg-
lipoproteins coa to mevalonate. as a conse-

quence,  xxxg1318xxx  expression
may be increased and one or more
of the following metabolic steps
variously reduced.

 

 

moiety may be present in a closed (lactone)
or in an open (hydroxy acid) form. the lac-
tone ring is present in lovastatin and simvas-
tatin, the open acid in pravastatin. lactones
are prodrugs, the open-ring hydroxy acids
being the active compounds. ring opening
occurs at alkaline ph or in the liver.

 xxxg1060xxx  inhibitors have a
unique profile of competitive, specific and
reversible inhibitors of the enzyme (fig. 3).
these agents reduce sterol synthesis from
'4c-acetate at nanomolar concentrations in
vitro and in vivo. in the cell, inhibition of
reductase leads to two consequences:

(1) marked increase in hmg-coa reduc-
tase with, however, no significant produc-
tion of cholesterol, and

(2) increase in ldl receptors on the cell
surface, draining ldl from the circulation
and providing the cell with the necessary
cholesterol.

the major biochemical effect on the body
economy is thus a dramatic reduction of cir-
culating ldl cholesterol. this occurs at
drug concentrations requiring minimal daily
dosages (generally from a minimum of 5 toa
maximum of 80 mg/daily

the hypothesis that  xxxg1318xxx  activ-
ity may be induced following treatment with
reductase inhibitors has been clearly shown
from animal and also human data, indica-
tive of an increased rate of removal of la-
beled ldl after therapy [22]. the ineffec-
tiveness of the raised production of hmg-

  
lipid-lowering agents

233

 

coa reductase is supported by the observa-
tion of an unchanged total synthesis of cho-
 xxxd3014xxx  in treated patients.

the selectivity in the mode of action is
also confirmed by lipoprotein data in hu-
mans, indicating that, aside from a small
increase in hdl cholesterol, lipoprotein
structure and composition is only moder-
ately affected [23]. these findings allow to
conclude that the mode of action of hmg-
coa reductase inhibitors in lowering plasma
cholesterol is by reducing biosynthesis and,
as a consequence, decreasing the number of
circulating ldl particles.

clinical and animal studies suggest that
the association of reductase inhibitors with
other drugs may prove extremely effective
in patients with severe hypercholesterol-
emia (e.g. familial heterozygous cases). the
association with anion-binding resins is
among the most widely tested and achieves
maximal effectiveness [24]. plasma choles-
terol and ldl reductions with this associa-
tion may go up to 40 and 50% or more.
similarly, a good activity has been shown
by their association with  xxxd3014xxx  and fi-
brates, in the case of type ii b hyperlipopro-
teinemia. this last association carries some
risk in terms of an increased incidence of
myalgia.

other drugs

numerous other agents are available for
the management of hyperlipoproteinemias.
most of these are absorbable, and a few are
of natural origin. among the most widely
used, the following may be listed:

 xxxd1863xxx  sodium is the dextro-
isomer of the naturally occurring l-thyrox-
ine.  xxxd1863xxx  reduces total and ldl
cholesterol over 20% in hypercholesterol-
emic patients. the mechanism stimulates

liver  xxxg1318xxx  synthesis. unfortunately,
the drug causes a variety of side effects: from
cardiac arrhythmias to the typical changes
associated with thyroid hormones, e.g. trem-
or, nervousness and insomnia.

b-sitosterol is a plant sterol, available in
some countries for the treatment of hyper-
cholesterolemia. it may occasionally induce
nausea with mild laxative effects. the use of
b-sitosterol is probably superseded by the
newer anion-exchange resins.

metformin, a  biguanide antidiabetic
agent, exerts a significant hypotriglyceri-
demic activity in nondiabetic patients. the
mechanism may be linked to a reduced liver/
intestinal biosynthesis of vldl.

tiadenol is a substituted decane affecting
both cholesterol and triglyceride levels in
different forms of hyperlipoproteinemia
[25]. the mechanism is not linked to an
increased lipoprotein catabolism, as in the
case of fibrates, but rather to the reduction of
liver lipoprotein secretion. although short-
term trials have clearly indicated a potent
activity of tiadenol in numerous patient se-
ries, long-term results are less satisfacto1
recent animal data indicate that chronic ad-
ministration may lead to the activation of
the liver microsomal enzyme system, thus
reducing activity.

panthetine is the disulfide dimer of pante-
 xxxd404xxx , the amide conjugate of panthotenic
acid with  xxxd1787xxx . in numerous clinical
trials, panthetine has been shown to signifi-
cantly, although not markedly, reduce serum
total (10-12%) and ldl cholesterol (12-
15%) levels; some activity is also exerted in
hypertriglyceridemias [26]. the mechanism
of panthetine is rather unique, being linked
to a reduced activation of hmg-coa reduc-
tase in the presence of high concentrations of
cholesterol precursors [27].

 
sirtori/manzoni/lovati

 

nn

s

w

a

x

oo

ro

references

lipid research clinics: coronary primary pre-
vention trial results. parts i and ii. jama 1984;
252:351-374,

frick mh, elo o, haapa k, et al: helsinki heart
study: primary-prevention trial with gemfibrozil
in middle-aged patients with dyslipidemia. n engl
j med 1987;317:1237-1245.

anderson jt, grande f, keys a: independence of
the effects of cholesterol and degree of saturation
of the fat in the diet on serum cholesterol in man.
am j clin nutr 1985;29:1164-1169.

sirtori cr, agradi e, conti f, gatti e, mantero
o: soybean protein diet in the treatment of type ii
hyperlipoproteinaemia. lancet 1977;i:275-277.
kuo pt, hayase k, kostis jb, moreyra ae: use
of combined diet and  xxxd1741xxx  in long-term (7-
7 years) treatment of patients with type ii hyper-
lipoproteinemia. circulation 1979;59:199-211.
shepherd j, packard cj, bicker s, lawrie tdv,
morgan hg:  xxxd1684xxx  promotes receptor
mediated ldl catabolism. n engl j med 1980;
302:1219-1222.

sedaghat a, samuel p, crouse jr, ahrens eh jr:
effects of neomycin on absorption, synthesis
and/or flux of cholesterol in man. j clin invest
1985;55:12-21.

boberg j, boberg m, gross r, grundy s, augustin
j, brown vw: the effect of treatment with clofi-
brate on hepatic triglyceride and lipoprotein li-
pase activities of post-heparin plasma in male
patients with hyperlipoproteinemia. atherosclero-
sis 1977;27:499-503.

wilson de, lees rs: metabolic relationships
among the plasma lipoproteins — reciprocal
changes in the concentrations of very-low- and
low-density lipoproteins in man. j clin invest
1972;51:1051-1057,

pichardo r, boulet l, davignon j: pharmacoki-
netics of  xxxd1724xxx  in familial hypercholesterol-
emia. atherosclerosis 1977;26:573-582.
kleinman y, oschry y, eisenberg s: abnormal
regulation of  xxxg1318xxx  activity and abnormal
cellular metabolism of hypertriglyceridaemic low-
density lipoprotein: normalization with bezafi-
brate therapy. j clin invest 1987;17:538-543.
niort g, bulgarelli a, cassader m, pagano g:
effect of short-term treatment with  xxxd331xxx  on
plasma fibrinogen,  xxxg784xxx , platelet acti-

 

 

 

z:

3

z

a

a

3

=

s

s

vation and blood filterability in atherosclerotic
hyperfibrinogenemic patients. atherosclerosis
1988:71:113-119.

calvert gd, blight l, franklin j, oliver j, wise p,
gallus as: the effect of  xxxd1724xxx  on plasma glu-
cose, lipoproteins, fibrinogen and other biochemi-
cal and haematological variables in patients with
maturity onset diabetes mellitus. eur j clin phar-
macol 1980;17:355-362.

carlson la, oré l: effect of treatment with nico-
 xxxd2715xxx  acid for one month on serum lipids in pa-
tients with different types of hyperlipoprotein-
emia. atherosclerosis 1973;18:1-9.

carlson la, hamsten a, asplund a: pronounced
lowering of serum levels of lipoprotein lp(a) in
hyperlipidaemic subjects treated with nicotinic
acid. j intern med 1989;226:271-276.

drake jw, bradford rh, mcdearmon m, fur-
man rh: the effect of 4,4(isopropylidenedithio)
bis (2,6-di-t-butylphenol) ( xxxd3014xxx ) on serum lip-
ids and lipoproteins in human subjects. metabo-
lism 1969;18:916-925.

atmeh rf, stewart jm, boag de, packard cj,
lorimer ar, shepherd j: the hypolipidemic ac-
tion of  xxxd3014xxx : a study of its effects on high-
and low-density lipoproteins. j lipid res 1983:
24:588-595.

partasarathy s, young sg, witztum jl, pittman
rc, steinberg d:  xxxd3014xxx  inhibits oxidative
modification of low-density lipoprotein. j clin
invest 1986;77:641-644,

yamamoto a, matsuzawa y, yokoyama s, funa-
hashi t, yamamura t, kishino b: effects of pro-
bucol on xanthomata regression in familial hyper-
cholesterolemia. am j cardiol 1986;57(suppl):
29-35.

franceschini g, sirtori m, vaccarino v, gian-
franceschi g, rezzonico l, chiesa g, sirtori cr:
mechanism of hdl reduction after  xxxd3014xxx  —
changes in hdl subfractions and increased re-
verse cholesteryl ester transfer. arteriosclerosis
1989:9:462-469.

endo a, kuroda m, tanzawa k: competitive
inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coen-
 xxxg1282xxx  a reductase by ml-236a and ml-236b,
fungal metabolites having hypocholesterolemic
activity. febs lett 1976;72:323-326.

bilheimer dw, grundy sm, brown md, gold-
stein jl:  xxxd2510xxx  and  xxxd1741xxx  stimulate re-
ceptor-mediated clearance of low-density lipopro-

 
lipid-lowering agents

v
a

 

24

tein. proc natl acad sci usa 1983;80:4124-
4128.

franceschini g, sirtori m, vaccarino v, gian-
franceschi g, chiesa g, sirtori cr: plasma lipo-
protein changes following treatment with pravas-
tatin and gemfibrozil in patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia. j lab clin med 1989;114:
250-259.

vega gs, grundy sm: treatment of primary
moderate hypercholesterolemia with lovastatin
( xxxd2510xxx ) and  xxxd1741xxx . jama 1987;257:33-
38.

sirtori m, montanari g, gianfranceschi g: clofi-
brate and tiadenol treatment in hyperlipoprotein-
emias. a comparative trial of drugs affecting lipo-
protein catabolism and biosynthesis. atheroscle-
 xxxd2167xxx  1983;49:149-161.

26 gaddi a, descovich gc, noseda g: controlled
evaluation of panthetine, a natural hypolipidemic
compound, in patients with different forms of
hyperlipoproteinemia, atherosclerosis 1984;50:
73-83.

cighetti g, del puppo m, paroni r, galli-kienle
m: modulation of  xxxg1060xxx  activity
by pentetheine/pantethine. biochim biophys acta
1988:963:389-393,

nu
8

prof. cesare r. sirtori

chair of clinical pharmacology
institute of pharmacological sciences
via balzaretti, 9

1-20133 milano (italy)
