neurotherapeutics: the journal of the american society for experimental neurotherapeutics

treatment of neuromuscular channelopathies: current concepts
and future prospects
james c. cleland*† and robert c. griggs†
*department of neurology, waikato hospital, hamilton, new zealand 3214 and †department of neurology, university of
rochester, rochester, new york 14627

summary: our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis
of the neuromuscular ion channelopathies has increased rapidly
over the past two decades due to the identiﬁcation of many of
the genes whose mutation causes these diseases. these molecular discoveries have facilitated identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
of the hereditary periodic paralyses and the myotonias, and are
likely to shed light on acquired ion channelopathies as well.
despite our better understanding of the pathogenesis of these
disorders, current treatments are largely empirical and the evidence in favor of speciﬁc therapy largely anecdotal. for periodic paralysis,  xxxd1872xxx —a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor— has been shown in a controlled trial to prevent attacks for
many patients with both hypokalemic and hypokalemic periodic paralysis. a second trial, comparing  xxxd1872xxx 
with acetazolamide versus placebo, is currently in progress. for

myotonia, there is only anecdotal evidence for treatment, but a
controlled trial of mexiletine versus placebo is currently being
funded by a food and drug administration– orphan products
grant and is scheduled to begin in late 2008. in the future,
mechanism-based approaches are likely to be developed. for
example, exciting advances have already been made in one
disorder, myotonic dystrophy-1 (dm-1). in a mouse model of
dm-1, a morpholino antisense oligonucleuotide targeting the 3=
splice site of clcn1 exon 7a repaired the rna splicing defect
by promoting the production of full-length chloride channel
transcripts. abnormal chloride conductance was restored, and
myotonia was abolished. similar strategies hold potential for
dm-2. the era of molecularly-based treatments is about to
begin. key words: therapy, channelopathy, ion-channel, electrophysiology.

introduction

of ion-channel diseases is ever-expanding (table 1). moreover, the identiﬁcation of defects of abnormal rna splicing
leading to reduced ion channel expression (e.g., myotonic
dystrophy), and acquired defects of ion-channel function in
diseases once believed to be pathophysiologically distinct
(e.g., critical-illness myopathy), further illustrate the complexity and diversity of this group of disorders.
this chapter outlines current understanding of ionchannel pathophysiology and existing neuromuscular
channelopathy treatments, and discusses emerging and
potential future treatment approaches. a detailed discussion of the pathophysiology of neuromuscular channelopathies is beyond the scope of this review, and the
reader is directed to several more detailed reviews on the
subject1– 4 and a recent review on clinical trial design in
neurologic channelopathies.5

the study of neuromuscular ion-channel disorders
(“channelopathies”) is rapidly evolving. although the
prototype disorders myotonia congenita and paramyotonia congenita were discovered over 100 years ago, our
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis has vastly
expanded (almost in exponential fashion) during the past
20 to 30 years. this progress is primarily due to identiﬁcation of causal genes coupled with advances in molecular technology such as heterologous expression systems and patch-clamping technology. we are now at the
forefront of advances that will eventually complete our
understanding of the pathophysiology of channelopathies, thus opening the door to more effective and targeted therapies for these disorders. once considered rare,
even disorders as common as migraine and epilepsy are
now linked to ion-channel dysfunction, and the spectrum

neuromuscular channelopathies:
basic concepts
address correspondence and reprint requests to: james cleland,
department of neurology, waikato hospital, private bag 3200, hamilton, new zealand. e-mail: clelandj@waikatodhb.govt.nz.

neuromuscular channelopathies are due to dysfunctional membrane excitability in either skeletal muscle or

vol. 5, 607– 612, october 2008 © the american society for experimental neurotherapeutics, inc.

607

608

cleland and griggs

table 1. examples of neuromuscular channelopathies

inherited disorders
periodic paralysis
hyperkalemic
hypokalemic
other pp
andersen-tawil syndrome
myotonic dystrophy
nondystrophic myotonia
myotonia congenita (dominant and recessive)
paramyotonia congenita
neuromyotonia
neuromyotonia with benign neonatal convulsions
familial primary erythromelalgia
congenital myasthenic syndromes
central core disease
malignant hyperthermia
susceptibility
acquired disorders
autoimmune
ainmt
lems
toxic/metabolic
critical-illness myopathy (?)

ion channel

gene

 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg310xxx  or  xxxg2026xxx 
kv3.4
kir2.1
clc-1

 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg310xxx  or  xxxg2026xxx 
mirp2 (?)
kcnj2
 xxxg643xxx 

clc-1
 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg2030xxx 
 xxxg1269xxx 
 xxxg2030xxx 
achr,
 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg2001xxx 

clcn1
 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg1229xxx 
 xxxg1269xxx 
 xxxg2030xxx 
 xxxg2026xxx 
 xxxg2001xxx 

reference

2
2
14
31
16
1
32
28
30
33
34
35
36

 xxxg1229xxx 
 xxxg302xxx 

37

 xxxg2026xxx  (?)

29, 39

38

ainmt ⫽ autoimmune neuromyotonia; lems ⫽ lambert-eaton myasthenic syndrome.

neurons. fundamentally, dysfunctional ion-channels alter membrane excitability thresholds, either by inherited
or acquired defects. excitability may be either reduced
(e.g., periodic paralysis) or enhanced (e.g., myotonic
disorders). generally speaking, inherited channelopathies alter transmembrane ionic currents via one or more
of the following mechanisms: 1) altered gating kinetics
(e.g., leftward shift of sodium-channel inactivation gating in hypokalemic stimuli ( xxxg310xxx ) due to  xxxg2026xxx  mutations), 2) reduced channel expression due to defective
post-transcriptional splicing mechanisms (e.g., abnormal
rna splicing in myotonic dystrophy), or 3) decreased
ion-channel expression due to either enhanced mrna
degradation during post-translational processing or reduced chaperone-mediated transport to the muscle membrane (e.g., r894x clcn1 recessive myotonia congenita). acquired defects are more diverse, but are most
commonly based on an immune, antibody-mediated
mechanism. the inherited channelopathies will be discussed in detail as follows, whereas acquired disorders
are discussed elsewhere.4
although the fundamental concept of altered membrane excitability due to defective ion-channel function
has already been extensively investigated, the relationship between genotype and phenotype is complex and, in
many cases, it is poorly deﬁned. for example, penetrance
is variable in periodic paralysis due to sodium channel
mutation (often reduced in females), and considerable
phenotypic variability may be present among kindreds
neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2008

with the same mutation. this variability is probably in
part explained by genetic elements (e.g., modifying
genes) as well as nongenetic factors (e.g., circulating
hormones or metabolites) that may further modify phenotype; however, in most cases, these factors remain to
be deﬁned. further data on the natural history of these
disorders and genotype–phenotype correlations will be
valuable in developing new treatments for these disorders.
current treatment of
neuromuscular channelopathies
periodic paralysis
existing treatments for neuromuscular channelopathies are largely empiric and based almost exclusively on
anecdotal experience. since the late, 1960s when the
carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide was found to
blunt or in some cases completely abolish periodic paralysis (pp) attacks, similar agents (e.g.,  xxxd1872xxx ) have been used with similar results.6 the relative
effectiveness of acetazolamide and  xxxd1872xxx  for
both prevention of attacks and the prevention or improvement of “ﬁxed” weakness in both hyperkalemic stimuli
(hyperpp) and  xxxg310xxx  are currently under study in a randomized clinical trial (clinicaltrials.gov). however, despite
their widespread use, the therapeutic mechanism(s) remain incompletely understood. it is possible that the
effect is directly related to carbonic anhydrase inhibitory

treatment of neuromuscular channelopathies
or kaliuretic effects, or alternatively, to their ability to
open bk-type k⫹ channels.7 furthermore, as well as
lowering serum k⫹ that could beneﬁt hyperpp, acetazolamide also prevents k⫹ ingress into muscle, which could
beneﬁt  xxxg310xxx .8,9 based on evidence of a postassium
channel-opening effect of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
(cais), other speciﬁc  xxxg1232xxx  openers (e.g.,
cromakalim) have been studied in pp. although these
have improved contractile force in ﬁbers of muscle biopsies from  xxxg310xxx  patients,10 an in vivo therapeutic
effect remains to be proven.
in addition to cais, treatment of pp typically involves
either potassium replacement ( xxxg310xxx ) or attempts to
reduce serum potassium by enhancing cellular uptake
with either inhaled beta agonist or glucose/insulin therapy (hyperpp). intravenous potassium-replacement protocols are also empiric and can be potentially hazardous,
given that rapid ﬂuxes in serum potassium levels may
occur with intracellular to extracellular shifts, whereas oral
potassium-replacement strategies are usually safer, while
still efﬁcacious.
despite considerable progress in our current understanding of pp pathophysiology, the question of whether
altered serum k⫹ during pp attacks is cause or effect
thereof remains largely unanswered. although total body
potassium is probably normal in genetically-deﬁned and
thyrotoxic pp, in contrast with secondary causes of pp
(such as hyperaldosteronism, which causes chronic k⫹
deﬁcit), abnormal intracellular k⫹ shift occurs during pp
attacks.11 why episodes are typically triggered by hyperkalemic or hypokalemic stimuli is unclear, but there is
a growing body of evidence implicating alterations in
“anomalous” (inwardly-rectifying) potassium (irk) currents. this is supported by the following observations:
barium intoxication (an agent that blocks inwardly rectifying potassium channels) causes a ﬂaccid paralysis
similar to a pp attack.12 furthermore, the normal coupling of the muscle-membrane potential to the k-reversal
potential becomes uncoupled in the setting of hypokalemia in barium-treated muscle, an effect that is potentiated by insulin.3 second, ruff13 demonstrated reduced
inward-rectiﬁcation k⫹ currents in muscle from patients
with  xxxg310xxx  due to an r528h  xxxg310xxx  mutation, and
mutations in the inwardly-rectifying kir2.1 channel cause
andersen-tawil syndrome, which is a rare disorder with
pp attacks that are clinically indistinguishable from other
causes of pp. third, a less common and controversial
cause of periodic paralysis (and possibly also a risk
factor for thyrotoxic periodic paralysis) is mutation of
the  xxxg1232xxx , kcne3 subunit mink-related
peptide 2 (mirp2). however, whether this is a pathogenic mutation or a benign polymorphism remains to be
established, with up to 15 to 20% of pp cases being
negative for genetic testing for known  xxxg2026xxx  and
 xxxg310xxx  mutations, thus other loci are undoubtedly

609

linked to pp.2,14 fourth and ﬁnally, others have found
reduced inward-rectifying atp-sensitive k⫹-channel
(katp) current in muscle biopsies of patients with pp.
these channels are metabolically regulated, have a high
density in many tissues (e.g., pancreatic islet cells), and
are closely regulated by hormones, such as insulin,
which provide an attractive hypothesis to explain the link
between pp attacks and carbohydrate intake.15
however, despite signiﬁcant advances in our understanding of the potential link between reduced irk currents and pp attacks, many questions remain unanswered. for example, how do mutations in sodium or
calcium channels (which cause the majority of pp) alter
irk currents? why are pp attacks precipitated by exercise? why is the therapeutic response to cais so variable? (some patients worsen, others improve, and others
still initially improve, but then the therapeutic effect
attenuates).
myotonic disorders: nondystrophic myotonia
(myotonia congenita and paramyotonia congenita),
and myotonic dystrophy (types i, ii)
the nondystrophic myotonias (ndm) are disorders of
either chloride channels (i.e., myotonia congenita [mc])
or sodium channels (i.e., paramyotonia congenita,
[pmc]). in ndm, exercise-related muscle stiffness and
cramping pain are typical symptoms, but generally, ﬁxed
weakness is not. by contrast, weakness rather than stiffness is predominant in the myotonic dystrophies (type 1
associated with ctg repeat in  xxxg643xxx  gene on chromosome 19, and type 2 with  xxxg372xxx  repeat in znf9 gene on
chromosome 3). myotonic dystrophy is also associated with
extramuscular manifestations, including muscle wasting,
cardiomyopathy, and diabetes. while clinically and genetically distinct, nondystrophic and dystrophic myotonic disorders share elements of a common pathogenesis; both
disorders result in at least some degree of decreased chloride conductance. in the case of ndm, mutations in clcn1
(the gene encoding the clc-1 muscle chloride channel) can
result in a nonfunctional clc-1 protein, accelerated degradation of mutant clcn-1 mrna transcripts during posttranscriptional processing, or defects in chaperone-mediated clc-1 protein transport to the sarcolemma. on the
other hand, the genetic mutation in myotonic dystrophies
causes a more extensive “spliceopathy” that affects numerous and diverse genes, reﬂecting the more diverse manifestations of myotonic dystrophy. the mutation in dm1 is an
expanded ctg-repeat (cugexp) in the 3= untranslated region (3= utr) of a protein-kinase encoding gene ( xxxg643xxx )
that produces an mrna that exhibits a “toxic gain of function” effect. it is retained in the nucleus where it adversely
affects alternative splicing of many genes controlled by a
group of proteins in the muscleblind (mbnl) family, one
being clcn1, and another the  xxxg1194xxx . this is
reviewed elsewhere.16 reduced mbnl protein-mediated
neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2008

610

cleland and griggs

alternative splicing of clcn1 mrna transcripts in a
mouse model of myotonic dystrophy leads to excessive
inclusion of exon 7a, resulting in a truncated and nonfunctional clc-1 protein. mice expressing cugexp
demonstrate myotonia on emg, and have a 70 to 80%
reduction in chloride conductance (a 75% reduction is
sufﬁcient to produce myotonia in humans). in these
mice, the myotonic phenotype can be at least partially
reversed by the overexpression of mbnl protein, consistent with an indirect effect via a splicing defect rather
than a direct effect of cugexp on clcn-1 transcription.
this rescue is still effective even after myotonia is clinically evident, indicating that the spliceopathy is a dynamic and potentially reversible process, even once established. in dm2, the pathogenesis is similar, but
distinct in that the toxic rna is an expanded tetranucleotide repeat (ccugexp), and arises in an intronic region
of znfn9. this intronic repeat is then excised from the
parent transcript during post-transcriptional processing,
whereupon it exerts its toxic effect directly. in other
respects, the downstream effects of both mutations on
mnbl-mediated alternative rna splicing are similar,
presumably reﬂecting the similarities in phenotype between dm1 and dm2.
from a pharmacologic perspective, and based on the
fact that myotonia is due to repetitive and inappropriate
opening of sodium channels, agents that reduce sodium
channel opening frequency or duration of opening should
be effective in alleviating myotonia. this is indeed borne
out in practice. anticonvulsants such as phenytoin and
carbamazepine block sodium channels in a use-dependent fashion (i.e., they preferentially inhibit rapidly and
repetitively opening sodium channels), and are variably
effective in myotonia. however, because the repetitive
ﬁring frequency of sodium channels in myotonic runs is
lower than that in epileptic phenomena, these agents are
probably less effective in myotonic disorders than in
epilepsy. the class ib anti-arrhythmic agents (e.g., mexilitene, a lidocaine derivative) are variably effective, also
blocking sodium channels in a use-dependent fashion,
but they have a higher afﬁnity for depolarized na⫹ channels. the explanation for the observation that there is considerable heterogeneity in response to mexilitene in patients
with mc and pmc is unclear. in the case of pmc, it is
probably in part due to variations in the degree of usedependent block that depends on whether the mutation is in
the inactivation particle (iii-iv linker), voltage-sensor
(ivs4), or some other part of the na⫹ channel.17 both
anticonvulsants and class 1b anti-arrhythmics are effective
on myotonia in both ndm and dm, although they have a
more limited role in dm due to potential cardiac toxicity.
they do not seem to alter the natural history of either of
these disorders. in pmc/pp overlap syndromes, although
they prevent myotonia they do not appear effective in
preventing paralytic attacks. on the other hand, class 1c
neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2008

anti-arrhythmic agents (such as propafenone) may hold
promise as being effective against both myotonia and
paralysis, based on a single report of a patient with pmc
due to t1313m  xxxg2026xxx  mutation in which both pp
and electrodiagnostic abnormalities both improved with
propafenone treatment.18 however, whether propafenone
is more effective than mexilitene in the wider clinical
setting, or whether its clinical efﬁcacy is mutation-speciﬁc requires more investigation.
future therapeutics in
neuromuscular channelopathies
general concepts
the multiple and distinct channelopathy pathomechanisms previously described preclude the “several diseases, one strategy” approach. first, the rarity and phenotypic heterogeneity of individual channelopathies
make placebo-controlled randomized trials difﬁcult, if
not impossible. second, their phenotypic and genotypic
heterogeneity likely explain the diverse treatment responses among individuals of different kindreds, yet carrying the same mutation, and sometimes even in the
same kindred with the same mutation. thus, assessment
of therapeutic efﬁcacy for even a single form of pp can
be challenging, and probably has limited utility in the
wider clinical setting unless consistent differences in
treatment response allow reasonable prediction of individuals’ therapeutic response a priori. one approach that
is inherently attractive in channelopathy treatment trials
is the use of the controlled, multiple crossover trial,
either implemented in single form as an “n-of-1” design
(synonyms: single patient trial, treatment optimization
trial), or as the more commonly used multiple-crossover
trial. in the former design, the patient acts as his or her
own control and treatment and placebo (or two treatments in direct comparison with each other) are randomly switched for a predetermined number of iterations
to determine whether there is an observable therapeutic
effect in that individual. this paradigm has been successfully used in other areas of medicine (e.g., asthma and
ﬁbromyalgia), and also in neurology (e.g., nicotine in
autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, a
disorder caused by mutations of a nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor).19 this design is attractive to patients and physicians who are more likely to participate in trials in which
there is a tangible beneﬁt to themselves, which improves
recruitment in an otherwise rare disease, and at the same
time optimizes treatment for the individual. although the
more conventional randomized, blinded, multiple-crossover
trial can also be used, it is subject to the potential problem
of low sensitivity in detecting treatment response heterogeneity among individuals due to phenotypic variability of the
disease (e.g., due to different mutations, or modifying
genes), as the cohort is analyzed as a whole. an alternative,

treatment of neuromuscular channelopathies
and perhaps more useful approach is to combine multiple
independent n-of-1 trials using hierarchical bayesian models;20 however, this is statistically complex and harder to
administer. thus, there is no “perfect” trial design in channelopathies, but rather the design must be tailored to the
question posed.
experimental concepts
molecular-based approaches are likely to have major
inﬂuence in channelopathy therapeutics, and exciting advances have already been made in related disorders. for
example, in a mouse model of myotonic dystrophy, a morpholino antisense oligonucleotide (aon) targeting the 3=
splice site of clcn1 exon 7a repaired the splicing defect by
promoting the production of full-length clcn-1 transcripts.
the chloride conductance was restored, and myotonia was
abolished.21 although the pathophysiology of myotonic
dystrophy is distinct, these ﬁndings have wider implications
for neuromuscular channelopathies: 1) aon therapy can be
successfully delivered without viral vectors but by direct
injection into muscle with electroporation, 2) the spliceopathy can be corrected even once the disease is symptomatic,
and 3) speciﬁc downstream effects of spliceopathy can be
potentially targeted with this approach. whether it will be
effective in ndm (or even pp) is unknown; however, there
is some evidence to suggest that it may be. for dominant
mc, the production of mutant clcn-1 transcripts probably
exerts its dominant negative effect by forming nonfunctional clc-1 heterodimers with wild-type channel subunits. “knockdown” of mutant clcn-1 transcripts with
aon therapy might partially reverse this effect, and may
promote formation of a higher proportion of wild-type
clc-1 channels, thus potentially restoring chloride conductance. for recessive mc, the situation is more complicated
because most mutations result in the production of nonfunctional channels via missense, nonsense, or premature termination codons (a defect not readily amenable to aon therapy). on the other hand, the technique of trans-splicing, in
which a ribozyme is used to facilitate splicing of its 3=-exon
to a target mrna sequence to allow restoration of a fully
functional mrna transcript, may hold promise in recessive
myotonia congenita. this technique has been used on a
canine mutant chloride channel mrna transcript, and despite a low level of repair efﬁciency (approximately 1%), up
to 18% of cells were found to have detectable chloride
currents.22 whether or not this technique can be applied to
an in vivo animal model of the disease, and thence to
humans, remains to be seen. furthermore, whether oral
aon therapy is possible in channel disorders also remains
to be seen. it has, however, recently been successfully used
in myasthenia gravis.23
there are other areas of potential therapeutic interest
that exist in pp. the effect of nongenetic factors in
modifying pp phenotype is illustrated by thyrotoxic pp.
such individuals do not carry known mutations in so-

611

dium or calcium channel genes, yet thyrotoxicosis produces a clinical and electrodiagnostic phenotype virtually indistinguishable from those with primary  xxxg310xxx .
however, once euthyroid, pp attacks typically resolve,
yet the electrodiagnostic abnormalities persist, albeit attenuated.24 furthermore, thyrotoxic patients without pp
demonstrate larger declines in compound muscle action
potential amplitude than healthy controls, suggesting a
susceptibility factor (possibly genetic) that predisposes
such individuals to thyrotoxic pp. the implications of
these observations are that hormonal status or other metabolic factor(s) may substantially modify the pp phenotype, and that hormonal (or perhaps even dietary) manipulation could offer a novel and hitherto unexplored
avenue for therapy. once the susceptibility factor(s) for
tpp has been identiﬁed, perhaps it will become more
clear which hormone(s) might be appropriate targets for
therapy.
finally, defects in the molecular trafﬁcking of ion
channel proteins from endoplasmic reticulum to the cell
membrane have been identiﬁed in certain ion-channel
disorders. in recessive myotonia congenita, voltageclamping studies in human embryonic kidney (hek) cells
have in some cases demonstrated minimal or no reduction in chloride conductance,25 indicating these mutated
channels are still at least partially functional, and raising
the possibility that defects of trafﬁcking to the sarcolemma might be one cause of recessive mc. for the
clcn1 mutations f413c and a513v (both recessive),
defects in transport from endoplasmic reticulum to the
golgi system have now been identiﬁed. the defect might
be due to either defective protein folding that prevents
chaperoning, or impaired protein stability, or both.26
agents that are able to facilitate chaperoning (“pharmacologic chaperones”) have been studied in cystic ﬁbrosis,
a defect of an apical cellular chloride channel that regulates cellular salt and water homeostasis. in the most
common cystic ﬁbrosis mutation, ⌬f508, defective folding leads to a protein that is retained in the er. this
defect is at least partially reversible using pharmacologic
chaperones,27 but whether chaperones could rescue the
myotonic phenotype in recessive mc is a question that
warrants further investigation.
references
1. colding-jørgensen e. phenotypic variability in myotonia congenita. muscle nerve 2005;32:19 –34.
2. jurkatt-rott k, lehmann-horn f. muscle channelopathies and critical points in functional and genetic studies. j clin invest 2005;
115:2000 –9.
3. struyk af, cannon sc. paradoxical depolarization of ba2⫹treated muscle exposed to low extracellular k⫹: insights into resting potential abnormalities in hypokalemic paralysis. muscle
nerve 2008;37:326 –37.
4. cleland jc, griggs rcg. channelopathies of the nervous system.
in: neurobiology of disease. gilman s, ed. burlington, ma:
elsevier academic press, 2007:319 –32.

neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2008

612

cleland and griggs

5. venance sl, herr be, griggs rc. challenges in the design and
conduct of therapeutic trials in channel disorders. neurotherapeutics 2007;4:199 –204.
6. tawil r, mcdermott mp, brown r jr, et al. randomized trials of
 xxxd1872xxx  in the periodic paralyses. working group on
periodic paralysis. ann  xxxd122xxx  2000;47:46 –53.
7. tricarico d, barbieri m, mele a, carbonara g, conte camerino d.
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are speciﬁc openers of skeletal muscle  xxxg1259xxx  of k⫹-deﬁcient rats. faseb j 2004;18:760 –1.
8. riggs je, griggs rc, moxley rt. dissociation of glucose and potassium arterial-venous differences across the forearm by acetazolamide: a possible relationship to acetazolamide’s beneﬁcial effect in
hypokalemia periodic paralysis. arch  xxxd122xxx  1984;41:35– 8.
9. riggs je, griggs rc, moxley rt, lewis ed. acute effects of
acetazolamide in hyperkalemic periodic paralysis and in normals.
neurology 1981;31:725–9.
10. grafe p, quasthoff s, strupp m, lehmann-horn f. enhancement
of k⫹ conductance improves the in vitro contraction force of
skeletal muscle in hypokalemic periodic paralysis. muscle nerve
1990;13:451–7.
11. lin s-h, chiu j-s, hsu c-w, chau t. a simple and rapid approach
to hypokalemic paralysis. am j emerg med 2003;21:487–91.
12. gallant em. barium-treated mammalian skeletal muscle: similarities
to hypokalemic periodic paralysis. j physiol 1983;335:577–90.
13. ruff rl. insulin acts in hypokalemic periodic paralysis by reducing inward rectiﬁer k⫹ current. neurology 1999;53:1556 – 63.
14. abbot gw, butler mh, goldstein san. phosphorylation and protonation of neighboring mirp2 sites: function and pathophysiology of mirp2-kv3.4 potassium channels in periodic paralysis.
faseb j 2006;20:293–301.
15. tricarico d, servidei s, tonali p, jurkat-rott k, conte camerino
d. impairment of skeletal muscle  xxxd83xxx -sensitive
k⫹ channels in patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
j clin invest 1999;103:675– 82.
16. osborne rj, thornton ca. rna-dominant diseases. human mol
genet 2006;15:162–9.
17. takahashi mp, cannon sc. mexilitene block of disease-associated
muations in s6 segments of the human skeletal muscle na⫹ channel. j physiol 2001;537:701–14.
18. alfonsi e, merlo im, tonini m, ravaglia s, brugnoni r, gozzini
a, moglia a. efﬁcacy of propafenone in paramytonia congenita.
neurology 2007;68:1080 –1.
19. willoughby jo, pope kj, eaton v. nicotine as an anti-epileptic agent
in adnfle: an n-of-one study. epilepsia 2003;44:1238 – 40.
20. zucker dr, schmid ch, mcintosh mw, d’agostino rb, selker
hp, lau j. combining single patient (n-of-1) trials to estimate
population treatment effects and to evaluate individual patient
responses to treatment. j clin epidemiol 1997;50:401–10.
21. wheeler tm, lueck jd, swanson ms, dirksen rt, thornton ca.
correction of clc-1 splicing eliminates chloride channelopathy
and myotonia in mouse models of myotonic dystrophy. j clin
invest 2007;117:3952–7.
22. rogers cs, vanoye cg, sullenger ba, george al jr. functional
repair of a mutant chloride channel using a trans-splicing ribozyme. j clin invest 2002;110:1783–9.

neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2008

23. argov z, mckee d, agus s, et al. treatment of human myasthenia
gravis with oral antisense suppression of acetylcholinesterase.
neurology 2007;69:699 –700.
24. arimura k, arimura y, ng, ar, sakoda s-i, higuchi i. muscle
membrane excitability after exercise in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis and thyrotoxicosis without periodic paralysis. muscle nerve
2007;36:784 – 8.
25. zhang j, bendahhou s, sanguinetti j, ptacek lj. functional consequence of chloride channel gene (clcn1) mutations causing
myotonia congenita. neurology 2000;54:937– 42.
26. papponen h, nissinen m, kaisto t, myllylä vv, myllylä r,
metsikkö k. f413c and a531v but not r894x myotonia congenita mutations cause defective endoplasmic reticulum export of
the muscle-speciﬁc chloride channel clc-1. muscle nerve 2008;
37:317–25.
27. wang y, bartlett c, loo tw, clarke dm. speciﬁc rescue of cystic
ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator processing mutants
using pharmacological chaperones. mol pharmacol 2006;70:297–
302.
28. kinali m, jungbluth h, eunson lh, et al. expanding the phenotype
of potassium channelopathy: severe neuromyotonia and skeletal
deformities without prominent episodic ataxia. neuromuscul disord 2004;14:689 –93.
29. allen dc, arunachalam r, mills kr. critical illness myopathy:
further evidence from muscle-ﬁber excitability studies of an acquired channelopathy. muscle nerve 2008;37:14 –22.
30. wuttke tv, jurkat-rott k, paulus w, garncarek m, lehmannhorn f, lerche h. peripheral nerve hyperexcitability due to dominant negative  xxxg1269xxx  mutations. neurology 2007;69:2045–53.
31. sansone v, tawil r. management and treatment of andersentawil syndrome. neurotherapeutics 2007;4:233–7.
32. vicart s, sternberg d, fontaine b, meola g. human skeletal
muscle sodium channelopathies.  xxxd122xxx  sci 2005;26:194 –202.
33. waxman sg, dib-hajj sd. erythromelalgia: a hereditary pain
syndrome enters the molecular era. ann  xxxd122xxx  2005;57:785– 8.
34. tsujino a, maertens c, ohno k, et al. myasthenic syndrome
caused by mutation of the  xxxg2026xxx  channel. proc natl acad sci
2003;100:7377– 82.
35. engel ag, ohno k, sine sm. congenital myasthenic syndromes.
in: myasthenia gravis and myasthenic disorders. engel ag, ed.
new york, ny: oxford university press, 1999:251–97.
36. lyfenko ad, goonasekera sa, dirksen rt. dynamic alterations
in myoplasmic ca2⫹ in malignant hyperthermia and central core
disease. biochem biophys res commun 2004;322:1256 – 66.
37. vernino s, lennon va. ion channel and striational antibodies
deﬁne a continuum of autoimmune neuromuscular excitability.
muscle nerve 2002;26:702–7.
38. newsom-davis j, lang b. the lambert-eaton myasthenic syndrome. in: myasthenia gravis and related disorders. engel ag,
ed. new york, ny: oxford university press, 1999:205–28.
39. teener jw, rich mm. dysregulation of sodium channel gating in
critical illness myopathy. j muscle res cell motil 2006;27:291– 6.

