the involvement of histaminic and muscarinic receptors
in the bronchoconstriction induced by myorelaxant
administration in sensitized rabbits
walid habre, md, phd*
ágnes adamicza, phd†
enikõ lele, md‡
tı́mea novák†‡
peter d. sly, mbbs, md, dsc,
fracp§
ferenc petak, msc, phd‡

background: muscle relaxants cause bronchospasm via histamine release and/or
by acting on the muscarinic receptors; we sought to characterize the respective
importance of these pathways in the presence of bronchial hyperreactivity.
methods: ovalbumin-sensitized rabbits were randomly assigned to several protocol groups: group c comprised untreated animals; in the other three groups, either
h1 and h2 histaminic receptor blockade was performed, leaving the m1, m2, and
m3 muscarinic receptors functional (group m123), or combining this treatment
with  xxxg449xxx  blockade (group m12), or with vagotomy (group
m3). respiratory system impedance was measured over a 90-s period, during
which succinylcholine,  xxxd2658xxx  or atracurium was administered. to monitor
the changes in lung mechanics, respiratory system impedance was averaged in a
2-s time window and fitted by a model featuring airway resistance and inertance
and tissue damping and elastance.
results: the peak increases in airway resistance in group c were greatest with
succinylcholine (79 ⫾ 17[se]%) and  xxxd2658xxx  administration (75% ⫾ 12%),
whereas they were lower after attracurium (40% ⫾ 11%). these changes were
markedly attenuated by both histamine and muscarinic receptor blockade with the
largest reduction in group m3 for succinylcholine (14% ⫾ 5.2%), and in group
m123 for  xxxd2658xxx  (5.1% ⫾ 9.1%) and attracurium (7.8% ⫾ 4.0%).
discussion: although the bronchospasm developing in the allergic airways after
muscle relaxants is mediated primarily by the histaminic pathway, the interactions
of succinylcholine on the m1, m2, and m3 receptors, those of atracurium on the m1
and m2 receptors, and those of  xxxd2658xxx  on the m3 receptors may also play a
role.
(anesth analg 2008;107:1899 –1906)

b

ronchospasm related to the administration of anesthetic drugs remains one of the main factors responsible for perioperative morbidity during anesthesia in
patients with bronchial hyperresponsiveness (bhr).1– 4
although numerous anesthetics have side effects affecting the airways, neuromuscolar blocking drugs (nmbds)
are most often reported to be involved in the development of intraoperative bronchoconstriction.5–15 nmbds
exert their adverse effects on the airway smooth muscle
from the *pediatric anesthesia unit, geneva children’s hospital, switzerland; †institute of experimental surgery, university of
szeged, hungary; ‡department of medical informatics and engineering, university of szeged, hungary; and §telethon institute for
child health research and centre for child health research,
university of western australia, perth, australia.
accepted for publication june 30, 2008.
supported by hungarian basic scientific research fund (otka)
k62403, budapest, hungary, and the swiss national science foundation (snsf 105828/1), wildhainweg 3, ch-3001 bern, switzerland.
ferenc petak is supported by a bolyai janos research fellowship.
address correspondence and reprint requests to ferenc petak,
phd, department of medical informatics, university of szeged,
koranyi fasor 9, h-6720 szeged, hungary. address e-mail to
petak@dmi.szote.u-szeged.hu.
copyright © 2008 international anesthesia research society
doi: 10.1213/ane.0b013e318186587c

vol. 107, no. 6, december 2008

(asm), either by inducing the endogenous release of
histamine5,7,8,10,11,14 and/or via their interactions with
the muscarinic receptors.6,12,13
the role of muscarinic receptors in the regulation of
asm tone is well established.16 –19 while the role of
preganglionic muscarinic receptor subtype of m1 has
not been fully clarified,16,17 the activation of the receptor of subtype m3, present on the asm, leads to a
contraction of the asm.17,19 nevertheless, there is
increasing evidence that the key role in the regulation
of asm tone is played by the muscarinic receptor of
subtype m2.17–19 the presynaptic m2 receptors exert a
negative feedback on the release of acetylcholine (ach)
from the parasympathetic nerves and those on the asm
inhibit the  xxxd81xxx -cyclase-induced relaxation of the
asm.17 since life-threatening acute bronchospasm has
been reported after administration of the nmbd that
antagonizes m2 receptors selectively (rapacuronium),20,21
characterization of the interactions of nmbds on the muscarinic receptors is of major clinical importance.
substantially elevated airway responses to various
nmbds have been demonstrated in the presence of
allergic lung inflammation leading to bhr.22 in addition to the elevated responsiveness of the airways to
1899

histamine, bhr is associated with an m2 muscarinic
receptor dysfunction via reducing the feedback inhibition and increasing cholinergic discharge. the fact
that nmbds act on both histaminic and muscarinic
pathways means that a systematic characterization of
the relative importance of these mechanisms in the
development of bronchospasm in situations where
bhr is present is of great importance in targeting
preventive and therapeutic strategies. the importance
of the involvement of the muscarinic receptors have
been highlighted in in vitro models12,13,20,21 or in
experimental animals with normal lungs.6 however,
there have been very few studies where the alterations
in the asm tone were assessed after the administration of nmbds in vivo, and there are no such data
available in the presence of bhr. in addition, only
global lung function variables (e.g., total respiratory
resistance23,24 or peak inspiratory pressure6) were
measured in these previous studies, without characterizing the changes in the airway and the tissue
mechanics separately.
the present study was designed to characterize the
underlying mechanisms and pathways involved in the
development of bronchospasm after the administration of nmbds commonly used in clinical practice in
the presence of sensitized airways exhibiting bhr.
 xxxd2658xxx , atracurium, and succinylcholine were
involved, since these frequently used muscle relaxants
used in routine clinical practice and these drugs have
been often reported to exert bronchoconstrictive side
effects.3,14,15,22 to identify the roles of the different
receptors, both antihistamine and selective anticholinergic interventions were applied before nmbd
administration. the changes in the respiratory mechanics in each treatment group were followed by
continuous tracking of the forced oscillatory mechanical
properties of the airway and the respiratory tissues.
unlike the data obtained with previous techniques applied in vivo, this approach i) excludes the potentially
confounding effects of the respiratory tissues, ii) makes it
possible to characterize the temporal dynamics of the
otherwise fairly fast process and thus, iii) makes the
identification of the maximal airway constriction
feasible.

methods
animal handling, allergic sensitization and challenge
after approval from the institutional ethics committee of the university of szeged, 29 adult rabbits of
either sex (2.7–3.7 kg) were studied. all animals were
actively sensitized by a procedure described in detail
previously.22 briefly, intraperitoneal injections of 0.1
mg ovalbumin (ova) and 10 mg  xxxd131xxx  (sigma-aldrich, budapest, hungary) were administered on days 0 and 13. the rabbits were then
exposed to aerosolized (voyage mefar jet nebulizer,
italy) ova (10 mg/ml) for a 20-min period daily from
day 25 to day 29. experiments were performed on day
1900

muscle relaxants and muscarinic receptors

30. when the sensitized animals were exposed to the
specific allergen by inhalation before the experiments,
the antibody-antigen reaction led to the accumulation
of inflammatory cells including mast cells in the
bronchial lumen, with the resultant development of
airway hyperresponsiveness.22,25 the animals were
maintained in a clean animal house under environmental conditions that were as stable as possible, with
food and water allowed ad libitum. in order to avoid
the development of tolerance to ova, the animals
were fed food free of egg proteins.

animal preparation
anesthesia was induced by an im injection of
xylazine (5 mg/kg), followed by the injection of
pentobarbital sodium (30 mg/kg) via an ear vein. the
rabbits were then tracheotomized with a 3.5-mm-id
polyethylene cannula and mechanically ventilated
with room air (model 683, harvard apparatus, south
natick, ma) while a tidal volume of 7–9 ml/kg, a
frequency of 30/min and a positive end-expiratory
pressure of 4 cm h2o were maintained. a carotid
artery was cannulated for continuous arterial blood
pressure monitoring (model 156 pc 06-gw2, honeywell, zürich, switzerland). a femoral vein was also
cannulated for drug delivery. maintenance doses of
anesthetic (pentobarbital sodium 5 mg/kg) were administered iv every 30 – 40 min.

measurement of respiratory impedance tracking
the measurement system with which the changes
in the input impedance spectra of the rabbit respiratory system (zrs) were monitored was described in
detail.22,26 briefly, the tracheal cannula was attached to
a t-piece that allowed the animal to be switched either
to the ventilator or to a loudspeaker-in-box system.
the loudspeaker delivered computer-generated pseudorandom forced oscillations of 2-s periods in the
frequency range 1–11 hz into the trachea. the loudspeaker chamber was pressurized to maintain the
same transrespiratory pressure during the tracking
maneuvers. the oscillatory signal was led through a
screen pneumotachograph (11 mm id) attached to a
differential pressure transducer (model 33na002d,
icsensors, malpitas, ca), which was used to measure
the tracheal flow (v’). an identical pressure transducer was applied to measure the tracheal pressure
(ptr) during oscillations via a side-port of the endotracheal tube.
the ptr and v’ signals were low-pass filtered at
25-hz and sampled with a microcomputer at a rate of
128 hz. the time window of the zrs calculation by fast
fourier transformation was 2 s, and the spectra estimated by moving sample-by-sample along the recording were averaged for 2 s. accordingly, these zrs data
represented the average impedance for a 4-s interval,
and the successive overlapping estimates were obtained every 2 s, resulting in 45 zrs estimates from a
anesthesia & analgesia

table 1. protocol groups
receptors
m1
group
group
group
group

c (n ⫽ 12)
m12 (n ⫽ 5)
m3 (n ⫽ 6)
m123 (n ⫽ 6)

m2

⫹
⫹
⫹
⫹
vagotomy
⫹
⫹

m3

h1

h2

⫹
4-damp (30 ␮g/kg)
⫹
⫹

⫹
suprastine (2 mg/kg)
suprastine (2 mg/kg)
suprastine (2 mg/kg)

⫹
ranitidine (5 mg/kg)
ranitidine (5 mg/kg)
ranitidine (5 mg/kg)

the functionality of the receptors is indicated by “⫹” signs.

figure 1. scheme of the experimental protocol.
measurements were started with recording of
respiratory input impedance (zrs) over a 90-s
period, during which the first neuromuscular
blocking drug (nmbd) (succinylcholine,  xxxd2658xxx  or attracurium) was administered 15 s after
the start of the recordings (respiratory system
impedance (zrs) track nmbd-1). fifteen min
later, a control zrs tracking was collected the same
manner, except no nmbd was injected (zrs track
ctrl). the effects of the other two nmbds were
then registered identically (zrs track nmbd-2
and nmbd-3), which was followed by another
control zrs track (zrs track ctrl-2) to establish
the baseline for the subsequent histamine (zrs
tracks histamine) and acetylcholine (zrs tracks
ach) challenges. the iv constrictor challenges
consisted of four consecutive doses of histamine
or acetylcholine injected 15 s after starting the
90-s-long zrs recordings.
90-s recording. the airway resistance (raw) and inertance (iaw), and constant-phase tissue model parameters representing tissue damping (g) and elastance
(h) were then extracted from these zrs spectra by
model fitting.27 lung tissue hysteresivity (␩) was
calculated as g/h.28 this approach has been shown to
provide reliable estimates for the airway and tissue
mechanics in rabbits14,22,29 and dogs,30 and it has been
proved to allow reliable tracking of the respiratory
mechanical parameters in mice26 and rabbits.22 a
smoothing procedure (three-point running average)
was applied to the time sequences of the airway and
tissue model parameters. the reported raw and iaw
values were corrected for the resistance and inertance
of the measurement set-up, respectively, including the
tracheal cannula.

study groups
before the experimental protocol, the animals were
randomly assigned to receive treatments designed to
block histamine and or muscarinic receptors in various combinations (table 1). no receptor blockade was
applied in the animals in the control group (group c).
in the animals in group m12, only the m1 and m2
muscarinic receptors were kept available by administering the h1 and h2 histamine receptor antagonists
(suprastine 2 mg/kg, ranitidine 5 mg/kg) and an m3
receptor blocker (4-damp, 30 ␮g/kg). in the rabbits in
group m3, only the m3 muscarinic receptors were left
functional by eliminating the presynaptic m1 and m2
muscarinic receptors through a vagotomy and by
vol. 107, no. 6, december 2008

blocking the h1 and h2 histamine receptors. finally,
group m123 contained animals in which the m1, m2,
and m3 muscarinic receptors were all left functional,
whereas the histamine h1 and h2 receptors were
blocked.

experimental protocol
the experiments were started in all groups with an
iv bolus of fentanyl (5 ␮g/kg) to ensure adequate
analgesia and to suppress spontaneous breathing efforts during the impedance recording. the tracheal
cannula was next detached from the respirator and
connected to the pressurized loudspeaker chamber for
90 s. the zrs measurement was started with a 15-s
baseline recording, after which a muscle relaxant
(randomly selected atracurium 1 mg/kg,  xxxd2658xxx 
2 mg/kg, or succinylcholine 5 mg/kg) was injected
into the femoral vein (fig. 1). in agreement with
previous studies in rabbits,22,31 larger doses of drugs
were applied here than those used in humans due to
the substantially higher clearance and enhanced metabolism of anesthetic drugs in rabbits. each rabbit’s
lungs were subsequently mechanically ventilated for
at least 15 min, and the control zrs was then recorded
in the same manner as above, except that no drug was
administered (control recording). the zrs recording
was then repeated after administration of the other
two muscle relaxants in random sequence. another
control zrs recording was made thereafter, which was
followed by impedance measurements during the
administration of iv boluses of histamine (2.5, 5, 10
© 2008 international anesthesia research society

1901

and 20 ␮g/kg) with the same timing as the muscle
relaxants in the animals in group c. in the animals in
groups m12, m3 and m123, the abolition of the h1
and  xxxg1079xxx  activities was confirmed by performing zrs measurements during administration of the
highest iv dose of histamine. histamine provocation
tests were followed by iv ach challenges (1, 2, 4, and
8 ␮g/kg) during which zrs was recorded continuously, as described earlier. finally, a bolus of ova (1
mg) was injected iv when the changes in zrs were
recorded. the animal was allowed a period of mechanical ventilation of at least 15 min between the
maneuvers involving administration of an nmbd,
and at least 5 min between the successive doses of
exogenous constrictor stimuli. after drug administrations, mechanical parameters obtained at the peak
value of raw were included in the analyses. the drug
effects were assessed by relating these peak model
parameters to those found from a control impedance
recording at the corresponding time point (fig. 1).

with succinylcholine, whereas atracurium induced
only a small increase. h exhibited minor changes after
the injection of any nmbd.

changes in raw
figure 3 summarizes the relative changes in raw
after administrations of ach, histamine, and the
nmbds. since iaw and the tissue variables exhibited
no statistically significant changes after drug administrations, these results are not displayed.
ach responses
it may be seen that ach induced dose-dependent
increases in raw in all groups of rabbits. muscarinic
receptor blockade had statistically significant effects
on the ach-induced elevations in raw (p ⬍ 0.001).
the airway reaction after the highest dose of ach was
significantly higher in group m3 than in group c
(p ⫽ 0.017), and there was a tendency to a lower
reaction in group m12 (p ⫽ 0.043 versus the adjusted
critical level of 0.025 established by the post hoc test).

statistical analyses
data are reported as means ⫾ se. the kolmogorovsmirnov test was used to test data for normality. oneway analysis of variances (anova) was used to assess
the differences among the protocol groups after the
histamine challenges were performed with the dose of 20
␮g/kg. to assess the differences in the effects of the
increasing ach doses among the protocol groups, twoway repeated measures anova with factors related to
the ach dose and protocol groups was performed.
similarly, the differences in the nmbd effects were
established by further two-way repeated measures
anova tests with factors identifying the specific
nmbd (succinylcholine, attracurium or  xxxd2658xxx )
and the protocol groups. one-way anova on ranks
was applied to evaluate whether the changes in the
airway and tissue parameters were significantly different from zero after nmbd administrations. post hoc
analyses with pairwise comparisons were performed by
using student-newman-keuls multiple comparison procedures. statistical tests were performed with the significance level set at p ⬍ 0.05.

results
there was no significant difference in age, weight,
or the parameter values obtained in the control recordings among the animals in the protocol groups.

time course of the mechanical changes
the time courses of the changes in raw and the
viscoelastic tissue variables in a control recording and
after administration of the nmbds in a representative
rabbit are demonstrated in figure 2. mild increases in
the mechanical variables over the time course of the
experiment were obvious in the control maneuver; iv
injection of the nmbds led to considerable elevations
in raw and smaller increases in g. in this particular
rabbit, the greatest lung constriction was encountered
1902

muscle relaxants and muscarinic receptors

histamine responses
increasing doses of histamine in group c induced
dose dependent elevations in raw. in the other three
protocol groups (groups m12, m3, and m123), h1 and
 xxxg1079xxx  blockade completely prevented the
histamine-induced changes in the airway variables
after the injection of the highest dose of histamine.
responses to nmbds
after administration of the nmbds, there were
significant interactions between receptor blockade and
the changes induced by the different nmbds (p ⫽
0.047). in the animals in group c, the increases in raw
were marked and statistically significant after administration of succinylcholine or  xxxd2658xxx , but the
airway constriction induced by atracurium injection
was significantly smaller (p ⬍ 0.001). the rabbits in
groups m12, m3, and m123 all exhibited significantly
lower airway responses after the administrations of
succinylcholine (p ⬍ 0.01) or  xxxd2658xxx  (p ⬍ 0.002),
whereas the mechanical variables obtained in the
various study groups did not differ statistically significantly in response to atracurium injection (p ⫽
0.38). after receptor blockade, the increases in raw
were still statistically significant in group m123 after
succinylcholine, in group m12 after atracurium, and
in group m3 after  xxxd2658xxx  administration,
whereas significant changes were not detected in the
other groups involving interventions.

discussion
the present study was performed to investigate the
relative roles of histamine release and the interaction
of different muscarinic receptor subtypes to changes
in respiratory mechanics after the administration of
commonly used muscle relaxants in a validated model
of bhr. the results demonstrate that the involvement
anesthesia & analgesia

figure 2. time courses of the changes in airway resistance (raw), tissue damping (g), and elastance (h) in a control recording
(f) and after administration of succinylcholine (e), atracurium (ƒ) or  xxxd2658xxx  (‚) in a single rabbit. double arrows
indicate the identification of airway responses after administration of the neuromuscular blocking drug (nmbd).

of the histaminic pathway is the primary cause of the
airway narrowing after the administration of succinylcholine,  xxxd2658xxx  and, to a lesser degree, atracurium. although these drugs exhibited the ability to
interact with all muscarinic receptors, this does not
seem to be of major significance. furthermore, the
nmbds studied seem to exert a differential interaction
with the muscarinic receptor subtypes: succinylcholine has an affinity on m1, m2, and  xxxg449xxx 
subtypes, atracurium interacts predominantly with
the m1 and m2 receptors, whereas the effects of
vol. 107, no. 6, december 2008

 xxxd2658xxx  are most pronounced on the activation of
the m3 receptors residing on the asm.
the adverse side effects of nmbds in inducing bronchoconstriction in clinical settings are primarily encountered in the presence of allergic airways.22,32 in contrast
with this observation, all previous studies have investigated the bronchoconstrictive potential of nmbds on
normal airways. this is the first study performed in a
validated animal model consistently demonstrating
bhr22 where interactions of nmbds with the muscarinic receptor are assessed. this model was chosen to
© 2008 international anesthesia research society

1903

figure 3. relative peak changes in airway resistance (draw: the percentage difference between the peak response in raw and

that at the corresponding control recording; see fig. 1 for details) after increasing doses of acetylcholine (ach, 1– 8 ␮g/kg),
histamine (h 2.5–20 ␮g/kg), and after succinylcholine (suc), attracurium (atr) or  xxxd2658xxx  (miv) administration.
measurements were obtained in sensitized untreated rabbits (group c, open bars), and in animals treated with antihistamines
(m123), antihistamines and a selective  xxxg449xxx  blocker (m12), or antihistamines in vagotomized rabbits (m3).*: p ⬍ 0.05
versus group c; §: p ⫽ 0.043 versus the adjusted critical level of 0.025; #: p ⬍ 0.05 versus suc within a group; $: p ⬍ 0.05 versus
miv within a group; ⫹: statistically significant increase after an neuromuscular blocking drug (nmbd).

characterize the underlying mechanisms responsible for
the development of bronchospasm. we have previously
demonstrated that the sensitization procedure used in
the present study with ova leads to airway hyperreactivity to exogenous constrictor stimuli, and is accompanied by a severe anaphylactoid lung reaction to the
specific allergen, ova.22 in addition, a larger dose was
administered here than in clinical practice because of the
substantially higher clearance and enhanced metabolism
of anesthetic drugs in rabbits.31 with this dose, we
previously obtained increases in plasma histamine levels
in rabbits14 comparable to those observed earlier in
humans after a lower dose of  xxxd2658xxx .7
since the constrictor response to the injection of a
nmbd develops rapidly and peaks within seconds,22 a
technique allowing monitoring of respiratory mechanical variables with sufficient resolution is required in
order to characterize the mechanical changes in the
respiratory system precisely. accordingly, continuous
1904

muscle relaxants and muscarinic receptors

tracking of the low-frequency zrs parameters was
adopted to describe lung responses after nmbd administrations. unlike global lung function variables measured
in previous studies, this technique permits continuous
measurement of airway function over a period of
time,26 while it also provides detailed information on
the altered dissipative and elastic properties of the
respiratory tissues.22 in addition, this approach allows
the identification of the maximal airway constriction
encountered in a fast transient process after injection
of nmbds by characterizing the temporal dynamics of
the lung’s mechanical changes. the time course and
the magnitude of the airway responses after  xxxd2658xxx  or succinylcholine administration in the present
study are comparable to those obtained previously in
animals with sensitized airways.22 besides a precise
description of the changes in airway mechanics, the
present study furnishes information on the magnitude
and temporal changes in respiratory tissue variables.
anesthesia & analgesia

although the predominant increases in raw are apparently due to the decreases in the airway cross-sectional
area after the administration of exogenous constrictor
agonists and nmbds, the slight increases in g and h are
likely to reflect enhanced ventilation heterogeneities
and/or peripheral airway closure.30 in agreement with
previous findings,14,22 the dominance of airways response over the changes in the tissue variables were also
obvious after administrations of nmbds, since the
stimulation of both histamine and muscarinic receptors
lead primarily to asm constriction.
our aim was to compare the bronchoactive side
effects of nmbds commonly used in clinical practice
for rapid sequence induction and for their short-acting
duration. although involvement of the same animal
limits the number of drugs that may be administered,
we sought to compare their effects within the same
rabbit, since this approach affords a possibility for
direct assessment of the association between the airway responses induced by the various pathways. in
order to avoid possible interactions between the
drugs, careful attention was paid to the drug clearance
time between the consecutive measurements. moreover, the three nmbds were administered in random
sequence, which further eliminated disturbing time
effects and possible bias due to drug interactions. in
fact, there were no systematic differences in the profiles of the lung responses to the different nmbds
when they were administered in different sequences,
confirming that the effects of possibly residual drug
did not influence our findings.
the effects of receptor blockade achieved by selective antagonist administration and vagotomy were
examined by exposing the receptors to their primary
agonist, histamine and ach. the highest dose of
histamine, which caused more than a fivefold increase
in raw in the control rabbits, induced no detectable
changes in the animals subjected to antihistaminic
preventive treatment (fig. 3). this suggests that, in
these rabbits, all the histamine receptors involved in
the lung mechanical responses were abolished by the
histamine receptor antagonists, and these receptors
were also blocked completely during the lung responses induced by the administration of the nmbds.
accordingly, the changes in the respiratory mechanical variables in groups m12, m3, and m123 were
solely a consequence of the interaction of the different
muscarinic receptor subtypes, with no involvement of
the histaminic pathway. with a view to characterizing
the involvement of the muscarinic receptor subtypes,
we eliminated their activities individually, either by
antagonizing the m3 receptors with a selective antagonist or by performing vagotomy, which abolishes the
preganglionic m1 and presynaptic  xxxg448xxx  functions. the effects of these interventions were confirmed by producing dose-response curves to ach in
the rabbits (fig. 3). although blockade of the m3
receptors blunted the ach-induced airway constriction, vagotomy unmasked the inhibitory role of the
vol. 107, no. 6, december 2008

m2 receptors, leading to dramatic increases in airway
responsiveness. these results are in qualitative agreement with the findings of previous studies with the
aim of identification of the roles of the muscarinic
receptors in regulating the asm tone.16 –19
the comparison of the changes in the respiratory
mechanical variables obtained in the protocol groups
after nmbd administration allows a characterization
of the underlying mechanisms responsible for their
bronchoactive side effects. the relationships of the
control and treated groups reveal that histamine liberation is the main contributor to the severity of the
bronchospasm for all three drugs studied; their interactions with the muscarinic receptors are not negligible (fig. 3, bottom). the predominance of histamine
release after the administration of succinylcholine or
 xxxd2658xxx  is in accordance with earlier findings
demonstrating their constrictor potential via stimulation of the histamine receptors.5,14,33 in line with
previous observations,24,34 atracurium revealed a
weaker histamine-releasing potential, suggesting a
less detrimental profile.
the present study also quantifies the magnitude of
the airway constriction that occurs as a consequence of
nmbds acting on the different muscarinic receptor
subtypes in the presence of bhr. as reported previously in animals with normal airways,12,13,35,36 the
nmbds show differences in their ability to interact
with muscarinic receptors subtypes in allergic animals. the similarity between the airway responses
during blockade of the various muscarinic receptor
subtypes suggests that succinylcholine possesses similar affinities for all three subtypes. this may result
from the chemical structural similarities between succinylcholine and ach. unlike succinylcholine, atracurium and  xxxd2658xxx  differed in their potential to
interact with the various muscarinic receptor subtypes. after exclusion of the histamine effects, the
airway constriction after atracurium administration
was significant only in group m12, suggesting this
drug only activates m1 and m2 receptors. previous in
vitro12 and in vivo36 investigations have demonstrated
a high affinity of atracurium for m2 receptors in
studies using normal airways.  xxxd2658xxx  primarily
interacted with m3 receptors to produce bronchconstriction in sensitized airways, which is in full agreement with previous observations in guinea pigs with
normal lungs.35
in summary, the experimental data acquired in the
current study provide direct experimental evidence of
the dual detrimental effects of these commonly used
nmbds in inducing the constriction of allergic airways. of the three nmbds evaluated, atracurium
demonstrated the least constrictor effects on the
sensitized airways, whereas  xxxd2658xxx  and succinycholine exerted marked and comparable levels of
bronchoconstriction. although all these effects were
mainly due to histamine release, the interactions of
these drugs with the muscarinic receptors also account
© 2008 international anesthesia research society

1905

for a substantial part of the adverse airway responses.
the deleterious effects of nmbds exerted via involvement of the muscarinic receptors depend on the
specific drugs, with succinylcholine exhibiting equal
affinities for the m1, m2, and m3 receptors, atracurium exerting its action on the m1 and m2 receptors
at ganglionic sites, and  xxxd2658xxx  interacting with
the m3 receptors in the asm. anesthesiologists
should, therefore, be aware of the coexistence of the
histaminic and muscarinic effects of nmbds in inducing the rapid development of bronchospasm in allergic airways. although further studies are required to
confirm these experimental findings for humans, identification of the pathways involved in the development of bronchoconstriction may contribute to the
establishment of preventive strategies targeting the
pathways primarily involved.
references
1. mertes pm, laxenaire mc. adverse reactions to neuromuscular
blocking agents. curr allergy asthma rep 2004;4:7–16
2. mertes pm, laxenaire mc, alla f. anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions occurring during anesthesia in france in
1999 –2000. anesthesiology 2003;99:536 – 45
3. laxenaire mc, mertes pm. anaphylaxis during anaesthesia.
results of a two-year survey in france. br j anaesth 2001;
87:549 –58
4. warner do, warner ma, barnes rd, offord kp, schroeder dr,
gray dt, yunginger jw. perioperative respiratory complications in patients with asthma. anesthesiology 1996;85:460 –7
5. guldager h, sondergaard i. histamine release from basophil
leukocytes in asthma patients after in vitro provocation with
various neuromuscular blocking drugs and intravenous anaesthetic agents. acta anaesthesiol scand 1987;31:728 –9
6. jooste e, zhang y, emala cw. neuromuscular blocking agents’
differential bronchoconstrictive potential in guinea pig airways.
anesthesiology 2007;106:763–72
7. naguib m, samarkandi ah, bakhamees hs, magboul ma,
el-bakry ak. histamine-release haemodynamic changes produced by rocuronium, vecuronium,  xxxd2658xxx , atracurium
and  xxxd3456xxx . br j anaesth 1995;75:588 –92
8. north fc, kettelkamp n, hirshman ca. comparison of cutaneous and in vitro histamine release by muscle relaxants.
anesthesiology 1987;66:543– 6
9. stellato c, de paulis a, cirillo r, mastronardi p, mazzarella b,
marone g. heterogeneity of human mast cells and basophils in
response to muscle relaxants. anesthesiology 1991;74:1078 – 86
10. ertama pm. histamine liberation in surgical patients following
administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. ann clin res
1982;14:15–26
11. smith nl. histamine release by suxamethonium. anaesthesia
1957;12:293– 8
12. hou vy, hirshman ca, emala cw. neuromuscular relaxants
as antagonists for m2 and m3 muscarinic receptors. anesthesiology 1998;88:744 –50
13. sugai y, sugai k, mishima m, okuda c, miyazaki m. the
interaction of neuromuscular relaxants with rabbit lung muscarinic receptors. acta anaesthesiol scand 1990;34:249 –52

1906

muscle relaxants and muscarinic receptors

14. habre w, babik b, chalier m, petak f. role of endogenous
histamine in altered lung mechanics in rabbits. anesthesiology
2002;96:409 –15
15. bishop mj, o’donnell jt, salemi jr.  xxxd2658xxx  and bronchospasm. anesth analg 2003;97:484 –5, table of contents
16. matsumoto s. functional evidence of excitatory m1 receptors in
the rabbit airway. j pharmacol exp ther 1997;281:531–9
17. fryer ad, jacoby db. muscarinic receptors and control of
airway smooth muscle. am j respir crit care med 1998;
158:s154 –s160
18. coulson fr, fryer ad. muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and
airway diseases. pharmacol ther 2003;98:59 – 69
19. haddad eb, landry y, gies jp. muscarinic receptor subtypes in
guinea pig airways. am j physiol 1991;261:l327–33
20. jooste e, zhang y, emala cw. rapacuronium preferentially
antagonizes the function of m2 versus m3 muscarinic receptors
in guinea pig airway smooth muscle. anesthesiology 2005;
102:117–24
21. jooste eh, sharma a, zhang y, emala cw. rapacuronium
augments acetylcholine-induced bronchoconstriction via positive allosteric interactions at the  xxxg449xxx . anesthesiology 2005;103:1195–203
22. petak f, hantos z, adamicza a, gality h, habre w. development of bronchoconstriction after administration of muscle
relaxants in rabbits with normal or hyperreactive airways.
anesth analg 2006;103:103–9
23. fine gf, motoyama ek, brandom bw, fertal km, mutich r,
davis pj. the effect on lung mechanics in anesthetized children
with rapacuronium: a comparative study with  xxxd2658xxx .
anesth analg 2002;95:56 – 61
24. habre w, scalfaro p, sims c, tiller k, sly pd. respiratory
mechanics during  xxxd3197xxx  anesthesia in children with and
without asthma. anesth analg 1999;89:1177– 81
25. smith h. animal models of asthma. pulm pharmacol
1989;2:59 –74
26. hantos z, collins ra, turner dj, janosi tz, sly pd. tracking of
airway and tissue mechanics during tlc maneuvers in mice.
j appl physiol 2003;95:1695–705
27. hantos z, daroczy b, suki b, nagy s, fredberg jj. input
impedance and peripheral inhomogeneity of dog lungs. j appl
physiol 1992;72:168 –78
28. fredberg jj, stamenovic d. on the imperfect elasticity of lung
tissue. j appl physiol 1989;67:2408 –19
29. lutchen kr, suki b, kaczka dw, zhang q, hantos z, daroczy
b, petak f. direct use of mechanical ventilation to measure
respiratory mechanics associated with physiological breathing.
eur respir rev 1994;4:198 –202
30. lutchen kr, hantos z, petak f, adamicza a, suki b. airway
inhomogeneities contribute to apparent lung tissue mechanics
during constriction. j appl physiol 1996;80:1841–9
31. cockshott id, douglas ej, plummer gf, simons pj. the pharmacokinetics of propofol in laboratory animals. xenobiotica
1992;22:369 –75
32. rajchert dm, pasquariello ca, watcha mf, schreiner ms.
rapacuronium and the risk of bronchospasm in pediatric patients. anesth analg 2002;94:488 –93; table of contents
33. moss j. muscle relaxants and histamine release. acta anaesthesiol scand suppl 1995;106:7–12
34. mehr eh, hirshman ca, lindeman ks. mechanism of action of
atracurium on airways. anesthesiology 1992;76:448 –54
35. okanlami oa, fryer ad, hirshman c. interaction of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants with m2 and m3 muscarinic receptors
in guinea pig lung and heart. anesthesiology 1996;84:155– 61
36. vettermann j, beck kc, lindahl sg, brichant jf, rehder k.
actions of  xxxd1993xxx , isoflurane, vecuronium, atracurium, and
pancuronium on pulmonary resistance in dogs. anesthesiology
1988;69:688 –95

anesthesia & analgesia

