european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

available at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.europeanurology.com

review – prostate cancer

pharmacological approaches to reducing the risk of
prostate cancer
roger s. rittmaster a,*, neil e. fleshner b, ian m. thompson c
a

oncology clinical development, glaxosmithkline, research triangle park, north carolina, usa
division of urology, university health network and department of surgery (urology), university of toronto, toronto, ontario, canada
c
department of urology, university of texas health science center at san antonio, san antonio, texas, usa
b

article info

abstract

article history:
accepted january 20, 2009
published online ahead of
print on february 5, 2009

context: it is now possible to reduce a man’s risk of developing biopsydetectable prostate cancer. this review addresses the evidence and
issues surrounding prostate cancer risk reduction.
objective: the scientific basis, therapeutic approach, and risks and benefits of prostate cancer prevention are reviewed. special attention is
given to data on 5a-reductase inhibitors (5-aris).
evidence acquisition: medline searches consisted of articles published
since 2003 regarding prostate cancer chemoprevention, prevention, or risk
reduction, as well as searches around specific topics within this review.
evidence synthesis: current data support the use of finasteride for prostate cancer risk reduction in appropriately selected men. the initial
concern that finasteride increased the incidence of high-grade prostate
cancer has not been confirmed by subsequent analyses. the efficacy of
dutasteride, a dual 5-ari, for prostate cancer risk reduction is currently
being evaluated in men with elevated  xxxg1281xxx  (psa).
other medical approaches to prostate cancer risk reduction, including
statins,  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-2) inhibitors, selective  xxxg730xxx 
modulators, and dietary supplements, await validation in controlled
clinical trials.
conclusions: it is now possible to reduce an individual man’s risk of
developing biopsy-detectable prostate cancer. the greatest benefit arises
from decreasing the amount of unnecessary treatment in men harboring
low-risk cancers. presently, there is no evidence that 5-aris or any other
approach to prostate cancer risk reduction will reduce the risk of lethal
prostate cancers. finasteride, however, does enhance the utility of psa
for diagnosing high-grade cancers.

keywords:
dutasteride
finasteride
pcpt
prevention
prostate cancer
reduce
risk reduction

# 2009 european association of urology. published by elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.

* corresponding author. glaxosmithkline, inc., 5 moore drive, research triangle park,
nc 27709, usa.
e-mail address: roger.s.rittmaster@gsk.com (r.s. rittmaster).
0302-2838/$ – see back matter # 2009 european association of urology. published by elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.eururo.2009.01.037

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

1.

introduction

prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed
cancer among men. in the western world, approximately one in six men will be diagnosed with the
disease, and about 3–4% of men will die from it.
autopsy data among young trauma victims demonstrate that prostate cancers start histologically
among men in their 30 s, of whom almost one in
three men harbor microscopic prostate cancer [1].
in contrast to histologic disease, clinical prostate
cancers generally do not present, even with screening, until men are in their 50 s. this slow progression
of preclinical prostate cancer to clinical disease
provides an excellent opportunity to delay the
natural history of the disease. this review will focus
on medical approaches to reducing the risk of
clinical prostate cancer, with an emphasis on a
critical appraisal of data with 5a-reductase inhibitors (5-aris). an excellent review of vitamin and
herbal therapies has recently been published [2].

1065

ontogeny of these cancers is so long (decades) that
an agent with the capacity to slow this process
would be of tremendous benefit. third, clinical trials
of agents to prevent prostate cancer could not be
reasonably studied among men in their 20 s and 30 s
because it would take generations to get results.
fourth, basic research efforts can focus on in vitro
and in vivo experiments using actual cancer cells
rather than focusing on transformation of benign to
malignant epithelium.
3.2.

benefits of prostate cancer prevention

medline searches consisted of articles published
since 2003 regarding prostate cancer chemoprevention, prevention, or risk reduction, as well as searches
around specific topics within this review.

because of the slowly progressing nature of most
prostate cancers, it is unclear that preventing early
cancers will save lives; however, due to the
anatomic location of the prostate, surgery and
radiotherapy often have adverse effects on sexual
and urinary function. at least 50% and 5% of men
who have radical therapy will experience permanent erectile and urinary dysfunction, respectively.
even if we can only prevent cancers not destined to
kill, simply reducing the burden of this disease could
reduce unnecessary treatments and their associated
costs. furthermore, a therapy that could slow
progression among men who elect active surveillance could improve uptake of this approach among
patients who are naturally anxious about their
clinical predicament.

3.

evidence synthesis

3.3.
defining who will benefit from prostate cancer
prevention

3.1.

definitions

2.

evidence acquisition

primary prevention refers to the prevention of the first
malignant cell, and tertiary prevention refers to the
delayed progression of those cells. true prevention
of prostate cancer would have to be started among
men in their 20 s. in light of this, we will shift our
emphasis to the clinical prevention of prostate cancer.
hence, we will be referring to primary prevention as
the prevention of clinically detectable prostate
cancers. tertiary prevention is delaying progression
among men already proven to have cancer at biopsy.
practically, it refers to intervention in men who are
on active surveillance. it is appropriate that agents
studied for primary prevention should also be
studied for tertiary prevention and vice versa.
the advantage of focusing prevention efforts on
slowing growth of existing microscopic cells is 4fold. first, by using this approach we can effectively
intervene among men in their 40 s and 50 s, a time
when they are likely to comply with a chemoprevention strategy. second, the timelines along the

several factors place a man at elevated risk of
prostate cancer: age, prostate specific antigen (psa)
level, race (african descent at higher risk), family
history, and dietary and exposure factors as well as
several associated genes.
3.3.1.

age

histologic disease starts in the 4th decade of life and
increases by about 10% per decade thereafter [1].
older men are also at higher risk for high-grade
disease [3]. increased risk with age must be balanced
by diminished life expectancy. most experts would
agree that risk reduction or prevention would not be
appropriate for elderly men (<15-yr life expectancy).
3.3.2.

prostate specific antigen

psa is widely regarded as the best marker of prostate
cancer. men with elevated psa levels are at an
increased present and future risk of biopsy-detected
prostate cancer. this risk elevation is largely a
continuous function of psa, without an identifiable
safe level [4].

1066

3.3.3.

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

family history and genes

men who have a first-degree relative with prostate
cancer are at 2- to 3-fold increased risk [5]. the larger
the number of affected relatives and the earlier the
age of onset of prostate cancer diagnosis, the higher
the risk. along with family history, a host of genetic
polymorphisms place men at higher risk, including
1q25 (hpc1), 17q24, 2p15, 11q13, xp11, and, more
recently, 8q24 [6]. although the prevalence of
these polymorphisms is not high, it is plausible
that future low-cost testing may help to identify
appropriate patients for risk-reduction strategies.
3.3.4.

dietary factors

men who are obese, who have insulin resistance,
and who consume elevated amounts of dietary fat
may be at elevated risk [7].
3.4.
pathogenesis of prostate cancer: molecular and
environmental targets for prevention

although there is a significant genetic component to
prostate cancer, environment plays an important
role. north americans are at approximately 10-fold
greater risk of dying from prostate cancer than are
japanese or chinese men living in asia; within a
generation of migrating to the united states, the risk
of prostate cancer for japanese or chinese men
approaches that of other north americans [8]. many
reasons for this increase in prostate cancer in
western countries have been postulated, with a
high-fat diet and factors causing prostate inflammation predominating.
prostatic inflammation predominates in the
peripheral zone, where most cancers arise. this
association could be the coexistence of two common
pathologies or a true cause and effect [9]. nevertheless, there is much circumstantial scientific
evidence linking inflammation to prostate cancer.
first, infection and chronic inflammation are known
to predispose to other cancers, such as the increased
incidence of colonic cancer with inflammatory
bowel disease. second, inflammatory cells in the
prostate are associated with prostatic inflammatory
atrophy (pia), which, in turn, is associated with
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (pin)
and prostate cancer. the most accepted theory of
pia is that chronic inflammation causes epithelial
cell damage and atrophy, perhaps through an
increase in oxidative stress, which is followed by
basal cell hyperplasia in an attempt at regeneration
[10]. one interesting finding is that hypermethylation of the  xxxg996xxx  gene, characteristic of prostate
cancer, is also common in pia.  xxxg996xxx  is important in
preventing oxidative damage and in maintaining

genetic stability. hypermethylation leads to downregulation of this gene [11]. most of the vitamin and
nutritional supplements proposed for prostate
cancer prevention, such as  xxxd3521xxx , selenium
and lycopene, are antioxidants thought to reduce
inflammation.
the other rational targets for prevention of
prostate cancer are the sex steroids: androgens and
estrogens. androgens are essential for normal prostate function, and neither eunuchs nor men with 5areductase (5-ar) deficiency develop prostate cancer.
one of the paradoxes of prostate carcinogenesis is
that in the normal prostate, androgens primarily
promote cellular differentiation, which would tend to
protect against cancer formation [12]. one mechanism by which prostate cancers co-opt androgens to
induce proliferation of malignant cells has recently
been discovered. tmprss2 is an androgen-regulated
gene normally coding for a transmembrane serine
protease. in at least 50% of prostate cancers, its
promoter region becomes fused to a member of the
ets family of growth factors, which are normally
expressed at low levels in the prostate [13]. the most
common fusion is tmprss2:erg. this fusion causes
overexpression of the growth factor, converting it
into an androgen-stimulated oncogene. it is tempting
to hypothesize that inflammation downregulates
 xxxg996xxx , leading to the genetic instability that predisposes to creation of the tmprss2 fusion genes and to
direct stimulation of prostate cancer by androgens
(fig. 1) [10]. the androgen axis is targeted by
 xxxg930xxx  (gnrh) agonists,
 xxxg183xxx  antagonists, and 5-aris; however,
only the latter have the safety profile to be used for
prostate cancer risk reduction.
the role of estrogens in human prostate carcinogenesis is not well defined. in some rodent
models, exogenous estrogens can synergize with
androgens and locally-produced estrogens to promote prostate cancer, an effect mediated through
 xxxg730xxx  a [14,15]. in humans, however, the
role of estrogens in promoting prostate cancer is
unclear. clinical trials using estrogens and antiestrogens are difficult to interpret because perturbation of estrogen signaling indirectly affects the
androgen axis, unless the latter is suppressed by
medical or surgical castration. the use of high-dose
estrogens to treat prostate cancer has been relegated
to a third-line treatment because of side effects,
including venous thromboembolism [16]. estrogen
receptor blockade to prevent prostate cancer using
the selective  xxxg730xxx  modulator  xxxd3402xxx  is currently being evaluated in a phase 3 trial
(see section 3.8.3), and phytoestrogens have been
hypothesized as preventative agents [17].

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

1067

fig. 1 – the molecular pathogenesis of prostate cancer segregated into non–androgen-sensitive versus androgen-sensitive
events. reproduced with permission from lippincott williams & wilkins [10].

3.5.
rationale for the use of 5a-reductase inhibitors for
prostate cancer prevention

testosterone is the major circulating androgen. to
be maximally active in the prostate, testosterone
must be converted to dihydrotestosterone (dht) by
the 5-ar enzymes. the appeal of 5-aris for prostate
cancer prevention is that they offer a mechanism for
reducing androgen stimulation of the prostate
without lowering circulating testosterone levels [18].
5-ar inhibition within the prostate reduces dht
levels below those seen with castration. testosterone concentrations rise, but not to the same level as
dht in placebo-treated prostates. therefore, 5-ar
inhibition results in dht being replaced in the
prostate with lower concentrations of a less potent
androgen [19]. there is also some evidence in animal
models that testosterone, by promoting cellular
differentiation, may be able to suppress tumor
growth when testosterone conversion to dht is
blocked [20]. this additional mechanism by which 5aris may prevent growth of prostate cancer has not
been well studied.
two main forms of 5-ar exist [21]. 5-ar2
predominates in benign prostate tissue. in highgrade pin and localized prostate cancer, 5-ar2 is
decreased and 5-ar1 is increased. in advanced
prostate cancer, both are increased. in models of
rat and human prostate cancer in which 5-ar1
predominates, dual 5-ar inhibition with dutasteride
decreases cell growth more than selective inhibition

of 5-ar2 with finasteride. a type 3 5-ar has recently
been discovered. it is expressed at low levels in
benign prostate tissue and is highly expressed in
advanced prostate cancer. whether it has functional
significance and whether it is inhibited by finasteride or dutasteride are currently unknown.
because many men already have foci of prostate
cancer, 5-aris must not only prevent new cancers
from forming but also must control the growth of
existing prostate cancers. when given prior to
radical prostatectomy, dutasteride appears to
reduce prostate cancer volume and to induce
apoptosis of prostate cells. the best proof of concept
for 5-ar inhibition in prostate cancer prevention
comes from the prostate cancer prevention trial
(pcpt).
3.6.

finasteride and the prostate cancer prevention trial

the pcpt, coordinated by the southwest oncology
group and funded by the us national cancer
institute, was initiated in 1993 at >200 sites across
the united states. the essential eligibility criteria for
the pcpt were men age 55, psa 3.0 ng/ml, and
normal digital rectal examination (dre). there were
no baseline biopsies. men were randomized to
finasteride 5 mg/d or a matching placebo. annual
examinations and psas prompted prostate biopsy
recommendations in men with an abnormal dre or
a psa >4.0 ng/ml. in the finasteride group, psa was
doubled initially and increased by a factor of 2.3 after

1068

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

4 yr in an attempt to equalize the number of biopsies
recommended in each arm and to preserve the study
blind. after 7 yr of participation, an end of study
prostate biopsy was recommended in all participants.
ultimately, 18 882 men were randomized. fifteen
months prior to study closure, the independent data
and safety monitoring committee recommended
study closure due to evidence that the primary end
point (prostate cancer prevalence) had been met
with a 24.8% reduction in prostate cancer with
finasteride [22]. at that time, an increased risk of
high-grade disease in the finasteride group (280
gleason 7–10 tumors in the finasteride group
compared with 237 in the placebo group) led to an
accompanying editorial suggesting that the drug
should not be used for chemoprevention.
since the initial rapid publication of the results of
the pcpt, investigators have examined detection
biases that may have led to these findings:
1. by reducing prostate volume, finasteride enhanced the detection of high-grade prostate cancer and
probably had a similar effect on lower grade
disease [23]. if high-grade disease was present
on radical prostatectomy, it was more likely to be
discovered on biopsy in men in the finasteride arm
of the study. when gland volume and number of
biopsy cores were added to baseline variables in a
logistic regression analysis, the odds ratio of highgrade cancer in the finasteride group changed
from a 14% increase to a 12% decrease, compared
with the placebo group [23].

2. finasteride increased the sensitivity of psa and
dre for detection of prostate cancer and, especially in the case of psa, significantly increased
sensitivity for detection of high-grade disease
[24,25] (fig. 2).
3. if finasteride caused more aggressive prostate
cancers, one would have expected to see an
increasing number of high-grade cancers over
time, worse clinical outcomes, and greater tumor
volume in the finasteride arm. none of these
occurred [26]. one could argue that 7 yr is not long
enough to see such effects; however, if finasteride
were inducing more aggressive cancers, one
would have expected to see evidence of this over
a 7-yr period.
three different analyses have been conducted to
account for these and other biases to determine the
true effect of finasteride on high-grade cancer
[23,27,28]. the results have ranged from no increase
in high-grade cancer when prostate volume changes
were included to a 27% relative risk reduction in
high-grade disease with finasteride when the results
from subsequent radical prostatectomies were used
instead of the prostate biopsies. because these
analyses were retrospective in nature and involved
many assumptions, they must be considered to be
hypothesis generating rather than as providing
definitive answers. furthermore, only 27% of men
diagnosed with prostate cancer had surgical tissue
available. although these analyses provide no
evidence that finasteride caused a net increase in
high-grade cancers, they do suggest that finasteride

fig. 2 – receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves for  xxxg1281xxx  (psa) detection of all prostate cancer and
high-grade prostate cancer: (left) roc curves for all prostate cancer; (middle) roc curves for gleason grade i7 prostate
cancer; (right) roc curves for gleason grade i8 prostate cancer; (lower right line) placebo group; (upper left line) finasteride
group. p values for the difference between the placebo and finasteride groups are <0.001 for all prostate cancer, 0.003 for
gleason grade i7, and 0.071 for gleason grade i8. reproduced with permission from oxford university press [24].

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

was less effective in reducing the risk of high-grade
cancer, compared with low-grade cancer.
the pcpt had several important limitations that
must be considered when trying to evaluate the
risks and benefits of finasteride as a chemopreventative agent. first, the study was conducted against a
backdrop of annual prostate cancer screening with
psa and dre. it is unknown how these results would
be changed in an unscreened population, where the
overdiagnosis of low-risk prostate cancers is not an
issue. second, most men in the pcpt had a psa <1.5
ng/ml and represented a group of men who would not
normally be considered at high risk for prostate
disease. the fact that they did have a high incidence
of prostate cancer on biopsy speaks to the dilemma of
diagnosing prostate cancer in men who are unlikely
to be harmed by the disease, at least over the next
several years, if left untreated. third, changes in psa
over time (from <3 ng/ml to >4 ng/ml) appeared to be
a good marker for high-grade cancer. because almost
40% of the biopsies in the pcpt were for cause and
because an increased psa drove many of these
biopsies, the true effect of finasteride on high-grade
cancer detection (vs prevention) is unknown. additionally, only about half of the patients randomized in
the pcpt were biopsied, creating potential biases
among subjects who were and were not biopsied. it is
clear from the multiple confounding effects of
finasteride that a complete assessment of the impact
of the drug could only be determined by an evaluation
of the entire prostate in all study subjects, an
impractical end point.
optimistically, by inhibiting growth and psa
secretion of low-grade prostate cancers, finasteride
decreased the detection of cancers that were
unlikely to cause harm and increased the detection
of cancers that did not respond to finasteride and
thus were at a high risk of progression. future
studies that avoid some of the biases of the pcpt will
be needed to prove or disprove this hypothesis.
should 5-aris be used for prostate cancer risk
reduction at this point? the clearest answer is in
men with an enlarged prostate, elevated psa,
and bothersome lower urinary tract symptoms.
the advantages of 5-aris in improving symptoms
and in reducing the future risk of urinary retention
and benign prostatic hyperplasia (bph)–related
surgery is well established. even in the largely
asymptomatic pcpt population, the modest
increased incidence of sexual dysfunction in the
finasteride arm was counterbalanced by a reduction
in bph diagnoses and complications [29]. in asymptomatic men, the jury is still out. clearly, 5-aris will
reduce psa-driven biopsies and, at least over a 7-yr
period, will not cause harm from missed, aggressive

1069

cancers. studies on cost–benefit analyses based on
the pcpt population have generally concluded that
the benefits do not justify the costs [30]. such
analyses, however, typically overemphasize life
years saved (for which there is no evidence with
finasteride) and underemphasize both the psychological harms of a prostate cancer diagnosis and the
physical harms of overtreatment.
the pcpt results have established finasteride as
the only proven method of reducing a man’s risk of
biopsy-detectable prostate cancer. the significance
of this achievement is further highlighted by the
recent failure of the selenium and  xxxd3521xxx  cancer
prevention trial (select) to demonstrate prostate
cancer risk reduction with either selenium or
 xxxd3521xxx  [31].
3.7.

dutasteride and prostate cancer risk reduction

dutasteride ( xxxd1954xxx ) inhibits both 5-ar1 and
5-ar2. it is approved in many countries for treatment of symptomatic bph and is currently being
investigated for both prostate cancer risk reduction
and treatment.
the initial interest in dutasteride for prostate
cancer came from two observations. the first was
that the ratio of 5-ar1 to 5-ar2 is increased in
prostate cancer compared with bph tissue, suggesting that dual 5-ar inhibition may be important
to achieving maximal efficacy in prostate cancer
prevention [21]. the second observation came from
phase 3 bph trials with dutasteride. the incidence
of prostate cancer (recorded as an adverse event
based on for-cause biopsies) was reduced by 51% in
the dutasteride arm compared with placebo after
27 mo (fig. 3) [32]. many factors could contribute to
this reduction, but a similar reduction had not
been seen in similarly designed studies with
finasteride. a subsequent study in which dutasteride was given for 4 mo prior to radical prostatectomy showed a 40% lower median cancer
volume with dutasteride compared with the control group [33]. because the initial tumor volumes
were unknown, the evidence for tumor shrinkage
with dutasteride was indirect.
based on these observations, the reduction by
dutasteride of prostate cancer events (reduce) trial
was initiated to test whether dutasteride could
reduce the risk of prostate cancer in men at high
risk of developing the disease [34]. reduce is an
international, multicenter, double-blind trial in
which >8000 men were randomized to dutasteride
or placebo for 4 yr. key entry criteria included men
aged 50–75; psa 2.5–10.0 ng/ml; prostate volume
<80 ml; and a single, negative, 6- to 12-core prostate

1070

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

if dutasteride is successful in reduce, it will not
only have to prevent new cancers from forming but
also will need to control the growth of existing
cancers. therefore, it is also being studied for its
ability to control the growth of cancer in an
expectant management population (reduction by
dutasteride of clinical progression events in expectant management [redeem] trial) [35].
3.8.
other potential medical approaches to prostate cancer
risk reduction
3.8.1.
fig. 3 – probability of being diagnosed with prostate cancer
in the placebo and dutasteride groups in dutasteride
phase 3 trials for benign prostatic hyperplasia. the trial
was placebo controlled up to month 24 and was open-label
dutasteride from months 24–48. cancers were recorded as
adverse events based on for-cause biopsies. after 27 mo,
there were 55 cancers in the placebo arm and 27 in the
dutasteride arm. adapted from the national cancer
institute [31] with additional data on file at
glaxosmithkline (months 27–48).

biopsy taken during the 6 mo prior to study entry.
subjects could not be enrolled if they had high-grade
pin or atypical small acinar proliferation (asap) on
the entry biopsy. use of phytotherapy, selenium, and
 xxxd3521xxx  was discouraged but not prohibited.
prostate biopsies (10-core) were repeated after 2
and 4 yr or for cause anytime during the study, with
the primary end point being the occurrence of
prostate cancer on biopsy. results will be available
in mid-2009.
the reduce trial addresses some of the concerns
that have arisen around the pcpt. first, the study
population, men with an elevated psa, is considered
to be at increased risk of prostate cancer. the
negative entry biopsy helped to ensure that subjects
did not have a large prostate cancer at baseline,
minimized the likelihood of for-cause biopsies, and
helped to ensure a low rate of refusal for studymandated biopsies. all study sites were required to
receive standardized training on the study-mandated 10-core biopsies, and all such biopsies were
processed and interpreted centrally. in reduce,
because there have been few psa-driven, for-cause
biopsies, the ability of psa dynamics to predict
prostate cancer in men given dutasteride or placebo
will be clarified. as with the pcpt, the study will be
limited in its ability to determine the effect of a 5-ari
on clinically aggressive prostate cancer because
few instances of advanced prostate cancer are
expected.

statins

statin drugs block the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
 xxxd1739xxx  (hmg-coa) enzyme, which is the ratelimiting step in cholesterol synthesis. there are
many plausible mechanisms by which these agents
may help reduce the risk of prostate cancer [36],
including (1) inhibition of lipid rafts (cholesterol-rich
cell membrane domains that may be important in
cell signalling); (2) reduction in intracellular androgen levels by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis; and (3)
reduction in mevalonate, a precursor to isoprenoids,
which promote cell survival.
many epidemiologic studies have examined post
hoc association between statin use for hypercholesterolemia and prostate cancer [36]. although initial
studies suggested an association, at least three metaanalyses of randomized trials for patients with
cardiovascular risk factors have shown no association with prostate cancer. current studies have now
focused on cases of advanced prostate cancer, with
some studies suggesting a differential benefit [36,37].
clearly, further study is required of these agents in
the context of prostate cancer risk reduction.
3.8.2.

cyclooxygenase inhibitors

considerable evidence suggests that  xxxg1884xxx  (cox-2) inhibition may reduce the risk of
prostate cancer. cox-2 is an inducible enzyme
associated with inflammation and other processes
and is found in high levels in the prostate. with
increased expression, a series of events that could
potentiate carcinogenesis may occur, including
increased angiogenesis and reduced cellular apoptosis [38]. analyses have suggested that nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory medications (nsaids) may be
associated with a reduction in risk of prostate cancer
[39].
in the early years of this decade, due to abundant
preclinical data related to cox-2 and its potential
relationship with prostate cancer, initial steps were
taken to develop a phase 3 cancer prevention trial
through the national cancer institute. shortly
thereafter, such a study was launched by merck &

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

co using the cox-2 inhibitor rofecoxib (vioxx). with
the 2004 withdrawal of this agent due to increased
risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events,
this prevention study was closed. it is difficult to
conceive of a future large-scale prevention trial of
cox-2 inhibitors for healthy patients.
3.8.3.

selective  xxxg730xxx  modulators

based on rodent models in which estrogens have
been shown to synergize with androgens to induce
hyperplasia, dysplasia, and prostate cancer, research
has been done to investigate the role of estrogen
receptor antagonists in prostate cancer prevention.
in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate
(tramp) model of rodent prostate cancer, the
selective  xxxg730xxx  modulator (serm)  xxxd3402xxx  has been shown to reduce and to delay the
development of prostate cancer [40].
one phase 2 trial of  xxxd3402xxx  has been conducted in men with high-grade pin but no cancer [41].
one of three doses of  xxxd3402xxx  demonstrated a
reduction in prostate cancer incidence after 1 yr, and
a phase 3 trial is currently ongoing to validate these
results. one difficulty with this approach is that
serms stimulate the androgen axis in men by
partially blocking negative feedback of testosterone
at the hypothalamus and pituitary, which leads to a
rise in serum luteinizing hormone, testosterone, and
psa [41]. thus, any putative benefits of serms on the
incidence of prostate cancer via blocking estrogens
will need to be balanced by the potential stimulation
of some cancers by the increased production of
androgens.
3.9.

current status of prostate cancer risk reduction trials

the pcpt trial is now complete, and there is unlikely
to be further new data from the trial clarifying the
benefit/risk ratio of prescribing finasteride for prostate cancer risk reduction. the initial results from the
reduce trial with dutasteride will be available in
mid-2009. results from the trial of toremiphene
in men with high-grade pin should become available
in 2009, although we are unaware of the exact
timelines for this study. as noted above, the select
trial with  xxxd3521xxx  and selenium was terminated for
lack of efficacy. currently, there are no other
prospective, placebo-controlled trials of agents for
prostate cancer risk reduction.
3.10.
assessing the benefit/risk ratio for prostate cancer
prevention

once an effective intervention is identified, a key
challenge will be to decide which men are at

1071

sufficiently high risk to warrant treatment. as a
general principle, the threshold for recommending a
preventative strategy should be higher than that for
any therapeutic intervention.
careful consideration must be given to relative
and absolute risk reduction, adverse effects, and
cost to either the patient or third-party payers. in the
end, however, individual patients are being treated,
and the value an individual patient places on
benefits and harms of a particular approach may
not reflect the assumptions of a given model.
the concepts of relative risk reduction must also
be interpreted in light of absolute risk reduction and
numbers needed to treat (nnt). if, for example, an
agent can reduce risk of prostate cancer by 50%, the
absolute risk reduction is only 1% if the man’s
prostate cancer risk is 2%; if his risk is 40%, then his
risk is reduced by 20%. the implications of these
numbers is that for the lower risk male, a doctor
would have to dispense 50 prescriptions to prevent
one cancer, whereas for the higher risk man, he
would have to dispense only 5. for finasteride, the
nnts are comparable to similar situations in which
primary prevention is practiced: statins for cardiovascular disease, bisphosphonates for bone loss,
and antihypertensives for stroke prophylaxis [42].

4.

conclusions

although many medications and nutritional supplements have been proposed for prostate cancer
prevention, finasteride is the only agent shown to
reduce the risk of biopsy-detectable prostate cancer
in a prospective clinical trial (the pcpt). the reduce
trial with dutasteride will provide evidence about
the use of a dual 5-ari in men with elevated psa.
5-aris offer the twin hope of not only reducing the
risk of prostate cancers that do not need to be
detected but also of enhancing the ability of psa to
predict high-grade cancers for which treatment
would be beneficial. the only other ongoing placebo-controlled trial in prostate cancer risk reduction is the phase 3 trial with  xxxd3402xxx  in men with
high-grade pin at baseline. the recent failure of the
select trial to demonstrate a benefit of either
 xxxd3521xxx  or selenium for prostate cancer risk
reduction highlights the difficulty of attributing
benefit to any agent based on associations in
epidemiologic studies. the excess number of cases
of prostate cancer in the subjects receiving  xxxd3521xxx 
should cause physicians to question recommendations for unproven preventive interventions. when
prevention is entertained, it is especially important
that the axiom of primum non nocere be followed.

1072

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

study concept and design: rittmaster, fleshner, thompson.
acquisition of data: rittmaster, fleshner, thompson.
analysis and interpretation of data: rittmaster, fleshner,
thompson.
drafting of the manuscript: rittmaster, fleshner, thompson.
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content:
rittmaster, fleshner, thompson.
statistical analysis: none.
obtaining funding: none.
administrative, technical, or material support: none.
supervision: none.
other (specify): none.
financial disclosures: i certify that all conflicts of interest,
including specific financial interests and relationships and
affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials discussed
in the manuscript (eg, employment/affiliation, grants or
funding, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options,
expert testimony, royalties, or patents filed, received, or
pending), are the following: rittmaster is an employee of
glaxosmithkline. fleshner is a consultant for astra-zeneca,
glaxosmithkline, merck, novartis, pfizer, and sanofi-aventis.
thompson has nothing to disclose.
funding/support and role of the sponsor: none.

references
[1] sakr wa, grignon dj, crissman jd, et al. high grade
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (hgpin) and prostatic
adenocarcinoma between the ages of 20–69: an autopsy
study of 249 cases. in vivo 1994;8:439–43.
[2] syed dn, khan n, afaq f, mukhtar h. chemoprevention of
prostate cancer through dietary agents: progress and promise. cancer epidemiol biomarkers prev 2007;16:2193–203.
[3] fleshner n, zlotta ar. prostate cancer prevention: past,
present, and future. cancer 2007;110:1889–99.
[4] thompson im, ankerst dp.  xxxg1281xxx  in the
early detection of prostate cancer. cmaj 2007;176:1853–8.
[5] johns le, houlston rs. a systematic review and metaanalysis of familial prostate cancer risk. bju int 2003;
91:789–94.
[6] kote-jarai z, easton df, stanford jl, et al. multiple novel
prostate cancer predisposition loci confirmed by an international study: the practical consortium. cancer epidemiol biomarkers prev 2008;17:2052–61.
[7] hsing aw, sakoda lc, chua jr s. obesity, metabolic
syndrome, and prostate cancer. am j clin nutr 2007;86:
s843–57.
[8] crawford ed. epidemiology of prostate cancer. urology
2003;62:3–12.
[9] sutcliffe s, platz ea. inflammation in the etiology of
prostate cancer: an epidemiologic perspective. urol oncol
2007;25:242–9.
[10] nelson wg. prostate cancer prevention. curr opin urol
2007;17:157–67.
[11] stock d, groome pa, siemens dr. inflammation and
prostate cancer: a future target for prevention and therapy? urol clin north am 2008;35:117–30, vii.

[12] dehm sm, tindall dj. molecular regulation of androgen
action in prostate cancer. j cell biochem 2006;99:
333–44.
[13] kumar-sinha c, tomlins sa, chinnaiyan am. recurrent
gene fusions in prostate cancer. nat rev cancer 2008;8:
497–511.
[14] prins gs, korach ks. the role of estrogens and estrogen
receptors in normal prostate growth and disease. steroids
2008;73:233–44.
[15] ricke wa, wang y, cunha gr. steroid hormones and
carcinogenesis of the prostate: the role of estrogens.
differentiation 2007;75:871–82.
[16] daskivich tj, oh wk. recent progress in hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer. curr opin urol 2006;16:
173–8.
[17] ganry o. phytoestrogens and prostate cancer risk. prev
med 2005;41:1–6.
[18] tindall dj, rittmaster rs. the rationale for inhibiting
5alpha-reductase isoenzymes in the prevention and
treatment of prostate cancer. j urol 2008;179:1235–42.
[19] rittmaster r, hahn rg, ray p, shannon jb, wurzel r. effect
of dutasteride on intraprostatic androgen levels in men
with benign prostatic hyperplasia or prostate cancer.
urology 2008;72:808–12.
[20] eggener se, stern ja, jain pm, et al. enhancement of
intermittent androgen ablation by ‘‘off-cycle’’ maintenance with finasteride in lncap prostate cancer xenograft model. prostate 2006;66:495–502.
[21] thomas ln, douglas rc, lazier cb, et al. type 1 and type 2
5a-reductase expression in the development and progression of prostate cancer. eur urol 2008;53:244–52.
[22] thompson im, goodman pj, tangen cm, et al. the influence of finasteride in the development of prostate cancer.
n engl j med 2003;349:215–24.
[23] cohen yc, liu ks, heyden nl, et al. detection bias due to
the effect of finasteride on prostate volume: a modeling
approach for analysis of the prostate cancer prevention
trial. j natl cancer inst 2007;99:1366–74.
[24] thompson im, chi c, ankerst dp, et al. effect of finasteride on the sensitivity of psa for detecting prostate cancer.
j natl cancer inst 2006;98:1128–33.
[25] thompson im, tangen cm, goodman pj, et al. finasteride improves the sensitivity of digital rectal examination for prostate cancer detection. j urol 2007;177:1749–
52.
[26] lucia ms, epstein ji, goodman pj, et al. finasteride and
high-grade prostate cancer in the prostate cancer prevention trial. j natl cancer inst 2007;99:1375–83.
[27] pinsky p, parnes h, ford l. estimating rates of true highgrade disease in the prostate cancer prevention trial.
cancer prev res 2008;1:182–6.
[28] redman mw, tangen cm, goodman pj, lucia ms, coltman jr ca, thompson im. finasteride does not increase
the risk of high-grade prostate cancer: a bias-adjusted
modeling approach. cancer prev res 2008;1:182–6.
[29] moinpour cm, darke ak, donaldson gw, et al. longitudinal analysis of sexual function reported by men in the
prostate cancer prevention trial. j natl cancer inst 2007;
99:1025–35.

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

[30] svatek rs, lee jj, roehrborn cg, lippman sm, lotan y.
cost-effectiveness of prostate cancer chemoprevention:
a quality of life-years analysis. cancer 2008;112:1058–65.
[31] lippman sm, klein ea, goodman pj, et al. effect of selenium and  xxxd3521xxx  on risk of prostate cancer and other
cancers: the selenium and  xxxd3521xxx  cancer prevention
trial (select). j am med assoc 2009;301:39–51.
[32] andriole gl, roehrborn c, schulman c, et al. effect of
dutasteride on the detection of prostate cancer in men
with benign prostatic hyperplasia. urology 2004;64:
537–41.
[33] gleave m, qian j, andreou c, et al. the effects of the dual
5alpha-reductase inhibitor dutasteride on localized prostate cancer—results from a 4-month pre-radical prostatectomy study. prostate 2006;66:1674–85.
[34] andriole g, bostwick d, brawley o, et al. chemoprevention of prostate cancer in men at high risk: rationale and
design of the reduction by dutasteride of prostate cancer
events (reduce) trial. j urol 2004;172:1314–7.
[35] fleshner n, gomella lg, cookson ms, et al. delay in the
progression of low-risk prostate cancer: rationale and
design of the reduction by dutasteride of clinical progression events in expectant management (redeem) trial.
contemp clin trials 2007;28:763–9.

editorial comment on: pharmacological
approaches to reducing the risk of
prostate cancer
marcelo orvieto, scott eggener
section of urology, university of chicago,
chicago, illinois, usa
seggener@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu
the unique features of prostate cancer—high
incidence, androgen dependence, risk of treatment-related morbidity, and frequent cause of
death—explain the enthusiasm and pursuit of
chemopreventive strategies. essential considerations of chemoprevention are safety, maintenance
of quality of life, cost effectiveness, and reduction
in disease incidence, impact, or severity. the
authors of this review accurately synthesize the
current state of prostate cancer chemoprevention
and suggest that decreasing the rate of biopsydetectable prostate cancer is a worthwhile end
point, thereby minimizing patient anxiety, treatment rates, side effects, and costs [1].
the prostate cancer prevention trial (pcpt)
clearly demonstrated that finasteride lowers the
rate of biopsy-detectable cancer by 25% [2] and
subsequently has successfully allayed concerns
regarding an increased risk of higher grade cancers
[3–5]. finasteride, however, appears to have prevented detection of low-grade cancers and failed to

1073

[36] hamilton rj, freedland sj. review of recent evidence in
support of a role for statins in the prevention of prostate
cancer. curr opin urol 2008;18:333–9.
[37] platz ea, leitzmann mf, visvanathan k, et al. statin drugs
and risk of advanced prostate cancer. j natl cancer inst
2006;98:1819–25.
[38] pruthi rs, derksen e, gaston k.  xxxg1884xxx  as a
potential target in the prevention and treatment of genitourinary tumors: a review. j urol 2003;169:2352–9.
[39] hussain t, gupta s, mukhtar h.  xxxg1884xxx  and
prostate carcinogenesis. cancer lett 2003;191:125–35.
[40] raghow s, hooshdaran mz, katiyar s, steiner ms.  xxxd3402xxx  prevents prostate cancer in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model. cancer res 2002;62:
1370–6.
[41] price d, stein b, sieber p, et al.  xxxd3402xxx  for the prevention of prostate cancer in men with high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia: results of a double-blind,
placebo controlled, phase iib clinical trial. j urol 2006;176:
965–70, discussion 970–1.
[42] schroder fh, roobol mj, andriole g, fleshner n. defining
men at increased future risk of prostate cancer: evidence
from a population-based screening cohort. j urol 2009;181:
69–74.

significantly affect the incidence of cancers with
more lethal potential. if applied to the us population, at least 30% of men >55 yr would be given
finasteride, leading to a $3.3 billion net annual
increase in medical costs [6]. thus, it is unlikely
that the potential benefits identified would justify
the societywide costs.
an ongoing trial, reduction by dutasteride of
prostate cancer events (reduce), is assessing the
dual 5a-reductase inhibitor dutasteride in a population of men at elevated risk of being diagnosed
with prostate cancer ( xxxg1281xxx 
level 2.5–10 ng/ml with previously negative biopsy)
and has the potential to further elucidate the
preventive role of this class of medications.
chemoprevention of prostate cancer is a laudable and a potentially high-impact public health
initiative. the anticipated results of the reduce
trial in 2009 in combination with ongoing pcpt
analyses may usher in new paradigms in prostate
cancer management. until then, the jury is still
out.

references
[1] rittmaster rs, fleshner ne, thompson im. pharmacological approaches to reducing the risk of prostate cancer. eur urol 2009;55:1064–74.

1074

european urology 55 (2009) 1064–1074

[2] thompson im, goodman pj, tangen cm, et al. the
influence of finasteride in the development of prostate
cancer. n engl j med 2003;349:215–24.
[3] lucia ms, epstein ji, goodman pj, et al. finasteride and
high-grade prostate cancer in the prostate cancer prevention trial. j natl cancer inst 2007;99:1375–83.
[4] pinsky p, parnes h, ford l. estimating rates of true highgrade disease in the prostate cancer prevention trial.
cancer prev res 2008;1:182–6.
[5] redman mw, tangen cm, goodman pj, lucia ms, coltman jr ca, thompson im. finasteride does not increase

editorial comment on: pharmacological
approaches to reducing the risk of
prostate cancer
jan adolfsson
oncologic center, karolinska university hospital,
17176 stockholm, sweden
jan.adolfsson@karolinska.se
the only 100% sure way not to die or to suffer
from a disease is not to get it. mainly because of
changes in demographics, the number of individuals who will be diagnosed with cancers, particularly prostate cancer, will increase in the
upcoming decades. the only way for our health
care systems to avoid having to take care of all
these new cases is to prevent them from occurring.
in the present issue, rittmaster et al [1] give an
overview of possible pharmacologic agents that
may prevent prostate cancer from developing or,
perhaps, from being diagnosed. there is evidence
that tamoxifen may prevent breast cancer [2] and
that finasteride may prevent prostate cancer [3].
still, chemoprevention is rarely used, for various
reasons. there was, for instance, an increased risk
of ovarian cancer in the tamoxifen trials; although
rare, such side effects may not be acceptable. to
achieve the preventive effect, long treatment times
will most likely be required. small risks of side
effects will also have to be taken into account when
large populations are being exposed. even if there is
a 25% risk reduction, the absolute effect will only be
5% in a population with a 20% risk of developing

the risk of high-grade prostate cancer: a bias adjusted
modeling approach. cancer prev res 2008;1:174–81.
[6] zeliadt sb, etzioni rd, penson df, thompson im, ramsey sd. lifetime implications and cost-effectiveness of
using finasteride to prevent prostate cancer. am j med
2005;118:850–7.

doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2009.01.038
doi of original article: 10.1016/j.eururo.2009.01.037

prostate cancer. in fact, the absolute majority of
individuals on chemoprevention will not benefit
from it: either they will not be at risk or they will get
the disease anyway. to reduce risk reduction at a
population level, all individuals at risk will have to
take the chemopreventive agent for long periods of
time, perhaps decades, and compliance may be
problematic outside trials. given these concerns
and due to the vastness of the task, it may never be
proven that any of the proposed agents are
acceptable for long-term treatment in large populations. chemoprevention may be an option in
defined high-risk groups with high motivation to
reduce their risk; however, such high-risk groups
are still rare.

references
[1] rittmaster rs, fleshner ne, thompson im. pharmacological approaches to reducing the risk of prostate cancer. eur urol 2009;55:1064–74.
[2] fisher b, costantino jp, wickerham dl, et al. tamoxifen
for prevention of breast cancer: report on the national
surgical adjuvant breast and bowel project p-1 study.
j natl cancer inst 1998;90:1371–88.
[3] thompson im, goodman pj, tangen cm, et al.
the influence of finasteride on the development of
prostate cancer. n engl j med 2003;349:215–24.

doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2009.01.039
doi of original article: 10.1016/j.eururo.2009.01.037

