r e v i e w

history of aromatase: saga of an important
biological mediator and therapeutic target
r. j. santen, h. brodie, e. r. simpson, p. k. siiteri, and a. brodie
division of endocrinology and metabolism (r.j.s.), university of virginia, charlottesville, virginia 22908; emeritus
investigator (h.b.), fulton, maryland 20759; prince henry’s institute of medical research (e.r.s.), melbourne 3168, australia;
department of obstetrics and gynecology (p.k.s.), university of california at san francisco, san francisco, california 94143;
and department of pharmacology (a.b.), school of medicine, university of maryland, baltimore, maryland 21201

aromatase is the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of androgens to estrogens. initial studies
of its enzymatic activity and function took place in an environment focused on estrogen as a component of the birth control pill. at an early stage, investigators recognized that inhibition of this enzyme
could have major practical applications for treatment of hormone-dependent breast cancer, alterations of ovarian and endometrial function, and treatment of benign disorders such as gynecomastia.
two general approaches ultimately led to the development of potent and selective aromatase inhibitors. one targeted the enzyme using analogs of natural steroidal substrates to work out the relationships between structure and function. the other approach initially sought to block adrenal function as
a treatment for breast cancer but led to the serendipitous finding that a nonsteroidal p450 steroidogenesis inhibitor,  xxxd147xxx , served as a potent but nonselective aromatase inhibitor. proof
of the therapeutic concept of aromatase inhibition involved a variety of studies with  xxxd147xxx  and the selective steroidal inhibitor,  xxxd2153xxx . the requirement for even more potent and
selective inhibitors led to intensive molecular studies to identify the structure of aromatase, to development of high-sensitivity estrogen assays, and to “mega” clinical trials of the third-generation
aromatase inhibitors, letrozole, anastrozole, and exemestane, which are now in clinical use in
breast cancer. during these studies, unexpected findings led investigators to appreciate the important role of estrogens in males as well as in females and in multiple organs, particularly the bone
and brain. these studies identified the important regulatory properties of aromatase acting in an
autocrine, paracrine, intracrine, neurocrine, and juxtacrine fashion and the organ-specific enhancers and promoters controlling its transcription. the saga of these studies of aromatase and the
ultimate utilization of inhibitors as highly effective treatments of breast cancer and for use in reproductive disorders serves as the basis for this first endocrine reviews history manuscript. (endocrine
reviews 30: 343–375, 2009)

i. introduction
ii. discovery and characterization of aromatase
iii. early physiological studies of aromatase
a. extraglandular estrogen production
b. cell-specific site of aromatase in breast
c. in situ production vs. uptake
iv. steroidal aromatase inhibitor development
a. historical aspects
b. 4-oh-androstenedione
v. nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor development
a. historical background
b. medical vs. surgical therapy
issn print 0021-972x issn online 1945-7197
printed in u.s.a.
copyright © 2009 by the endocrine society
doi: 10.1210/er.2008-0016 received april 29, 2008. accepted march 27, 2009.
first published online april 23, 2009

c. comparison of antiestrogens vs. aromatase
inhibitors
d. key international conference
e. studies to optimize aromatase inhibitor therapy
vi. preclinical studies of third-generation aromatase
inhibitors
a. model systems
b. switching studies in model systems
vii. clinical studies of third-generation inhibitor
development
viii. “mega” clinical trials
a. comparison of different hormonal therapies
b. switching trials
abbreviations: a, androstene-3, xxxd2153xxx ; ag,  xxxd147xxx ; cc, clomiphene
citrate; cox2,  xxxg1884xxx ; dhea, dehydroepiandrosterone; er,  xxxg730xxx ;
hc, hydrocortisone; mtor, mammalian  xxxg1478xxx ;  xxxd2153xxx , 4-hydroxy-a; pge2,
 xxxd1903xxx .

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

edrv.endojournals.org

343

344

ix.
x.

xi.

xii.

xiii.

xiv.

xv.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

c. management of toxicity due to aromatase
inhibitors
d. evaluation of emerging strategies with aromatase
inhibitors
resistance to aromatase inhibitors: back from the
bedside to the bench
future strategies for usage of aromatase inhibitors
a. aromatase inhibitors combined with growth factor inhibitors
b. blockade of aromatase specifically in breast
c. prevention of breast cancer
purification, structural characterization, and regulation of aromatase
a. purification
b. promoter regulation
c. promoter switching
d. three-dimensional structure
biological function of aromatase in specific organs
a. placenta
b. brain
c. bones
d. testis
e. prostate
clinical use of aromatase inhibitors in gynecology
and pediatrics
a. anovulation
b. endometriosis
c. gynecomastia
d. short stature
e. aromatase excess and deficiency syndromes
lessons learned from studies of aromatase
a. importance of estrogens in the male
b. estrogen action via autocrine, intracrine, paracrine, juxtacrine, and neurocrine mechanisms
summary and conclusions

i. introduction
he initial discovery of estrogens and their bioactivity in
urinary extracts in the 1920s provided the impetus to
better understand the structure, biosynthesis, secretion,
and function of the various estrogens. working independently, edward doisy and adolf butenandt isolated estriol, estrone, and estradiol from pregnancy urine in the
early 1930s (1–5). these studies prompted attempts to
determine the specific mechanisms of estrogen synthesis.
the initial discovery of the aromatase enzyme and the
unraveling of its varied functions represent an intriguing
and illustrative series of events and a major success story
in the field of endocrinology regarding breast cancer therapy. aromatase provided one of the first molecular targets
for rational drug development in the treatment of cancer.
comprehensive studies of aromatase demonstrated the
importance of extraglandular hormone synthesis and of
intracrine, autocrine, paracrine, juxtacrine, and neurocrine mechanisms of estrogen action. study of its physiology revealed many surprising findings, particularly in

t

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

males, such as its role in energy balance (6), maintenance
of bone (7), regulation of pituitary gonadotropins (8),
modulation of spermatogenesis (9), and development of
gynecomastia (10).
the story of the discovery of the aromatase enzyme and
its wide-ranging physiological actions provides insight
into the unexpected complexities of hormonal regulation
and highlights how the prepared mind can process unexpected findings to generate new hypotheses, a scientific
process characterized in detail by claude bernard in the
mid-19th century (11). this first “history” manuscript
published by endocrine reviews will attempt to capture
these aspects of the studies on aromatase and of the investigators who contributed to this process.

ii. discovery and characterization
of aromatase
the isolation and biochemical characterization of androgens and estrogens in the 1930s allowed recognition of
the similarities between these two classes of compounds
and the speculation that c19 steroids might be directly
converted to c18 estrogens (1– 4, 12). bernhard zondek
(12) speculated correctly in 1934 that “the female hormone which is regularly present in the male organism represents a normal physiological product of the metabolism
of the sex hormones especially since— due to our present
chemical knowledge—a conversion of the male hormone
into the female one appears to be quite possible.” steinach
and kun (13) in 1937 provided the first experimental evidence of this conversion by administering unlabeled  xxxd3327xxx  to men and demonstrating enhanced
estrogenic activity in urine. later, the focus on development of oral contraceptives provided a practical impetus
for intensive study of estrogen synthesis and metabolism.
the worcester foundation for experimental biology
(wfeb), established in 1944 in shrewsbury, massachusetts, became an incubator for scientists interested in reproduction, neurophysiology, and steroid biochemistry.
this ultimately led to the development of the oral contraceptive pill by founder gregory pincus* and m. c. chang.*
a major interest of the foundation’s research was the program focused on biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids
produced by the adrenal glands, testes, and ovaries.
recruitment of ralph dorfman* to the foundation
(1951–1964) enhanced efforts to understand steroid
metabolism and provided necessary bioassay expertise.
dorfman brought with him a team of scientists that included the enzymologist, mika hayano,* whose laboratory became a center for research on estrogen biosynthesis.
*a photograph of each individual identified within text by an asterisk appears online on the
aromatase history web site (www.freewebs.com/aromatasehistory).

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

these investigations benefited from collaborations with
andre meyer, a swiss scientist working with pincus.
meyer took up the challenge of identifying metabolites of
 xxxd176xxx  (a) in incubations of bovine adrenal homogenates. in 1955, meyer made the crucial discovery that androstenedione was hydroxylated by the bovine adrenal to yield 19-hydroxy-a (19-oh-a) (14, 15)
and noted that “the removal of the angular methyl group
at c19, a step requiring introduction of a hydrogen molecule to oxygen, facilitated aromatization of ring a or b of
the steroid.” he recognized the enzymatic nature of 19hydroxylation and suggested that this was likely a first
step in the biosynthesis of estrogens from nonaromatic
steroids. he believed that aromatization involved more
than one enzymatic step and termed this the “aromatization process” (14, 15). kenneth ryan later agreed but
speculated about the possibility of a single enzymatic step
by stating: “although the aromatization of androgens to
estrogens probably represents a multienzyme system, it is
interesting to note that the time curve is linear for the first
hour” (16). definitive proof that only a single enzyme was
involved awaited purification of aromatase in the 1980s
(see section ix. a).
dorfman and kenneth savard later provided further
insight into the “aromatization process.” they demonstrated conversion of radiolabeled testosterone to estrogen by the human ovary in studies carried out at the wfeb
in collaboration with two harvard scientists, lewis engel
and billy baggett (17). key to the success of these studies
was the use of radiolabeled tracer steroids synthesized by
the laboratory of marcel gut at the wfeb. before the
availability of radiolabeled steroids from commercial
sources, gut’s radiolabeling expertise was critical to
working out steroid biosynthesis and metabolic pathways
(18). meyer, hayano, and co-workers further demonstrated formation of estrogen during incubation of 19hydroxyandrostendione with various tissues including
ovaries and adrenals (14, 15). nevertheless, the yields
were quite low, and it remained for kenneth ryan and
lewis engel at harvard to utilize human placental microsomal preparations to convert androgens to estrogens in
high yields (16). this microsomal system became the
mainstay for studying the aromatization of androgens to
estrogens and the mechanisms involved (19).
investigation of the aromatization reaction benefited
from the critical mass of recruited investigators and trainees attracted by the national institutes of health (nih)
training program for steroid biochemistry jointly held at
the wfeb and clark university (20). work from the
hayano team led tomas morato and colleagues to propose 19-oxo-androstenedione as the intermediary between 19-oh-a and estrogen (21) and to postulate the

edrv.endojournals.org

345

sequence to be testosterone 3 19-hydroxyandrostenedione 3 19-oxoandrostenedione 3 estrogen. they also
noted the strict requirement of  xxxd532xxx  phosphate (nadph) and oxygen for
the conversion of both 19-oxygenated compounds to estrogens. the a ring of the estrogen molecule then received
the experimental attention of aubrey thompson, pentti
siiteri,* and paul macdonald at university of texas
southwestern medical school in dallas, jack fishman and
his group at rockefeller university, and eliahu caspi at
the wfeb (22–26). these investigators proposed several
mechanisms, but details of the reaction sequence, and in
particular the third step, have eluded investigators until
this day (27, 28), and novel mechanisms continue to be
suggested (29, 30).
another postdoctoral fellow from the nih training program for steroid biochemistry to join the hayano laboratory
was harry brodie,* who initially sought to understand the
stereochemistry of hydrogen elimination at the c-1 position
during aromatization. in previous work by gual* et al. and
morato et al. (20, 21), a number of steroid structures were
evaluated as possible precursors to aromatization of ring a.
these studies suggested that the ⌬4-3-one structure in ring a
was required but that the ⌬4-3-one structure was a poor
initial precursor, as was 19-norandrostenedione. the presence of axial ␤ substituents at c-11 interfered with aromatization, whereas those at the 11␣ and 9␣ positions did not.
the cumulative evidence suggested that 19-oxo-androstenedione required hydroxylation and cofactors to be converted to estrogen and the final oxidation step involved dehydrogenation at c-1 and c-2.
because aromatization appeared to involve ␤-face attacks, the precise site (i.e., ␣ or ␤ hydrogen) where the stereochemical elimination of hydrogen at c-1 occurred became of interest. harry brodie, morato and gut, together
with others in the hayano lab, prepared samples of androstenedione labeled with 3h at c-1 in either the ␣ or ␤ position. upon incubation with placental microsomes, 83% of
tritium in the 1␤ position was lost during conversion to estrone, whereas 85% of the 1␣ tritium was retained, indicating the importance of loss of the 1␤-hydrogen (31, 32).
later, harry brodie and john townsley established that
the 2␤-hydrogen was also required (33). the observations
that 19-norandrostenedione and androsta-1,4-diene-3,17dione are poor substrates for conversion to estrogen suggested that hydrogens are removed after oxidation of the
c-19 methyl group to form the 19-hydroxy or 19-oxo
compounds.
these early studies of aromatase required multistep purifications and meticulous attention to detail. a practically
important advance was the development of an aromatase
assay requiring only one step. knowledge of the 1␤-hy-

346

santen et al.

history of aromatase

drogen loss stimulated aubrey thompson and pentti
siiteri* in 1974 (23, 34) to develop a one-step radiometric
assay in which tritium release from the 1␤-tritium-labeled
substrate was measured as tritiated water (3h2o). as validation, they demonstrated that the rate of 3h2o release
and formation of isolated estrogen product were similar.
this assay facilitated study of potential aromatase inhibitors
in later experiments (35–38). by the early 1970s, investigators generally agreed upon several facts regarding the mechanism of aromatase action. conversion of androstenedione
to estrogen involved 19-oh and 19-oxo intermediates, but
not the 19-oic acid, as precursors. the aromatization of ring
a involved the elimination of the 1␤- and 2␤-hydrogens (31,
39, 40), suggesting that aromatase acted on the ␤-face of the
substrate. three moles each of oxygen and  xxxd532xxx  phosphate (nadph) were consumed per mole of androgens converted to estrogen by the
human placental aromatase (22, 34). the reaction involved
a cytochrome p450-mediated enzyme, as evidenced by
blockade with  xxxd147xxx  (ag), a known inhibitor
of adrenal p450-mediated hydroxylation (41, 42). the aromatization reaction was not initially considered to involve
p450 because it could not be inhibited by carbon monoxide,
the classic test at that time for p450-mediated steps.
as a result of his ongoing mechanistic studies, harry brodie recognized the therapeutic potential of targeting aromatase and began development of selective aromatase inhibitors in the early 1970s. in 1973, his group published initial
systematic studies on the development of competitive steroidal aromatase inhibitors (17). although a number of classical
inhibitors that blocked multiple cytochrome p450 hydroxylases had previously proved useful for mechanistic studies
(i.e., cyanoketone  xxxd2843xxx  and ag) (34,
35), none of these compounds was specific for aromatase
(35, 40). the wfeb group reasoned that steroidal analogs of
aromatase substrates would be more specific inhibitors, resulting from their high-affinity interactions with the active
site of the enzyme. brodie’s group systematically examined
more than 100 steroidal structures and substrate analogs
(17) and inferred important structural components for inhibition from these data.
collaboration between investigators with different interests and expertise often leads to a broader experimental perspective (17). as an example of this, a timely marriage of
concepts and individuals led to a biological focus on aromatase inhibitors for use in breast cancer patients. angela
brodie* had arrived at the wfeb in 1962. she subsequently
married harry brodie and joined his lab as staff scientist in
1971. angela brodie had previously worked at the christie
cancer hospital in manchester, united kingdom, a site of
active investigation of hormone therapies for breast cancer
and later of tamoxifen development. the arrival of

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

craig jordan* at wfeb in 1972 added to an environment focused on breast cancer treatment (43). jordan
came to work with michael harper who had been involved in original work on tamoxifen with arthur walpole in the united kingdom (44, 45).

iii. early physiological studies of aromatase
a. extraglandular estrogen production

in the 1970s, paul macdonald, pentti siiteri, and their
dallas collaborators made the sentinel discovery of extraglandular aromatase activity in both men and women.
standard dogma before that time dictated that steroid hormones were only produced in endocrine glands such as
ovary, testis, and adrenal. these investigators showed that
adipose tissue was a rich source of aromatase (10, 22, 23,
41, 46 –53). these investigators demonstrated that peripheral tissue provides the major source of estrogen synthesis in men and in postmenopausal women and that the
reaction involves aromatization of adrenal androstenedione.
studies of postmenopausal women showed that the conversion of androstenedione to estrogen was higher in obese
subjects, suggesting that adipose tissue might be the primary site of aromatization (47). to prove this hypothesis,
clinical studies demonstrated that total body aromatization of plasma androstenedione increased from 0.5 to
10% with a rise in body weight from 100 to 400 pounds
in women (47). these data provided the first indication
that adipose cells might express the aromatase gene and
could readily explain how obesity increases the risk of
both endometrial and breast cancer in postmenopausal
women. together with an obstetrics and gynecology resident, a. schindler, the siiteri group directly demonstrated
the presence of aromatase with the tritium release assay in
surgically obtained adipose tissues from women (54).
breast tissue was also found to have substantial aromatase
activity. based on the clinical interpretation of data from a
young boy referred with severe gynecomastia but no feminizing tumor, macdonald and siiteri found that 50% of this
patient’s plasma androstenedione was converted to estrogens through aromatization (10). based on studies of tom
dao, siiteri postulated from its structure that testololactone
was an aromatase inhibitor and suggested its use to treat this
patient. notably, estrogen levels were reduced by 79%, and
subsequent studies by siiteri and aubrey thompson, his
graduate student, later confirmed this activity of testololactone using an aromatase index (e.g., determination
of the ratio of androgens to estrogens) developed in
collaboration with howard judd (46, 50).
original studies of william miller,* john adams, tom
dao, y. j. abul-hajj, and donald killinger directly demonstrated local estrogen synthesis in breast cancer tissue using

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

classical product isolation techniques (55–57). later studies
of alan lipton,* richard santen,* and angela brodie (58 –
60) used siiteri’s (3h2o) radiometric aromatase assay
method (22, 23) to quantitate the levels of aromatase in a
large number of breast cancers and correlate activity with
biological parameters. they found that both benign and malignant breast tissues contain aromatase (61– 67).
b. cell-specific site of aromatase in breast

for a number of years, controversy existed whether
aromatase resided predominantly in stromal or epithelial
breast cancer cells (68, 69). the viewpoints of various
investigators varied depending upon the methodology
used. immunohistochemistry with monoclonal antibodies
favored an epithelial source (69), whereas polyclonal antibodies or isolation of stromal and epithelial cells in tissue
culture and measurement of aromatase in these cells favored fibroblasts (61, 70). convincing evidence that both
stromal and epithelial cancer cells contained aromatase
awaited studies by hironobu sasano* using laser capture
methodology with quantitative pcr of aromatase. with
this methodology, his group clearly demonstrated an
equal role for each compartment in human breast cancer
tissue (71). stromal and epithelial cells are not the only
sources of estrogen production in human breast cancer
tissue. gil mor* and his colleagues demonstrated the presence of aromatase in macrophages, a cell type comprising
up to 25% of the cells found in breast tumors (72, 73).
c. in situ production vs. uptake

an important question addressed whether breast tumor
estrogen concentrations result primarily from local synthesis
in the tumor via aromatase or from plasma uptake in postmenopausal women. the presence of very high levels of estrogen in breast tissue provided inferential evidence that local
synthesis might predominate (74). eleven studies reported
mean estradiol levels of 46 – 480 pg/g in breast cancer tissue
from postmenopausal women, levels substantially higher
than plasma estrogen levels of 2–10 pg/ml after menopause
(75, 76). however, the maintenance of higher tissue than
plasma levels after the menopause could also reflect uptake
against a gradient mediated by high-affinity estrogen receptors (ers). the first direct assessment of this question involved a xenograft castrate mouse model system developed
by wei yue,* a former trainee of angela brodie (62). castration was used in this and subsequent studies to model the
postmenopausal state in women. her data suggested that
components of both uptake and local synthesis are physiologically important. attempts to determine this directly in
postmenopausal women with breast cancer involved infusion of 3h-androstenedione and 14c-estrone for recovery
corrections and determinations of radioisotope ratios in

edrv.endojournals.org

347

plasma and breast tissue. two groups, those of william
miller* (77) and michael reed* (78), carried out these complex studies and concurred that 50 –70% of the estrogen in
the breast resulted from local synthesis and the remainder
from uptake. anita dunbier, a postdoctoral research fellow
of mitch dowsett,* recently conducted an elegant study that
correlated plasma estradiol levels with estrogen-responsive
gene expression in er⫹ breast tumors and found four genes,
tff-1, greb1, rage, and azgp1, with correlation coefficients statistically significant at p ⬍ 0.001 (79). tumor tissue er␣ levels in tumor also correlated with gene expression.
using multivariate analysis of two independent tumor sets,
they concluded that an average of 19% of the variability of
these genes was explained by plasma estradiol levels, and
13% from the levels of er␣ present. interestingly, when
dunbier proposed this study to dowsett, he initially thought
that the analysis was quite unlikely to be informative and was
not of high enough priority to be done.
william miller’s group (80) and later serdar bulun*
and colleagues (81) provided further indirect evidence in
favor of local estrogen synthesis in the breast. they determined the activity of aromatase and its expression in quadrants where breast tumors usually arose. the quadrant of
the breast containing the tumor generally had the highest
aromatase activity and expression of message. one interpretation of these data is that a tumor is more likely to
develop in the region of the breast where aromatase expression is highest. an alternate explanation is that factors
produced by the tumor stimulate aromatase expression
locally within the surrounding mesenchymal cells and
within the tumor itself.  xxxd1903xxx  (pge2) is a candidate factor because it is a powerful stimulator of aromatase expression in breast adipose stromal cells (82, 83).
pge2 is formed via  xxxg1884xxx  (cox2), whose expression is high in many breast tumors where it correlates
with tumor size, grade, her-2 positivity, and an unfavorable disease-free interval. moreover cox2 inhibitors have
been shown to inhibit aromatase activity of breast cancer
cells (83). the relationship between cox2 and breast estrogen levels is of interest because of epidemiological studies in patients receiving aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and development of breast cancer. as
reviewed by robert brueggemeier (83), regular use of such
drugs correlates with up to a 50% reduction in breast
cancer risk over a 5-yr period. use of acetaminophen,
which does not block cox2, was used as a control and was
associated with no reduction in breast cancer risk (84).
an additional complexity regarding local estrogen synthesis in breast is the relative role of aromatase vs. formation from circulating  xxxd2046xxx  via the sulfatase enzyme (85– 87). the isotopic kinetic methods using
tritiated androstenedione as substrate described in section

348

santen et al.

history of aromatase

iii. a. do not estimate local formation via sulfatase, and
consequently radiolabeled  xxxd2046xxx  must be used to
assess local synthesis directly (88). with this technique,
approximately 19 –50% of the estrogen found in rodent
breast cancer tissues from castrate animals (i.e., postmenopausal) originated from local enzymatic cleavage of estrone
sulfate to free estrone via sulfatase as shown by shigeru
masamura and colleagues (88). no human data using direct
isotopic techniques are as yet available.

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

site-directed mutagenesis data identified three important additional regions in the active site of aromatase, s478 and
h480 (in the ␤-4 sheet at the carboxy-terminus) and  xxxd309xxx 
(in the i helix). these sites are thought to participate in a
charge relay system that leads to the aromatization of the a
ring of the androgen substrate. it has been proposed that
exemestane is converted to reactive intermediates by the
heme through hydroxylation of the c-19 group, aided by
 xxxd309xxx  and t310. the intermediates then bind irreversibly to
the enzyme, causing suicide inhibition in which  xxxd309xxx  may
also be involved (28).

iv. steroidal aromatase inhibitor development
a. historical aspects

systematic structure/function studies by the brodies
(harry and angela) examined nearly 100 steroidal aromatase inhibitors and led to the identification of 1,4,6-androstatrienedione (19) and 4-hydroxy-androstenedione (4oh-a) (89) as the most promising candidate inhibitors.
their findings encouraged a cadre of investigators working independently at other institutions to identify a wide
variety of steroidal inhibitors. these included 16␣-bromoandrogens (90), 7-␳-aminophenylthioandrostenedione (91), and 1-methyl-1,4-androstadiene-3, xxxd2153xxx 
(92). testololactone, used for over two decades as a treatment for breast cancer, was found to inhibit aromatase
(50). c-19-substituted aromatase inhibitors include thiiranes and oxiranes (93, 94), epoxysteroids (94), and thiol
and amino analogs (95, 96). potent a ring-bridged steroid
inhibitors (97, 98) that consist of analogs containing carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur atoms have also been
described. reviews by brueggemeier provide extensive detail regarding these and other inhibitors and the investigators involved (37, 99).
some of the inhibitors described above were later found to
cause enzyme inactivation (100) by functioning as mechanism-based inhibitors. because these inhibitors bind to the
active enzymatic site, they are quite specific and should also
have lasting effects in vivo as a result of inactivating the enzyme. the first compound designed as a mechanism-based
inhibitor of aromatase was 10-propargy1-4-estrene-3, xxxd2153xxx  (mdl 18,962), designed and synthesized independently
by the three research groups of cecil robinson, o’neal
johnston, and doug covey* (38, 101, 102). other mechanism-based inhibitors were identified among the most potent
steroidal inhibitors originally thought to be competitive inhibitors including  xxxd2153xxx , l-methylandrosta-1,4-diene3, xxxd2153xxx  (92), and 6-methyleneandrost-1,4-diene-3,17dione (exemestane).
recent studies by shuian chen* and colleagues, utilizing
the three-dimensional structural aromatase model generated
by favia et al. (103), proposed a new clamping mechanism
of steroidal substrate/inhibitor binding to the active site (28).

b. 4-oh-androstenedione

focusing on  xxxd2153xxx  as a lead compound after extensive
comparisons among inhibitors, the brodies demonstrated reduction of estrogen levels in rodents. as proof of biological
efficacy,  xxxd2153xxx  caused regression of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]
anthracene rat mammary tumors (a model developed by
charles huggins) more effectively than tamoxifen (89). in
contrast to tamoxifen,  xxxd2153xxx  was not estrogenic on other
tissues such as the rat uterus. studies in nonhuman primates
demonstrated that  xxxd2153xxx  inhibited peripheral (nonovarian) estrogen synthesis using radiolabeled tracer studies carried out in collaboration with christopher longcope at the
wfeb (104). angela brodie then established collaborations
with two medical oncologists in london, charles coombes*
and paul goss,* and a clinical chemist, mitch dowsett. this
collaborative group enabled the first clinical trials with
 xxxd2153xxx  for treatment of breast cancer in women. pilot studies demonstrated significant responses to  xxxd2153xxx , although
many women had relapsed from previous tamoxifen treatment. coombes and brodie then proposed to ciba-geigy
that further clinical development of  xxxd2153xxx  be undertaken.
the late stuart hughes at ciba-geigy quickly appreciated
that selective aromatase inhibitors could have distinct advantages over tamoxifen and ag. with pharmaceutical company support, further clinical trials proceeded in the mid1980s and  xxxd2153xxx , renamed  xxxd2153xxx , became the first
“selective aromatase inhibitor” to become available for the
treatment of breast cancer.

v. nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor
development
a. historical background

sir george beatson introduced bilateral oophorectomy
for treatment of premenopausal women with breast cancer in 1896 (105), and this approach gained common usage,
as did surgical adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy (106). in
the 1950s and 1960s, several endocrinologists including
mortimer lipsett, olaf pearson, albert segaloff, b. j.
kennedy, anne carter, and others focused on development

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

of medical alternatives to these surgical modalities for
treatment of breast cancer. termed “hormone additive
therapy,” these included administration of glucocorticoids, androgens, and even estrogens (107–111). ralph
cash suggested another approach: direct inhibition of adrenal steroid synthesis. he knew that ag could block cholesterol side chain cleavage (112) and reasoned that ag
might replace surgical adrenalectomy for the treatment of
breast cancer in postmenopausal women. objective tumor
regression in a single patient with breast cancer treated in
1967 provided proof of his concept (112).
richard santen,* during his endocrinology fellowship
in 1971, evaluated a breast cancer patient who was severely cushingoid from high doses of prednisone used to
suppress the adrenal. not aware of cash’s case report,
santen envisioned the use of direct adrenal inhibition with
ag to avoid the side effects of high-dose prednisone. upon
recruitment to the new medical school at penn state university, he and a medical oncologist, alan lipton,* initiated clinical studies with ag in 1972. independent groups
headed by thomas hall and h. h. (dicky) newsome also
began to examine ag as breast cancer treatment at about
the same time (113, 114).
the adrenal inhibitory properties of ag necessitated
use of replacement glucocorticoid, and a long-acting
agent, dexamethasone, was chosen (115). however, ag
accelerated the metabolism of dexamethasone and limited
its glucocorticoid potency (115). to overcome this problem, hydrocortisone (hc) was substituted because its metabolism was not significantly altered by ag. with the
availability of a practical ag/hc regimen, pilot studies
with this regimen were undertaken. largely on the basis of
anecdotal observations of tumor regressions (fig. 1), investigators became convinced that ag/hc was effective, and
multiple clinical trials conducted by trevor powles,* ian
smith,* adrian harris,* robin murray, and others later
provided compelling evidence (106, 116).
a chance meeting between pentti siiteri and richard
santen led to the realization that ag effectively blocked
total body aromatase in postmenopausal women. siiteri
had previously demonstrated in 1969 that ag could block
aromatase in vitro (41) and was aware of the reports of
selective and potent aromatase inhibitors by the brodies
(19). he had also envisioned the potential use of aromatase inhibitors for treatment of breast cancer (22, 23,
34, 41, 50) and suggested that many of the then-current
treatments for breast cancer worked through aromatase
inhibition (22, 23, 50). invited to lecture at the penn state
medical school in 1974, siiteri suggested that ag most
likely was working as an aromatase inhibitor for breast
cancer and advised use of the isotopic kinetic, total body
aromatization method to directly prove that ag inhibited

edrv.endojournals.org

349

fig 1. left, lytic metastases (arrows) in pelvis and cervical vertebra
before aromatase inhibitor therapy. right, healing of lytic lesions
during administration of the aromatase inhibitor, ag, in combination
with hc. [reproduced with permission from r. j. santen, e. ramojlik,
t.j. worgul 1982  xxxd147xxx . scientific profile. in: r. j. santen,
i.c. henderson, eds. pharmanual: a comprehensive guide to the
therapeutic use of  xxxd147xxx . 2nd revised edition, basel: s.
karger;101–161.]

aromatase in postmenopausal women (48). santen’s
group then used this methodology and demonstrated 95–
98% inhibition in postmenopausal patients with breast
cancer (fig. 2 (117). this observation focused emphasis
upon the aromatase inhibitory properties of ag and led to

fig 2. the effect of ag on aromatization of androstenedione (⌬-4a)
to estrone (e1) as measured in blood. the data points represent
individual patients studied before and during treatment with 1000 mg
of ag and 40 mg of hc daily. the horizontal lines represent the mean
values for all five patients. the down sloping lines connect individual
patients before and during treatment. [reproduced with permission
from r. j. santen et al.: j clin endocrinol metab 47:1257–1265, 1978
(117) © 1978 the endocrine society.]

350

santen et al.

history of aromatase

its later designation as a “nonselective first-generation”
aromatase inhibitor (118 –126).
william mcguire* chaired the breast cancer task
force of the nih at this time and strongly encouraged the
penn state group, now comprising harold harvey,* lawrence demers,* steve santner, and eugeniuz samojlik* (in
addition to santen and lipton), to pursue further work
with ag (127). mcguire facilitated a key collaborative
arrangement between the penn state group and the breast
cancer program at duke university, headed by samuel
wells.* this collaboration facilitated rapid expansion of
the scope of studies with ag.
precise quantitation of the low estrogen levels characteristic of menopausal women (i.e., 2–10 pg/ml) (76) provided
a major challenge for the study of aromatase inhibitors. eugeniusz samojlik* (128 –130) developed rias that measured
estrogens in concentrated urine and in plasma after purification by celite column chromatography, techniques developed by siiteri 10 yr earlier. the most practical method
took advantage of the 100-fold higher levels of estrone
sulfate in plasma than free estrogen and involved a specific
method for measuring  xxxd2046xxx  (128, 130).
b. medical vs. surgical therapy

the next phase of clinical trials compared ag/hc with
the standard hormonal modalities then available. head to
head comparisons between ag/hc and surgical adrenalectomy were facilitated by the collaboration of a breast
surgeon at duke university, samuel wells, and the penn
state group. ag/hc demonstrated equal efficacy in comparison with both surgical adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy, both in clinical responses and in estrogen suppression (131, 132) and led to abandonment of the
surgical ablative methods. aromatase inhibition with ag,
however, could not replace surgical oophorectomy in premenopausal women because ag/hc did not block ovarian function due to interruption of estradiol negative feedback with reflex rises in lh and fsh (133).
c. comparison of antiestrogens vs. aromatase inhibitors

tamoxifen was being developed at approximately the
same time as ag in the 1970s, and direct comparisons of
the two approaches were deemed necessary. four randomized clinical trials compared ag with tamoxifen (106,
134 –136) and found equal clinical efficacy but fewer side
effects and toxicity with the antiestrogen. as an additional
disadvantage, use of ag required coadministration of replacement hc. based on these considerations, tamoxifen
became established as first-line hormonal therapy for
breast cancer, a position held for the next two decades.

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

d. key international conference

motivated by the successful clinical trials with ag/hc in
the 1970s and recognition of its aromatase blocking properties, alan lipton, harold harvey, and richard santen conceived and organized an international symposium at key
biscayne, florida, in december of 1981 to discuss a broad
range of the basic and clinical aspects of aromatase. one
major conclusion was that the predominate mechanism of
ag in breast cancer patients was aromatase inhibition, not
suppression of adrenal steroidogenesis (137, 138). this
meeting served as a catalyst for investment of major resources
into the clinical development of highly selective and potent
aromatase inhibitors (137, 138). several presentations also
highlighted the importance of aromatase for a range of biological processes in the brain, ovary, testis, and placenta. a
series of eight follow-up international aromatase conferences brought together investigators in this field over the
next 25 yr, which has led to multiple collaborative studies.
e. studies to optimize aromatase inhibitor therapy

adrian harris,* mitch dowsett, and the santen group
attempted to reduce the dose of ag or use its d-stereoisomer to reduce side effects and eliminate the need for hc.
however, these efforts were not successful (139 –143) and
emphasized the need for selective aromatase inhibitors
such as  xxxd2153xxx . several clinical trials demonstrated the
efficacy of an im formulation of  xxxd2153xxx  in producing
objective breast cancer regressions (126, 144 –148). on
this basis,  xxxd2153xxx , now renamed  xxxd2153xxx , was approved by the national health service in the united kingdom and represented the first “selective aromatase inhibitor” and first agent approved specifically for this purpose.
however, with further studies, it became apparent that
 xxxd2153xxx  did not block aromatase sufficiently to improve efficacy over ag, and more potent inhibitors were
deemed necessary (144, 149, 150).
recognizing the potential of aromatase inhibitors, several pharmaceutical companies contributed substantially
to the identification and clinical development of more potent steroidal and nonsteroidal selective aromatase inhibitors. ciba-geigy (now novartis), merrill-dow, imperial
chemical industries (now astra-zeneca), lilly, pharmitalia, jannsen, and yamaguchi pharmaceuticals all initiated aromatase inhibitor development programs. the first
agent to emerge was the second-generation inhibitor cgs16949a, later renamed  xxxd2080xxx , a compound initially
studied by ronald steele at ciba-geigy (151). the groups
of lawrence demers* at penn state and patrick trunet at
novartis concomitantly demonstrated its ability to inhibit
estrogens in women but unexpectedly uncovered aldosterone-blocking properties (152, 153). this limited the
doses of  xxxd2080xxx  that could be given to block aromatase
more effectively than with ag or  xxxd2153xxx  (152, 154).

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

although approved for use in japan,  xxxd2080xxx  never
achieved substantial usage (155). more potent and selective
aromatase inhibitors were clearly needed. using an array of
resources, the pharmaceutical companies then used structure/function analysis, animal models, and sophisticated
hormone assays to identify lead compounds. this resulted in
the development and licensing of two nonsteroidal reversible
inhibitors, anastrozole and letrozole, and one mechanismbased steroidal inhibitor, exemestane. to emphasize the role
of classical endocrinology in this process, ajay bhatnager,
a reproductive endocrinologist working at ciba-geigy, used
a gamut of bio- and ria techniques to identify letrozole as a
highly promising compound.

vi. preclinical studies of third-generation
aromatase inhibitors
a. model systems

historically, rodent model systems played an important role in the initial development of aromatase inhibitors
as well as antiestrogens (156), but these represented the
premenopausal hormonal state. seventy percent of human
breast tumors occur in postmenopausal women in whom
local estrogen synthesis in the tumor is a key component
(as noted previously, aromatase inhibitors do not inhibit
estrogens in premenopausal women). therefore, human
models more comparable to the postmenopausal breast
cancer patient were needed to examine the antitumor effects of the third-generation aromatase inhibitors being
developed. use of athymic mouse xenografts, a technique
developed in the 1980s (157), allowed in vivo growth of
tumors from human carcinoma cell lines (156, 158 –160).
although the athymic mouse with mcf-7 tumors proved
to be an excellent model for studying antiestrogens under
premenopausal conditions, it is not useful for investigating aromatase inhibitors in postmenopausal patients.
accordingly, xenografts with tumors containing aromatase grown in castrate animals were needed.
shuian chen (161), from the city of hope (duarte,
ca), created the needed cells (mcf-7ca) by stably transfecting aromatase into wild-type mcf-7 cells, which then
served as a local source of estrogen by aromatizing androstenedione. the penn state group initially showed that
androstenedione could stimulate proliferation of these
(mcf-7ca) cells in vitro and that aromatase inhibitors
could block this growth (162). wei yue* in angela brodie’s group then developed an in vivo xenograft model
with these aromatase transfected mcf-7 cells (160, 163)
as a robust means of conducting preclinical studies (164,
165). because they were devoid of ovaries, animals bearing mcf-7 ca cells mimicked the postmenopausal situation where aromatase is not under feedback regulation by

edrv.endojournals.org

351

gonadotropins. thus, inhibitors targeting aromatase and
also antiestrogens could be studied in tumors formed from
these cells. the third-generation aromatase inhibitors,
letrozole and anastrozole, reduced tumor volume significantly more effectively and for a longer duration than tamoxifen. when combined with tamoxifen, these agents
caused suppression similar to tamoxifen alone (165). because the antiestrogen  xxxd2165xxx  causes er degradation,
the combination of this antiestrogen with letrozole was
postulated to be more effective treatment than with either
compound. all treatments suppressed tumor growth (p ⬍
0.001), but letrozole appeared better than the pure antiestrogen  xxxd2165xxx  (1 mg/d). however, when the two drugs
were combined, tumor suppression was significantly
greater than treatment with either letrozole or  xxxd2165xxx 
alone (p ⬍ 0.0001) (166). the additive effect on tumors
treated with the combination of these two compounds
suggested that some transcription via the er may occur
with  xxxd2165xxx  treatment alone that is not completely
blocked by the antiestrogen.
b. switching studies in model systems

the initial studies with first-generation aromatase inhibitors involved breast cancer patients who had relapsed after
prior endocrine therapies such as oophorectomy, high-dose
estrogens, and tamoxifen. accordingly, in the xenograft tumor model, mice received tamoxifen first, with a later switch
to letrozole. although efficacious, this strategy proved inferior to treatment with letrozole as first-line treatment (167).
both tamoxifen and  xxxd2165xxx  were ineffective as secondline therapy after letrozole treatment. these studies provided
insight into current switching trials that are examining the
correct sequences of hormonal therapy (166).

vii. clinical studies of third-generation
inhibitor development
the three food and drug administration (fda)-approved third-generation inhibitors (118), anastrozole,
letrozole, and exemestane, possess 100- to 10,000-fold
higher potency and greater efficacy than ag,  xxxd2153xxx ,
and  xxxd2080xxx , and less toxicity than ag and  xxxd2080xxx .
testing of these agents used isotopic kinetic, radioimmunological and ultrasensitive biological assays for assessment of aromatase blockade and phase i, ii, and iii clinical
trials for determination of antitumor efficacy.
to facilitate clinical studies of estrogen suppression, substantial further attention was directed toward the development of ultrasensitive assays for measurement of plasma estrogens, particularly by the groups of karen klein, mitch
dowsett, lawrence demers, jurgen geisler,* and per lonning* (168 –171). the plasma  xxxd2046xxx  assays, the

352

santen et al.

history of aromatase

ultrasensitive bioassays, and the isotopic kinetic methods
appeared superior to rias of estradiol to determine the
degree of suppression of aromatase. with the most precise
method, isotopic kinetic measurement, aromatase inhibition exceeded 98% with each of these inhibitors (fig. 3),
with letrozole seemingly slightly more potent than the
other agents (171–173). bioassay and standard ria data
also demonstrated profound suppression of estradiol levels with these agents (168 –170, 174 –176). phase i and ii
clinical trials were then conducted with very promising
results (176 –185).

viii. “mega” clinical trials
a. comparison of different hormonal therapies

large trials have now been undertaken to demonstrate
the superiority of third-generation aromatase inhibitors
over tamoxifen and progestins with respect to efficacy and
toxicity. these studies established the superiority of one
endocrine therapy over another for the first time. as opposed to earlier studies generally conducted by single
groups, the collaborative efforts of several investigators at
multinational sites were required to conduct these studies,
and scientific advisory committees generally assumed
leadership roles. first authors of the resulting publications
generally represented the investigators who had enrolled

fig 3. aromatase activity remaining during the administration of first-,
second-, and third-generation aromatase inhibitors (milligrams per day).
data are expressed on a log scale to emphasize the expected log dose
response characteristics of pharmacological inhibitors. with the most
potent inhibitor, only 1% of aromatase activity persists during therapy.
the degree of suppression was determined by an isotopic kinetic method
using 3h-androstenedione and 14c-estrone to assess the rho value before
and during therapy. the rho value represents the percentage conversion
of androgens to estrogens in the total body under equilibrium conditions.
ana, anastrozole; exe, exemestane; fad,  xxxd2080xxx ; for,  xxxd2153xxx ;
let, letrozole. [reproduced with permission from h. kronenberg, s.
melmed, k. polonsky, p. r. larsen 2008 williams textbook of
endocrinology, 11th edition, philadelphia: saunders (239).]

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

the largest number of subjects into specific protocols.
these trials enrolled up to 10,000 participants each and
were powered to detect differences in several disease parameters. one individual involved in these trials, paul
plourde,* is of particular interest. he trained as a clinical
endocrinology fellow at penn state during the development of ag and later spearheaded the rapid development
of anastrozole. his efforts led to its approval by the fda
in what proved to be record time (i.e., 43 d) after submission of the request for approval. anastrozole then
became the initial third-generation inhibitor approved
worldwide.
results among studies with each aromatase inhibitor
were nearly uniform and demonstrated superior efficacy
of the third-generation aromatase inhibitors when compared with ag/hc and the progestin,  xxxd2557xxx 
(186 –188). five large, multicenter, multinational, randomized trials then directly compared the aromatase inhibitors with tamoxifen in advanced disease (189). all
demonstrated the superiority of the aromatase inhibitors
in clinical efficacy, with improved responses ranging from
2 to 13% (fig. 4). the differences were statistically significant in all but one trial in which the receptor status was
unknown in 55% of patients (190).
toxicities related to tamoxifen differed from those with
the aromatase inhibitors. pooled data indicate that tamoxifen use was associated with deep venous thromboses and
pulmonary emboli (7.6 vs. 4.5%) significantly more frequently than the aromatase inhibitor, anastrozole (190,
191), whereas nausea, hot flashes, and gastrointestinal
distress were comparable. aromatase inhibitor use was
associated with an increase in osteoporosis, osteopenia,
arthralgias, and myalgia. however, in the one trial comparing aromatase inhibitors with placebo, it is surprising
how commonly most of these problems were noted in the
placebo group (192). accordingly, the risks causally attributable to the aromatase inhibitors are less than appreciated from the comparative trials. for example, in one

fig 4. comparison of tamoxifen vs. aromatase inhibitors in five
randomized, controlled studies in advanced disease. [reproduced with
permission from h. kronenberg, s. melmed, k. polonsky, p. r. larsen
2008 williams textbook of endocrinology, 11th edition, philadelphia:
saunders (239).]

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

study, arthralgias occurred in 16.6% of patients receiving
placebo and 21.3% given letrozole (192). taken together,
these trials provided evidence of the superiority of the
third-generation aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen
in the advanced disease setting with respect to efficacy and
toxicity. letrozole, anastrozole, and exemestane have
now been approved globally as first-line therapy for advanced breast cancer. these trials showed for the first time
that one endocrine therapy could be superior to another.
previous dogma held that each available endocrine therapy produced similar rates of response and could be distinguished only on the basis of side effects and cost.
when proven superior to tamoxifen in the advanced
disease setting, the third-generation aromatase inhibitors
were studied in the adjuvant setting (i.e., given immediately after initial surgery to prevent recurrences). two similar large trials—the atac ( xxxd173xxx  and tamoxifen
alone and in combination trial) and the big-femta
trial— compared the effects of either agent on time to progression of disease, time to treatment failure, and on overall survival (193). michael baum and mitch dowsett
spearheaded the atac trial, and a consortium of investigators spearheaded the big-femta study (194). at 5 yr
of follow-up, both clinical trials demonstrated an absolute
superiority of the aromatase inhibitor of approximately
3%, whereas overall survival with either therapy was
similar. in this setting, tamoxifen caused an increase in
endometrial cancer and in venothrombotic episodes.
aromatase inhibitors were associated with accelerated
bone loss, symptoms of urogenital atrophy, and arthralgias. lipid parameters did not appear to deteriorate significantly with the aromatase inhibitors (194). on the basis of these data, the aromatase inhibitors have now been
approved globally for use in the adjuvant setting. published guidelines still suggest initial use of tamoxifen unless patients are at risk of venothrombotic episodes (195,
196). initial use of an aromatase inhibitor should also be
considered in patients with her 2/neu or er⫹/pr ( xxxg1737xxx )⫺ tumors (who in one trial appeared to respond less well to tamoxifen) (193) or in high-risk patients.
b. switching trials

several studies are currently comparing the sequential
use of aromatase inhibitors after initial adjuvant therapy
with tamoxifen. the ma 17 trial, headed by paul goss,
compared placebo to letrozole in women who had received tamoxifen for 5 yr (192). the results demonstrate
a 35% greater relative reduction in new events and an
absolute reduction of 4% in women receiving the aromatase inhibitor. overall survival was improved only in
the node-positive group. the lead author of the exemestane study was a pioneer in the  xxxd2153xxx  studies,
charles coombes. this trial, comparing the effect of 5 yr

edrv.endojournals.org

353

of tamoxifen with 2–3 yr of tamoxifen, followed by
switching to exemestane at 2–3 yr (197), also showed a
reduction in new cancer events in the aromatase inhibitor
compared with the tamoxifen group. the austrian breast
& colorectal cancer study group (abcsg)/arimadexnolvadex (arno) trial was similar but used anastrozole
rather than exemestane. the switch to the aromatase inhibitor resulted in a 3% improvement in event-free survival (198). as these data have matured, the prolongation
of overall survival with use of aromatase inhibitors appears likely based on four randomized trials and a metaanalysis of them (199 –201). the big-1-98 directly tested
the most effective strategies in a four-arm trial comparing:
1) tamoxifen for 5 yr; 2) letrozole for 5 yr; 3) letrozole for
2 yr, followed by tamoxifen for 3 yr; and 4) tamoxifen for 2
yr, followed by letrozole for 3 yr. this confirmed that 5 yr of
letrozole was superior to 5 yr of tamoxifen or 2 yr of tamoxifen followed by letrozole. interestingly, the switch to tamoxifen after 2 yr of letrozole was not detrimental (202). these
switching data demonstrate that initial therapy with an aromatase inhibitor appears preferable. formal guidelines have
not yet been written based on these new results. current
guidelines, written by the american society of clinical oncology recommend that appropriate therapy is now to use an
aromatase inhibitor somewhere in the course of adjuvant
therapy (196).
c. management of toxicity due to aromatase inhibitors

available data indicate that aromatase inhibitors accelerate the rate of bone loss as well as increasing fracture
incidence. these effects can be circumvented by coadministration of potent bisphosphonates (203). no significant
changes in cardiovascular events have been described, but
a trend toward an increase is of concern (204). based on
these data, use of statins in patients at increased risk of
heart disease may be warranted.
d. evaluation of emerging strategies with
aromatase inhibitors

neoadjuvant therapy represents the use of an antitumor agent before surgery in an attempt to shrink the tumor
sufficiently to allow lumpectomy rather than mastectomy
(205). mike dixon and colleagues (206) conducted a nonrandomized neoadjuvant trial that demonstrated an 81%
reduction of tumor volume with letrozole vs. 75% with
anastrozole and 48% with tamoxifen. more recently, a
multicenter randomized trial involving 324 patients compared letrozole (2.5 mg/d) with tamoxifen (20 mg/d) in
women with er⫹ tumors of greater than 2 cm in size
(207). letrozole caused a 55% rate of objective response (complete response and partial response) vs.
36% for tamoxifen (p ⬍ 0.001). breast conserving sur-

354

santen et al.

history of aromatase

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

of signaling pathways involving er␣,  xxxg721xxx ,  xxxg681xxx  receptor, and igf-receptor (43, 106,
167, 209 –224). these steroid and growth factor pathways that signal through mapk, phosphatidylinositol-3kinase, and mammalian  xxxg1478xxx  (mtor)
drove proliferation (225) and enhanced the rate of er␣mediated transcription via nuclear and extranuclear (i.e.,
genomic and nongenomic) effects. because er␣ is able to
co-opt existing growth factor pathways via igf-r and
associated adaptor proteins such as shc, breast cancer cells
ix. resistance to aromatase inhibitors: back
from the bedside to the bench
can become hypersensitive to estrogen. a second form of
adaptation is up-regulation of er␣ by reduction of methwomen with advanced breast cancer who initially re- ylation of the er␣ gene promoter c (222). this adaptive
spond to aromatase inhibitors later relapse. cancer cells mechanism can be abrogated by the pure antiestrogen fulare highly plastic and able to adapt to escape the normal vestrant, which down-regulates the minimal levels of er␣
mechanisms that control cell replication. to understand present and causes tumor regression. a third adaptation
this high incidence of relapse, the groups of mitch dowsett by breast cancer cells to low estrogen levels is that they
and richard santen returned to the laboratory to examine become desensitized to the antiapoptotic effects of estrothe molecular adaptation mechanisms used by cancer gen and concomitantly respond paradoxically to estradiol
cells. they reasoned that aromatase inhibitors created a with mitochondrial and death receptor-mediated apoptostate of long-term estradiol deprivation and studied cancer sis. an understanding of these mechanisms of adaptation
cells exposed to this environment in cell culture. in these suggests therapeutic strategies that specifically target proexperiments, breast cancer cells adapted by up-regulation liferative signaling pathways with a variety of kinase inhibitors and survival pathways with
small molecule, proapoptotic enhancers. the proapoptotic strategy attempts
to “purge” resistant cells using estradiol
as the “trigger” to induce apoptosis and
proapoptotic agents to enhance the degree of cell kill (43) to eliminate resistant
cells.
in vivo xenograft models in castrate
animals (to mimic the postmenopausal
state in women) have been used to study
the development of resistance to aromatase inhibitors by the group of angela
brodie. letrozole, for example, initially
caused marked inhibition of tumor
growth, but tumors invariably acquire the
ability to proliferate in the presence of this
aromatase inhibitor. in vivo models of development of resistance to aromatase infig 5. the effects of long-term treatment with letrozole on the growth of mcf-7ca
hibitors also exhibit er␣ interaction with
xenografts. a, animals were inoculated with mcf-7ca cells at two sites on each flank and
were supplemented with androstenedione for the duration of experiment. when the tumors
growth factor receptors (167, 211, 226).
reached a measurable size, animals were assigned to three groups (n ⫽ 20 per group) and
tumors initially increase the levels of
injected sc daily with letrozole (10 g/d), vehicle (control), or tamoxifen (100 g/d). tumor
er␣, followed by phosphorylated
volumes were measured weekly and were expressed as the percentage change relative to
her-2, and later the adaptor protein shc
the initial tumor volume. two mice per group were killed, and tumors were collected for
analysis at 4, 28, and 56 wk as indicated on the graph. b, the effect of letrozole treatment
and grb-2. when regrowth occurs at 56
on her-2, p-shc, shc, grb2, p-mapk, mapk, p-er␣, er␣, and pgr expression in mcf-7ca
wk, a 6-fold increase in activated mapk is
tumor xenografts. letrozole-treated tumors, collected at 4 wk (when they were responding
observed, whereas er␣ levels are supto letrozole), 28 and 56 wk (when they were growing on letrozole), were analyzed by
western immunoblotting, and were compared with vehicle-treated tumors collected at wk 4
pressed (211) (fig. 5). a combination of
(control). [reproduced from w. yue et al.: clin cancer res 11:925s–930s, 2005, with
traztuzamab (antibody to her2) with

gery was chosen in 45% of patients receiving letrozole
and 35% receiving tamoxifen (p ⬍ 0.001). approximately 50% of women had a sufficient reduction in size
of tumor to allow lumpectomy. of interest is the fact
that her 2/neu-positive tumors responded better to the
aromatase inhibitor (i.e., 88% response) than to tamoxifen (i.e., 21%) (208).

permission from the american association for cancer research.]

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

edrv.endojournals.org

aromatase inhibitors is superior to the use of aromatase inhibitors alone in xenograft models and suggests the need to
test this strategy in women with breast cancer (227).

x. future strategies for usage of aromatase
inhibitors

355

months of therapy with  xxxd2072xxx  (an mtor inhibitor)
plus anastrozole than with letrozole alone (47%; p ⫽
0.03). based on all of these data, clinical studies have
shown proof of the principle that these strategies can
work, but further studies are necessary to identify potentially responding patients, the best strategies to use, and
the optimal time to implement them.
b. blockade of aromatase specifically in breast

a. aromatase inhibitors combined with growth factor
inhibitors

clinical trials are now under way to address the issue of
resistance to aromatase inhibitors in patients. based on the
up-regulation of growth factor pathways during secondary resistance to aromatase inhibitors, preclinical studies
have demonstrated that a wide variety of inhibitors delay
resistance (219, 220). accordingly, a number of clinical
trials have now been initiated that combine aromatase
inhibitors with  xxxg2198xxx  inhibitors or growth factor
receptor antagonists (228, 229). the tandem trial, conducted by an international consortium of investigators,
provides preliminary evidence that addition of herceptin
(a monoclonal antibody against her-2) to an aromatase
inhibitor significantly improves clinical benefit (230).
similarly, the group headed by mathew ellis reported a
50% rate of clinical benefit (complete objective tumor
regression, partial tumor regression, or stable disease
for ⬎ 6 months) in er⫹/her-2⫹ breast cancer patients
(231) and the group of a. jones reported an improvement
in progression-free survival from 2.4 to 4.8 months (p ⫽
0.00016) in a similar group of patients (232). massimo
cristofanilli (233) reported the results of a clinical trial
comparing anastrozole alone vs. anastrozole plus gefitinib
(a small molecule her-2 blocker) in 93 patients. this
group reported a significant prolongation of disease-free
survival from 8.2 to 14.6 months. targeting of mtor
appears to provide only modest to no benefit in patients
with locally advanced or metastatic disease (234, 235). in
a neoadjuvant trial (i.e., after initial biopsy but before
surgical excision of the tumor), the group of jose baselga
(236) demonstrated 58% greater tumor shrinkage after 4

currently available aromatase inhibitors block estrogen in nearly all tissues. unwanted toxicity such as osteoporosis results and side effects such as those due to vaginal
atrophy occur. ideally, one would prefer to utilize an approach that inhibits aromatase specifically in the breast,
leaving other sites such as bone, brain, and vasculature
uncompromised. aromatase expression in breast cancer
tissue is uniquely regulated by promoters ii/i.3 through a
cell signaling pathway not found in other tissue sites. accordingly, blockade of promoter ii/i.3-mediated transcription might provide a breast-specific therapy. studies
of the regulation of aromatase promoter ii in breast tissue
led to a search for factors that might be potential targets
for this pathway (237). cox2 inhibitors have the potential
to fulfill such a role but currently are not available for
testing due to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
colin clyne and the simpson group are examining liver
receptor homologue 1 (lrh-1), an obvious factor as a
candidate for such a target, which in the postmenopausal
woman regulates aromatase expression primarily in the
breast (table 1). at this time, controversy exists as to
whether endogenous ligands for lrh-1 exist or whether
it is constitutively active in the absence of endogenous
agonists. candidates for potential endogenous ligands include phospholipids and sphingolipids (238). using the
liver receptor homologue 1-a ligand binding domain for
antagonism of the coactivator binding domain, clyne and
colleagues used a phage display, high throughput screen of
peptide sequences containing the nuclear receptor recognition motif lxxll. in this way, a number of peptides
was identified that powerfully inhibit the transactivation

table 1. regulation of transcription of aromatase
tissue

exon
name

pathways

enhancers

suppressors

ovary
testis
breast tumor tissue

ii
ii
ii/i.3

camp/creb
camp/creb
camp/creb

brca1, bmp-15,  xxxd3027xxx 
tgf-␤, estradiol
ear-2, coup tf1, rar␥

adipose

i.4

jak/stat

brain
placenta
bone

1.f
i.1
i.4

pge,  xxxg1604xxx , lrh-1
tgf-␣, testosterone, dht, fsh
pge, cortisol,  xxxg1604xxx , lrh-1, pka, err␣,
glucocorticoids
class i cytokines, gre, gas, tnf␣,
glucocorticoids, lrh-1, pka, pkc, sp-1, shp
androgens, estrogens
sp-1, mash 2, usf-1, usf 2, tse
gre, il-1␤, class i cytokines, tnf␣, tnf␤,
glucocorticoids, 1,24 vitamin d

356

santen et al.

history of aromatase

capacity of lrh-1 on the aromatase promoter ii in the
presence or absence of the coactivator pgc1␣ (237). this
provides proof of principle that lrh-1 coactivator interactions can be targeted pharmacologically and in turn
leads to the possibility that more useful drug-like molecules could be developed that mimic these peptides.

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

reveals a 50% greater reduction with the aromatase inhibitors than with tamoxifen (239). two clinical trials,
international breast cancer intervention study ii (ibis ii)
and map 3, have now been initiated to determine whether
the aromatase inhibitors are effective primary preventative agents for breast cancer.

c. prevention of breast cancer

lifetime exposure to estrogens correlates with the incidence of breast cancer in women at risk (239). transgenic mice with aromatase overexpression are more susceptible to carcinogen-induced breast cancer (240, 241).
blockade of receptor-mediated proliferation is believed to
be the mechanism whereby the selective er modulators,
such as tamoxifen and raloxifene, prevent breast cancer in
women. an alternate hypothesis (fig. 6) postulates that
estrogens can be enzymatically converted via cytochrome
p450 1b1 to catechol-estrogens and then to estrogen-quinones. proponents of the estrogen genotoxic hypothesis
over the years have been joachim liehr, ercole cavalieri,
james yager, jose russo, and richard santen (242–244).
these metabolites can bind covalently to dna and cause
release of the nucleotide-estrogen conjugates through a
process called depurination. repair of these naked segments of dna causes point mutations and can contribute
to the carcinogenic process (242). redox cycling of catechol-estrogens to quinones with back conversion to catechol-estrogens generates reactive oxygen species that can
also result in dna damage and depurination (244). based
on currently available data, both the er␣-mediated and
genotoxic pathways probably contribute (242, 244).
blockade of estrogen synthesis with aromatase inhibitors
would then prevent breast cancer by a mechanism different from that of the antiestrogens and should be more
effective. at present, examination of the development of
new contralateral breast cancer in adjuvant therapy trials

fig 6. diagrammatic representation of the two pathways whereby
estrogens can cause breast cancer and the sites of inhibition with
aromatase inhibitors and tamoxifen.

xi. purification, structural characterization,
and regulation of aromatase
emphasis on clinical utilization of aromatase inhibitors
provided a strong impetus to more thoroughly understand
the basic structure and molecular regulation of the aromatase enzyme. these studies were conducted over the
same time period as development of aromatase inhibitors
but are reviewed together here to trace their logical
progression.
a. purification

in the 1980s, yoshio osawa, peter hall, larry vickery,
frank bellino, n. muto, m. pasonen, o. pelkonen, evan
simpson,* and carole mendelson* purified the human
aromatase cytochrome p450 protein from placental microsomes and demonstrated conversion of androstenedione to estrone with purified enzyme (245–250). these
studies provided definitive evidence that the “aromatization process” involved a single enzyme, and not multiple
enzymes as originally thought.
the quantities of aromatase generated by these efforts
were insufficient for sequencing and crystallization but
did allow generation of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies. with more powerful molecular tools and advances
in recombinant dna technology, several laboratories isolated cdna clones complementary to aromatase transcripts.
the group of evan simpson and carole mendelson screened
a ␭gt11 phage, human expression library with antibodies
raised against the human aromatase protein (251) and
isolated a partial cdna clone lacking the 5⬘ end but containing the heme binding region. use of a 5⬘-race
method led to characterization of the sequence of the 5⬘
end of the cdna, thus yielding the entire amino acid sequence of the human aromatase protein. subsequently,
similar techniques identified aromatase sequences from
numerous species (252–258).
screening of human genomic libraries soon followed,
and the groups of evan simpson, nobohiro harada, and
katsumi toda independently characterized the exonic sequences of the human aromatase gene (259 –261). approximately 30 kb in length in total, the nine coding exons
included exons ii-x, with the heme binding region residing
in exon x. findings regarding exon i turned out to be quite
unexpected and exceedingly important. the 5⬘ ends of the

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

transcripts from different tissues revealed divergent sequences upstream of the start of translation, and ovary,
placenta, and adipose tissue each exhibited unique exons
i (262–264). these unique first exons were spliced into a
common 3⬘ junction upstream of the start of translation,
resulting in the synthesis of identical aromatase proteins
(fig. 7). for several years, the missing sequences between
the most distant placental promoter, the intermediate adipose promoter, and the proximal ovarian promoter remained unidentified. this gap was finally closed by serdar
bulun* and colleagues (265) when the human genome
sequence data became available; the complete structure of
the human aromatase gene, encompassing a span of over
100 kb, is indicated in fig. 7.
b. promoter regulation

understanding the complex promoter structure of the
aromatase gene turned out to be extremely important
since it defines the tissue-specific regulation of estrogen

edrv.endojournals.org

357

biosynthesis. the ovary, testis, adipose tissue, brain, bone,
and breast cancer tissues each utilize their own promoters
and associated enhancers and suppressors (table 1) (63,
262, 266 –279). as often happens in an emerging field,
difficulties arise with respect to nomenclature, and the
designations of the simpson and nobohiro harada
groups are still both used (but the simpson nomenclature
predominantly; see fig. 7). groups headed by carol
mendelson, evan simpson, joanne richards, nobohiro
harada, serdar bulun, jacques balthazart, serge carreau,
and shuian chen spearheaded the efforts to understand
promoter regulation. in the ovary and testes, aromatase
regulation occurs via a camp/ xxxd1773xxx  response element binding pathway, which can be enhanced or suppressed by several factors (table 1). of interest is that a
mutation of  xxxg2218xxx , a molecule upstream of amp kinase,
is associated with aromatase overexpressing testicular tumors, suggesting a role for amp kinase in aromatase reg-

fig 7. diagrammatic representation of the aromatase gene, the alternate exons i, and its location on chromosome 15. a different nomenclature
for the alternative exons evolved during contemporaneous studies in the laboratories of evan simpson and nobohiro harada. the simpson
nomenclature is that shown in fig. 3. in the case of the harada nomenclature, the placental promoter (i.1 above) is designated 1a; the adipose/
bone promoter (i.4 above) is 1b; i.3 above is 1c, and ii above is 1d. it was realized that bone employed a promoter that was identical to that found
in adipose tissue (264) (i.4/1b), whereas in brain another unique promoter was described by harada’s group and is named promoter 1f (361).
[reproduced from s. e. bulun et al.: journal of steroid biochemistry and molecular biology 86:219 –224, 2003, with permission from elsevier.]

358

santen et al.

history of aromatase

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

trated by studies of the er (288). low levels of expression,
its membrane-bound character, and heme binding instability
initially hampered studies of aromatase structure. for this
reason, a number of groups, including those of laughton,
graham-lorence, and evan simpson; koymans, zhang, and
chen; and kagawa sought to model the three dimensional
structure of the aromatase protein based on the known structures of other cytochrome p450 species. the first structures
published were those of soluble prokaryotic cytochrome
p450, and early modeling attempts were based on these
structures, which, however, had low sequence homology to
aromatase (27, 289, 290). structures of several mammalian
c. promoter switching
microsomal p450 species have been characterized subsean important concept regarding breast cancer is that quently (291), and models of aromatase have been built from
intratumoral factors can result in promoter switching with them (103). site-directed mutagenesis of critical residues in
a resultant enhancement of transcription. the groups of the catalytic site revealed by the modeling studies has led to
harada, simpson, and chen contributed substantially to the publication of proposed mechanisms of the aromatase
the initial findings (63, 286, 287). in normal adipose mes- reaction (27, 103, 289, 290). the methodology for a recent
enchymal cells, promoter i.4 drives the low levels of ex- model used expression in escherichia coli of a structurally
pression of aromatase. class 1 cytokines and tnf␣, stable and functionally active human aromatase (28). the
which are produced locally within the adipocytes, drive three-dimensional folding of this purified preparation has
this promoter. however in the presence of a tumor, the 3- been analyzed by limited proteolysis and proteomic methto 4-fold increase in aromatase expression is not due to an odology. the proposed reaction mechanism highlights the
increase in expression derived from promoter i.4, but significance of residues such as t310 and  xxxd309xxx  in the catarather promoter switching occurs such that the gonadal lytic reaction mechanism as well as that of the conserved
promoter (promoter ii) predominates (63, 286, 287). this cysteine,  xxxd1896xxx  (28).
promoter is regulated by a number of enhancer elements
final resolution of the structure-function relationships
(table 1) as well as suppressors but probably most im- of the aromatase-substrate complex required sufficient
portantly by pge2 via the camp pathway.
quantities of purified aromatase protein to allow crystallization. although several groups had previously used the
d. three-dimensional structure
expression of recombinant aromatase (292–294), this
optimal drug development depends upon precise knowl- methodology required expression system-dependent modiedge of the structural nature of the drug target, as best illusfications of the n terminus of the protein. very recently, the group of debashis ghosh* in buffalo, new york,
identified the actual three-dimensional
crystal structure of human aromatase
(30). his group achieved this by using
aromatase purified from placental microsomes as the source material—an
achievement requiring more than a decade of improvements in the biochemical purification techniques originated
by yoshio osawa. a view of the active
site of aromatase crystallized with androstenedione is shown in fig. 8 (see dynamic structure movie as supplemental
data on the endocrine society’s journals online website at: http://edrv.endojournals.org).a proposed mechanism for the third step of the reaction
fig 8. structure of the aromatase gene determined from the crystallization of aromatase
sequence is also presented in fig. 9. alulation (280 –282). these findings provide a key example
of how multi-institutional collaborations can enhance understanding of biological mechanisms by study of rare
disorders.
reduction of ovarian aromatase by brca 1 is also of
particular interest because mutations of this gene would be
expected to increase ovarian aromatase and are associated
with genetic forms of breast cancer (283–285). in adipose
tissue, the jak/stat pathway is involved and stimulated
by class i cytokines. regulation in both bone and brain
also involves a complex set of enhancers.

with its substrate, androstenedione (30). [reproduced from d. ghosh et al.: nature 457:219 –
223, 2009 (295) with permission from nature publishing group.]

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

fig 9. mechanism of a ring aromatization proposed from the crystal
structure model. [reprinted from d. ghosh et al.: nature 457:219 –
223, 2009 (295), with the permission of the authors and
publisher].[reproduced from d. ghosh et al.: nature 457:219 –223,
2009 (295) with permission from nature publishing group.]

though there are many similarities to the models previously published, there are also some important differences
in the disposition of key amino acids involved in the reaction mechanism. in particular,  xxxd309xxx  is shown to be
involved in enolization of the 3-oxo group, rather than
removal of the 2␤-hydrogen, which is instead facilitated
by the carbonyl group of a306 (30).

xii. biological function of aromatase in
specific organs
a. placenta

in late human pregnancy, approximately 20 mg/d of
estradiol is produced by the enzymatic action of placental
aromatase (51). dehydroepiandrosterone (dhea) sulfate, in relatively equal amounts from the maternal and
fetal adrenal glands, is converted to free dhea by the
sulfatase enzyme, then to androstenedione by 3 ␤-ol
dehydrogenase, then to estrone by aromatase, and finally to estradiol by 17 ␤-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(297). the formation of estriol involves a complex collaboration between the fetal adrenal and placenta. egon
diczfalusy’s laboratory pointed out the importance of the
feto-placental unit whereby dhea sulfate from fetal adrenal is hydroxylated at the 16␣ position in fetal liver and
then aromatized to estriol in the placenta and liver (298).
siiteri’s group demonstrated that the amount of aromatase
in liver increases substantially during pregnancy, probably
as a result of increasing cortisol levels (51). taken together, these mechanisms result in a total of 100 –150
mg/d of estriol production, 5- to 7-fold higher amounts
than for estradiol (51).
siiteri has recently suggested that estriol may be the
primary biological estrogen during late pregnancy (297).
estriol is readily available for tissue entry because it does
not bind tightly to shbg. in contrast, estradiol is less
available for tissue entry, although its levels in maternal
blood are higher than estriol. shbg circulates in high concentrations during pregnancy and binds estradiol with

edrv.endojournals.org

359

high affinity. although estriol was considered by some to
be a weak estrogen, studies in sheep (299) and in rat uteri
demonstrated its potent estrogen agonistic effects as a
stimulator of uterine weight and blood flow (299 –301).
optimal development and growth of the fetus depend on
adequate delivery of oxygen and nutrients across the
hemochorial placenta to the fetal circulation throughout
gestation. continued growth and development of the newborn infant depends on increased blood flow to the breasts
during gestation in preparation for lactation. taken together, these data emphasize a key biological role for
estriol, the major estrogen during pregnancy. on a more
hypothetical note, siiteri (297) postulates that perhaps
estriol may play a role in the known protective effects of
pregnancy on later breast cancer development.
b. brain

frederick naftolin* and collaborators first demonstrated
the presence of aromatase in primate brain by infusing tritiated androgens into the carotid arteries of monkeys and recovering tritiated estrogens from the jugular vein (302). the
groups of john resko* and charles roselli,* gloria callard,* jacques balthasart, and others directed attention to
the regulation of aromatase and its site-specific functions
in brain (303–306). an elegant demonstration of the
pathophysiological role of aromatase in the brain by
rachel hill, wah chin boon, and colleagues was the observation that aromatase knockout animals demonstrate
behavioral activity mimicking obsessive-compulsive disorder (307). also intriguing were the observations of
roselli and collaborators that rams preferring male partners exhibited enhanced aromatase activity in their sexually dimorphic nuclei (308, 309). in several species, mating
behavior is also controlled by the local effects of aromatase
acting at specific parts of the brain (310 –315). perhaps of
major importance is that aromatase appears to play a
key role in brain repair after various types of injury
(316 –319).
c. bones

a major surprise regarding bone physiology was the
finding that plasma estradiol levels correlate better with
bone mineral density than do testosterone levels in aging
men. this suggests a major role for aromatized androgens
on maintenance of bone mass in men (7, 320), which was
established by studies of the bone phenotype of aromatase-deficient men and of the man with er␣ deficiency
(321). the phenotypic findings included continued
growth into adulthood, genu valgum, unfused epiphyses,
and delayed bone age (322). studies of orhan oz and evan
simpson and his group with the aromatase knockout
mouse provided parallel evidence of a male bone phenotype in mice (323).

360

santen et al.

history of aromatase

d. testis

aromatase is present in various compartments of the
testis in all mammalian species studied (mice, bank vole,
bear, monkey, man) with localization to leydig cells, sertoli cells, gonocytes, spermatogonia, spermatocytes, spermatids, and spermatozoa (9). dr. anita payne was a pioneer in conducting studies on testicular aromatase using
classical isotopic methods to demonstrate aromatase activity (324). the physiological significance of local estrogen production in the testis is not precisely known. however, aromatase knockout mice exhibit an impairment of
spermatogenesis associated with a decrease in sperm motility and an inability to fertilize oocytes (325), suggesting
an important physiological role.
e. prostate

several investigators examined aromatase in benign
prostatic hypertrophy and in prostate cancer tissues but
reported conflicting results (326). however, the recent
studies of gail risbridger and colleagues demonstrated
aromatase in benign and malignant prostate tissue by
qualitative and quantitative pcr, assessment of specific
promoter usage, immunohistochemistry and enzyme assay. they found aromatase in benign tissue to be predominantly in stromal cells, but in cancer cells, both components contained this enzyme (327). tissue recombinant
experiments using aromatase knockout mice demonstrated a biological role for local aromatase and suggested
disparate roles for er␣ and er␤ agonists (327, 328). based
on the possible importance of aromatase in prostate cancer,
two clinical trials with aromatase inhibitors in this disease
were initiated but yielded negative results (329, 330).

xiii. clinical use of aromatase inhibitors in
gynecology and pediatrics
a. anovulation

the antiestrogen  xxxd1726xxx  (cc) currently
represents the standard agent for ovulation induction in
women with unexplained infertility or with world health
organization grade ii oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea
(i.e., normal fsh and estradiol levels). one of the adverse
pharmacological properties of cc is its long overall halflife. this results in a prolonged antiestrogenic effect on the
endometrium and cervix, with up to 30% of women experiencing a reduction in endometrial thickness and glandular density and increased number of vacuolated cells.
the antiestrogen retention at the hypothalamic and pituitary levels interferes with normal negative feedback
mechanisms and allows estradiol to rise to supraphysiological levels (331).
these properties of cc led the group of robert casper

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

to examine possible advantages of aromatase inhibitors in
patients with oligo- or anovulation (332–334). several potential advantages include a shorter drug half-life of
30 – 60 h with anastrozole and letrozole; a lack of antagonistic effect on uterus and cervix; retention of normal
regulation of pituitary/hypothalamic feedback; and an upregulation of ovarian fsh receptors as a result of increments in local androgen levels (333, 334). the regimen
initially chosen used 2.5 mg letrozole given orally for d 3–7
of the menstrual cycle. a small randomized controlled trial
of cc vs. letrozole (335) demonstrated several differences:
an average of two preovulatory follicles in response to cc
vs. one with the aromatase inhibitor; higher estradiol levels
after  xxxd2228xxx  in the cc group (2300
vs. 600 pm/liter with the aromatase inhibitor); and a nonsignificant difference in pregnancy rate (cc 5.6% vs. aromatase inhibitor 16.7%). later studies have used anastrozole, which is presumed to work similarly although
only preliminary comparative data with letrozole are
available (336 –339).
pregnancy data from three tertiary referral centers on
infertile couples reported 133 pregnancies with 2.5 or 5.0
mg letrozole, 113 pregnancies with cc alone or in combination with gonadotropins, 110 pregnancies with gonadotropins alone, and 38 pregnancies achieved without
ovarian stimulation (331, 340). pregnancy rates per cycle
were highest with letrozole plus fsh (20% per cycle) with
comparable miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy rates in all
groups. the aromatase inhibitor, however, was associated
with a lower rate of multiple gestations (4.3% vs. 22%
with the other therapies).
a recent study raised a note of caution because six congenital anomalies and one hepatocellular carcinoma were
observed in 150 births resulting from use of letrozole for
ovulation induction. these data were compared with a
database of 36,000 spontaneously conceived babies (341).
the overall rate of anomalies was not increased, but ovulation induction with letrozole was associated with a significant increase in locomotor and cardiac abnormalities.
to evaluate this more thoroughly, robert casper and colleagues conducted a study utilizing cc treated patients as
the control group (340). they studied 514 babies conceived in women treated with letrozole and 397 with cc
and found no increases in anomaly rate with the aromatase
inhibitor in any parameter. overall cardiac anomalies
were found in 0.2% in the letrozole group and 1.8% in
those receiving cc (p ⫽ 0.02). the rate of twins in the
letrozole group was 4.8 vs. 5.1% with cc. these data
would suggest that the use of aromatase inhibitors for
ovulation induction is promising and must now be confirmed in larger randomized, controlled trials.

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

b. endometriosis

endometriosis occurs in 6 –10% of premenopausal
women in the general population and in 30 –35% of
women evaluated for pelvic pain, infertility, or both. recent studies have reported overexpression of aromatase in
endometriotic implants as compared with normal endometrial tissue (342). with his interest in gynecological endocrinology, serdar bulun led a large group of investigators to study extensively the regulation of aromatase in
endometriotic tissue. they found that several factors involved in regulation of aromatase transcription are overexpressed, including pge2, camp, the transcription factor  xxxg1604xxx , and cox2 (342, 343). a positive
feedforward system has been proposed whereby steroidogenic acute regulatory, aromatase, estradiol, cox2, and
pge2 favor continuous formation of estrogen (344).
surgery is usually chosen for treatment of severe endometriosis or associated pain. however, the known physiology of endometriosis suggests that inhibition of estrogen production would ameliorate the symptoms. in
concert with this idea, gnrh superagonist analogs, the
impeded androgen  xxxd1806xxx , and bilateral oophorectomy
have been shown to relieve pain (344). however, nearly
half of women with endometriosis with chronic pain are
refractory to available treatments designed to lower estrogen production. this clinical observation provided impetus for development of aromatase inhibitors for women
with endometriosis. the rationale involved use of a combination of two approaches: 1) inhibition of ovarian function and circulating estrogen levels with progestins, combined estrogen plus progestin, or with gnrh superagonist
or antagonist analogs; and 2) blockade of in situ estrogen
synthesis in the endometriotic lesions.
an initial pilot trial provided preliminary evidence of
efficacy (345). soysal et al. (345) then conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing anastrozole plus the
gnrh analog  xxxd2229xxx  with anastrozole plus placebo in
80 premenopausal women with severe endometriosis
present after conservative surgery. both therapies reduced
symptom scores, but women in the combined aromatase
inhibitor/gnrh arm experienced a significantly longer
time to recurrence (⬎24 vs. 17 months). after 24 months,
57% were free of recurrence in the gnrh plus aromatase
inhibitor arm vs. 10.4% in the gnrh alone arm. based on
this study, the inhibition of local estrogen production in
combination with “medical oophorectomy” with a gnrh
analog appears promising but requires further study.
c. gynecomastia

this condition results from an increase in estrogen production (either local or systemic) or an abnormal ratio of
estrogen to testosterone (346, 347). glenn braunstein
(346) first suggested that overexpression of aromatase

edrv.endojournals.org

361

may underlie several forms of gynecomastia in adult men.
aromatase inhibitors alter both of these components and
have been used to treat gynecomastia. reports suggest
relief of breast pain but a lesser effect on reduction in the
size of the breast tissue (348). men with recent onset gynecomastia may respond to aromatase inhibitors to a
greater extent than those with long-standing changes. no
large, systematic studies in adults have compared aromatase inhibitors to antiestrogens.
d. short stature

clinical observations by cesare carani and his group in
men with aromatase deficiency and by eric smith in a male
patient with an er␣ knockout mutation suggest that lack
of estrogen action is associated with significant increases
in overall height due to lack of estrogen-induced epiphyseal closure (321, 349). in their adult years, aromatasedeficient men continue to grow well beyond puberty and
fail to close the epiphyses of their long bones, resulting in
marked enhancement in overall height. these observations suggested that inhibition of aromatase might prevent
closure of epiphyses in children or adolescents with a diminished, predicted adult height. several clinical disorders
compromise predicted adult height, including gh deficiency, the mccune-albright syndrome, familial malelimited precocious puberty, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, constitutional delay of puberty, and idiopathic short
statue. aromatase inhibitors have been used in each of
these disorders, and early results are promising (350, 351).
notably, the groups of leo dunkel and nelly mauras (331,
332) have led the way in performing extensive clinical studies
to enhance overall stature in adolescents with various forms
of short stature and have critically analyzed their data.
e. aromatase excess and deficiency syndromes

several families have been described in which both
males and females exhibit increased aromatase activity
and high estrogen levels with an autosomal dominant
form of inheritance (10, 352–354). the group of paul
macdonald described the first family (see section iii. a.)
and that of gary berkovitz the second. an intriguing notion is that the family of king tutankhamun, including
king tut himself, his brother smenkare, and his relatives
amenophis iii and amenophis iv (i.e., akhenaten) had
familial gynecomastia that could be related to aromatase
excess (355, 356). later families were described by a group
headed by constantine stratakis (357) and by masashi
demura, a colleague of serdar bulun, who (349) conducted careful genetic studies to reveal that regional rearrangements in chromosome 15q21 cause formation of
cryptic promoters for the aromatase gene resulting in aromatase overexpression (352). clinical features in males

362

santen et al.

history of aromatase

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

table 2. comparison of effects of aromatase deficiency in men and in mice
system

aromatase-deficient men

aromatase-deficient male mice

liver
carbohydrate metabolism and insulin resistance

hepatic steatosis
insulin resistance ⫾ diabetes
mellitus ⫾ glucose intolerance
overweight or obese
increased total cholesterol, increased
triglycerides
tall stature, unfused epiphyses,
decreased bmd
libido and sexual function appear
compromised anecdotally in
several cases, and in one case
based on a questionnaire

hepatic steatosis
insulin resistance, elevated fasting blood glucose

adiposity
serum lipids
bone
sexual behavior

age-progressive obesity
increased total cholesterol, increased
triglycerides
shorter femur length, decreased trabecular bone
volume and thickness
impaired copulatory behavior

derived from ref. 296.

include pre- or peripubertal gynecomastia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and compromised final height in
association with high circulating estrogen levels. hypogonadism results from the negative feedback effects of estradiol
to suppress gonadotropins, but this depends on the level of
severity of the aromatase deficiency. in women, the features
include precocious thelarche, macromastia, enlarged uterus,
and menstrual irregularities. second-generation aromatase
inhibitors have been useful in the treatment of these patients
(353).
the group of melvin grumbach in collaboration with
akira morishima, felix conte, and evan simpson described the first cases of aromatase deficiency (349). now
reported in seven males and 10 females (322, 358), this
condition prevents the placenta from metabolizing androgens to estrogens, and the female fetuses are exposed to
excessive androgen levels in utero resulting in androgenization of the female fetus and virilization of the mother
during pregnancy. phenotypic features in girls include clitoromegaly, scrotalization of labioscrotal folds, and occasionally a urogenital sinus. at puberty, the girls have
 xxxg1325xxx , lack of breast development, primary amenorrhea, and progressive virilization. at this time, all reported females with aromatase
deficiency have been placed on estrogen replacement at the
time of puberty, so there are no data as to the progression
of the condition into adulthood, unlike the situation in
men (see section xiv. a).

xiv. lessons learned from studies
of aromatase
a. importance of estrogens in the male

comparison of the phenotypes of aromatase-deficient
and normal males, both in mice and in men, provides compelling information regarding the role of estrogens in the
male. as shown in table 2, aromatase deficiency exerts

major effects on liver function, carbohydrate metabolism,
insulin sensitivity, adiposity, plasma lipids, bone, and sexual behavior. these observations, as well as examination
of the phenotypes of er␣ and er␤ knockout rodents and
a single er␣-deficient man, have led to the appreciation
that estrogens exert important actions in men as well as in
women (295, 321, 322, 359, 360, 362).
b. estrogen action via autocrine, intracrine, paracrine,
juxtacrine, and neurocrine mechanisms

as discussed in section iii. a., experimental data
over the past two decades have led to the realization that
hormones can be synthesized locally in nonglandular
tissue. these hormones then act directly in the cells of
synthesis (autocrine or intracrine function), in the cells
nearby (paracrine function), in the cells next to the site
of synthesis (juxtacrine function), or in neurons themselves (neurocrine function). physiological studies of
aromatase provided compelling examples of each of
these types of action. for example, in the brain, estradiol synthesized locally via aromatase exerts autocrine,
paracrine, juxtacrine, and neurocrine effects (306). in
the postmenopausal breast, local synthesis may also
be the predominant determinant of tissue estrogen
levels (62).

xv. summary and conclusions
the importance of aromatase has increased as our understanding of the scope of estrogen action has widened.
with the recognition of molecular defects in the er and in
aromatase expression, we now know that estrogen subserves multiple functions in males as well as in females.
thus, aromatase is important in brain function, bone metabolism, the metabolic syndrome, energy expenditure,
cardiovascular physiology, testis and prostate physiology,
and regulation of gonadotropin secretion in the male. the

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

production of estradiol by aromatase in extraglandular
tissues in postmenopausal women provides a compelling
example of the role of autocrine, paracrine, and intracrine
mechanisms. the story of the evolution of our understanding of these multiple roles for aromatase represents an
odyssey driven primarily by allowing observational data
to generate new hypotheses. the history of aromatase
outlines a success story where identification of a molecular target and inhibitors of it have led to substantially improved therapies for women with breast cancer.
several aspects of this success story such as the role of
serendipity, mentoring, critical masses of investigators,
key workshop meetings, molecular biology technical
advances, pharmaceutical support, and fruitful collaborations among investigators provide a roadmap for
advances in other areas.

acknowledgments
address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: dr. richard j.
santen, university of virginia health system, division of endocrinology, p.o. box 801416, charlottesville, virginia 22908. e-mail:
rjs5y@virginia.edu.
disclosure summary: e.r.s., p.k.s., h.b., and a.b. have nothing to
declare. r.j.s. served on the advisory boards of wyeth, meditrina, and
novo-nordisk pharmaceuticals and received consulting fees from
wyeth.

references
1. thayer sa, levin l, doisy ea 1931 characterization of
 xxxd2043xxx . j biol chem 91:655– 665
2. veler cd, thayer s, doisy ea 1930 the preparation of the
crystalline follicular ovarian hormone:  xxxd2045xxx . j biol chem
87:357–371
3. butenandt a 1929 uber “ xxxd2037xxx ” ein krystallisiertes weibliches sexualhormon. die naturwissenschaften 17:879
4. butenandt a 1931 uber die chemische untersuchung der
sexualhormone. zeitschrift fur angewandte chemie 44:
905–908
5. fieser lf, fieser m 1959 steroids. baltimore, md; waverly
press
6. simpson er, misso m, hewitt kn, hill ra, boon wc,
jones me, kovacic a, zhou j, clyne cd 2005 estrogen–
the good, the bad, and the unexpected. endocr rev 26:
322–330
7. khosla s, melton 3rd lj, riggs bl 2002 clinical review
144: estrogen and the male skeleton. j clin endocrinol
metab 87:1443–1450
8. santen rj 1981 feedback control of luteinizing hormone
and follicle-stimulating hormone secretion by testosterone and estradiol in men: physiological and clinical implications. clin biochem 14:243–251
9. lambard s, silandre d, delalande c, denis-galeraud i,
bourguiba s, carreau s 2005 aromatase in testis: expression and role in male reproduction. j steroid biochem mol biol 95:63– 69

edrv.endojournals.org

363

10. hemsell dl, edman cd, marks jf, siiteri pk, macdonald
pc 1977 massive extraglandular aromatization of plasma
androstenedione resulting in feminization of a prepubertal
boy. j clin invest 60:455– 464
11. bernard c 1865 an introduction to the study of experimental medicine. vi. doubt in experimental reasoning.
classics of medicine library. birmingham, al: gryphon
editions ltd.; 48 –52
12. zondek b 1934 oestrogenic hormone in the urine of the
stallion. nature 133:494
13. steinach e, kun h 1937 transformation of male sex hormones into a substance with the action of a female hormone. lancet 133:845
14. meyer as 1955 conversion of 19-hydroxy-␦4-androstene3, xxxd2153xxx  to estrone by endocrine tissue. biochim biophys
acta 17:441– 442
15. meyer as, hayano m, lindberg mc, gut m, rodgers og
1955 the conversion of ␦  xxxd176xxx -4-c14
and dehydroepiandrosterone by bovine adrenal homogenate preparations. acta endocrinol 18:148 –168
16. ryan kj 1959 biological aromatization of steroids. j biol
chem 234:268 –272
17. baggett b, dorfman ri, engel ll, savard k 1956 the
conversion of testosterone-3-c14 to c14-estradiol-17␤ by
human ovarian tissue. j biol chem 221:931–941
18. gut m 1962 some aspects of stereoselectivity in the introduction of tritium into steroids. the 5th annual symposium on advances in tracer methodology. washington
dc: plenum press
19. schwarzel wc, kruggel wg, brodie hj 1973 studies on
the mechanism of estrogen biosynthesis. 8. the development of inhibitors of the enzyme system in human placenta.
endocrinology 92:866 – 880
20. gual c, morato t, hayano m, gut m, dorfman ri 1962
biosynthesis of estrogens. endocrinology 71:920 –925
21. morato t, hayano m, dorfman ri, axelrod lr 1961 the
intermediate steps in the biosynthesis of estrogens from
androgens. biochem biophys res commun 6:334 –338
22. thompson jr ea, siiteri pk 1974 utilization of oxygen and
 xxxd532xxx  phosphate by
human placental microsomes during aromatization of androstenedione. j biol chem 249:5364 –5372
23. thompson jr ea, siiteri pk 1974 the involvement of human placental microsomal cytochrome p-450 in aromatization. j biol chem 249:5373–5378
24. hahn ef, fishman j 1984 immunological probe of estrogen
biosynthesis. evidence for the 2 ␤-hydroxylative pathway in
aromatization of androgens. j biol chem 259:1689 –1694
25. fishman j, guzik h, dixon d 1969 stereochemistry of
estrogen biosynthesis. biochemistry 8:4304 – 4309
26. caspi e, njar vc 1987 concerning the pathway from 19oxoandrost-4-ene-3, xxxd2153xxx  to estrone. steroids 50:347–
362
27. graham-lorence s, amarneh b, white re, peterson ja,
simpson er 1995 a three-dimensional model of aromatase cytochrome p450. protein science 4:1065–1080
28. hong y, yu b, sherman m, yuan yc, zhou d, chen s
2007 molecular basis for the aromatization reaction and
exemestane-mediated irreversible inhibition of human aromatase. mol endocrinol 21:401– 414
29. lieberman s, ma s, he y 2005 new assumptions about
oxidative processes involved in steroid hormone biosyn-

364

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

thesis: is the role of cytochrome p-450-activated dioxygen
limited to hydroxylation reactions or are dioxygen insertion reactions also possible? j steroid biochem mol biol
94:405– 420
ghosh d, griswold j, erman m, pangborn w 2009 structural basis for androgen specificity and oestrogen synthesis
in human aromatase. nature 457:219 –223
brodie hj, hayano m, gut m 1962 the stereochemical
course of catalytic hydrogenation of ring a unsaturated
steroids. j am chem soc 84:3766 –3767
morato t, raab k, brodie hj, hayano m, dorfman ri
1962 the mechanism of estrogen biosynthesis. j am chem
soc 84:3764 –3766
townsley jd, brodie hj 1968 studies on the mechanism of
estrogen biosynthesis. 3. the stereochemistry of aromatization of c19 and c18 steroids. biochemistry 7:33– 40
thompson jr ea, siiteri pk 1979 subcellular distribution
of aromatase in human placenta and ovary. horm res 11:
179 –185
marsh da, brodie hj, garrett w, tsai-morris ch, brodie
am 1985 aromatase inhibitors. synthesis and biological
activity of androstenedione derivatives. j med chem 28:
788 –795
brueggemeier rw, li pk, snider ce, darby mv, katlic
ne 1987 7 ␣-substituted androstenediones as effective in
vitro and in vivo inhibitors of aromatase. steroids 50:163–
178
brueggemeier rw, li pk, chen hh, moh pp, katlic ne
1990 biochemical and pharmacological development of
steroidal inhibitors of aromatase. j steroid biochem mol
biol 37:379 –385
marcotte pa, robinson ch 1982 synthesis and evaluation
of 10 ␤-substituted 4-estrene-3, 17-diones as inhibitors of
human placental microsomal aromatase. steroids 39:325–
344
brodie hj, kripalani kj, possanza g 1969 studies on the
mechanism of estrogen biosynthesis. vi. the stereochemistry of hydrogen elimination at c-2 during aromatization.
j am chem soc 91:1241–1242
brodie hj, kripalani kj, possanza g 1969 studies on the
mechanism of estrogen biosynthesis vi. the stereochemistry of hydrogen elimination of c-2 during aromatization.
j am chem soc 91:1241–1242
bolton s, siiteri pk, studies of aromatizing enzymes of the
placenta. proc of annual meeting of society for gynecologic investigation, denver, colorado, 1969 (abstract
p-37)
chakraborty j, hopkins r, parke dv 1972 inhibition
studies on the aromatization of  xxxd176xxx 
by human placental microsomal preparations. biochem j
130:19p–20p
jordan vc, brodie am 2007 development and evolution
of therapies targeted to the  xxxg730xxx  for the treatment and prevention of breast cancer. steroids 72:7–25
harper mj, walpole al 1967 a new derivative of triphenylethylene: effect on implantation and mode of action in
rats. j reprod fertil 13:101–119
harper mj, walpole al 1966 contrasting endocrine activities of cis and trans isomers in a series of substituted
triphenylethylenes. nature 212:87
barone rm, shamonki im, siiteri pk, judd hl 1979 inhibition of peripheral aromatization of androstenedione to

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

47.

48.

49.

50.
51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

estrone in postmenopausal women with breast cancer using ␦ 1-testololactone. j clin endocrinol metab 49:672–
676
grodin jm, siiteri pk, macdonald pc 1973 source of
estrogen production in postmenopausal women. j clin endocrinol metab 36:207–214
macdonald pc, rombaut rp, siiteri pk 1967 plasma precursors of estrogen. i. extent of conversion of plasma ␦-4androstenedione to estrone in normal males and nonpregnant normal, castrate and adrenalectomized females. j clin
endocrinol metab 27:1103–1111
macdonald pc, siiteri pk 1966 the in vivo mechanisms of
origin of estrogen in subjects with trophoblastic tumors.
steroids 8:589 – 603
siiteri pk, thompson ea 1975 studies of human placental
aromatase. j steroid biochem 6:317–322
siiteri pk, macdonald pc 1966 placental estrogen biosynthesis during human pregnancy. j clin endocrinol
metab 26:751–761
siiteri pk, the origin of placental estrogen during human
pregnancy. proc of the 2nd international congress on hormonal steroids, milan, italy, 1966. in: macdonald pc, ed.
excerpta medica foundation, international congress series 132:726 –732
thompson ea, siiteri pk 1973 studies on the aromatization of c-19 androgens. ann ny acad sci 212:378 –391
schindler ae, ebert a, friedrich e 1972 conversion of
androstenedione to estrone by human tissue. j clin endocrinol metab 35:627– 630
adams jb, li k 1975 biosynthesis of 17␤- xxxd2037xxx  in
human breast carcinoma tissue and a novel method for its
characterization. br j cancer 31:429 – 433
abul-hajj yj, iverson r, kiang dt 1979 aromatization of
androgens by human breast cancer. steroids 33:205–222
perel e, blackstein me, killinger dw 1982 aromatase in
human breast carcinoma. cancer res 42(8 suppl):3369s–
3372s
tilson-mallett n, santner sj, feil pd, santen rj 1983 biological significance of aromatase activity in human breast
tumors. j clin endocrinol metab 57:1125–1128
lipton a, santen rj, santner sj, harvey ha, sanders si,
matthews yl 1992 prognostic value of breast cancer aromatase. cancer 70:1951–1955
lu q, nakmura j, savinov a, yue w, weisz j, dabbs dj,
wolz g, brodie a 1996 expression of aromatase protein
and messenger ribonucleic acid in tumor epithelial cells and
evidence of functional significance of locally produced estrogen in human breast cancers. endocrinology 137:3061–
3068
santen rj, martel j, hoagland m, naftolin f, roa l,
harada n, hafer l, zaino r, santner sj 1994 stromal
spindle cells contain aromatase in human breast tumors.
j clin endocrinol metab 79:627– 632
yue w, wang jp, hamilton cj, demers lm, santen rj
1998 in situ aromatization enhances breast tumor estradiol
levels and cellular proliferation. cancer res 58:927–932
agarwal vr, bulun se, leitch m, rohrich r, simpson er
1996 use of alternative promoters to express the aromatase
cytochrome p450 ( xxxg574xxx ) gene in breast adipose tissues of
cancer-free and breast cancer patients. j clin endocrinol
metab 81:3843–3849
sasano h, frost ar, saitoh r, harada n, poutanen m,

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

vihko r, bulun se, silverberg sg, nagura h 1996 aro-

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

matase and 17 ␤-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 in
human breast carcinoma. j clin endocrinol metab 81:4042–
4046
suzuki t, moriya t, ishida t, ohuchi n, sasano h 2003
intracrine mechanism of estrogen synthesis in breast cancer. biomed pharmacother 57:460 – 462
miller wr, dixon jm 2001 local endocrine effects of aromatase inhibitors within the breast. j steroid biochem mol
biol 79:93–102
sasano h, anderson tj, silverberg sg, santen rj, conway
m, edwards dp, krause a, bhatnagar as, evans db,
miller wr 2005 the validation of new aromatase monoclonal antibodies for immunohistochemistry–a correlation with
biochemical activities in 46 cases of breast cancer. j steroid
biochem mol biol 95:35–39
santen rj, martel j, hoagland m, naftolin f, roa l,
harada n, hafer l, zaino r, pauley r, santner s 1998
demonstration of aromatase activity and its regulation in
breast tumor and benign breast fibroblasts. breast cancer
res treat 49(suppl 9):s93–s99
shenton kc, dowsett m, lu q, brodie a, sasano h, sacks
np, rowlands mg 1998 comparison of biochemical aromatase activity with aromatase immunohistochemistry in human breast carcinomas. breast cancer res treat 49(suppl
1):s101–s107
pauley rj, santner sj, tait lr, bright rk, santen rj 2000
regulated  xxxg574xxx  aromatase transcription in breast stromal fibroblasts. j clin endocrinol metab 85:837– 846
miki y, suzuki t, tazawa c, yamaguchi y, kitada k,
honma s, moriya t, hirakawa h, evans db, hayashi s,
ohuchi n, sasano h 2007 aromatase localization in human breast cancer tissues: possible interactions between
intratumoral stromal and parenchymal cells. cancer res
67:3945–3954
mor g, yue w, santen rj, gutierrez l, eliza m, berstein
lm, harada n, wang j, lysiak j, diano s, naftolin f 1998
macrophages, estrogen and the microenvironment of
breast cancer. j steroid biochem mol biol 67:403– 411
leek rd, lewis ce, whitehouse r, greenall m, clarke j,
harris al 1996 association of macrophage infiltration
with angiogenesis and prognosis in invasive breast carcinoma. cancer res 56:4625– 4629
pasqualini jr, chetrite g, blacker c, feinstein mc,
delalonde l, talbi m, maloche c 1996 concentrations
of estrone, estradiol, and  xxxd2046xxx  and evaluation
of sulfatase and aromatase activities in pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer patients. j clin endocrinol
metab 81:1460 –1464
geisler j 2003 breast cancer tissue estrogens and their manipulation with aromatase inhibitors and inactivators. j
steroid biochem mol biol 86:245–253
wang s, paris f, sultan cs, song rx, demers lm,
sundaram b, settlage j, ohorodnik s, santen rj 2005 recombinant cell ultrasensitive bioassay for measurement of
estrogens in postmenopausal women. j clin endocrinol
metab 90:1407–1413
larionov aa, berstein lm, miller wr 2002 local uptake
and synthesis of  xxxd2045xxx  in normal and malignant postmenopausal breast tissues. j steroid biochem mol biol 81:
57– 64

edrv.endojournals.org

365

78. reed mj, beranek pa, ghilchik mw, james vh 1986 estrogen production and metabolism in normal postmenopausal women and postmenopausal women with breast or
endometrial cancer. eur j cancer clin oncol 22:1395–
1400
79. dunbier ak, anderson h, folkerd e, ghazoui z, smith ie,
ellis mj (for neoadjuvant letrozole study group), dowsett
m, expression of estrogen responsive genes in breast cancers
correlates with plasma estradiol levels in postmenopausal
women. proc 31st annual san antonio breast cancer symposium, san antonio, texas (abstract 63)
80. o’neill js, elton ra, miller wr 1988 aromatase activity
in adipose tissue from breast quadrants: a link with tumour
site. br med j (clin res ed) 296:741–743
81. bulun se, sharda g, rink j, sharma s, simpson er 1996
distribution of aromatase p450 transcripts and adipose
fibroblasts in the human breast. j clin endocrinol metab
81:1273–1277
82. zhao y, agarwal vr, mendelson cr, simpson er 1996
estrogen biosynthesis proximal to a breast tumor is stimulated by pge2 via  xxxd1773xxx , leading to activation of
promoter ii of the  xxxg574xxx  (aromatase) gene. endocrinology 137:5739 –5742
83. brueggemeier rw 2002 overview of the pharmacology of
the aromatase inactivator exemestane. breast cancer res
treat 74:177–185
84. harris re, namboodiri kk, farrar wb 1996 nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and breast cancer. epidemiology 7:203–205
85. chetrite gs, cortes-prieto j, philippe jc, wright f,
pasqualini jr 2000 comparison of estrogen concentrations,  xxxg2222xxx  and aromatase activities in normal,
and in cancerous, human breast tissues. j steroid biochem
mol biol 72:23–27
86. santner sj, feil pd, santen rj 1984 in situ estrogen production via the  xxxg2222xxx  pathway in breast tumors:
relative importance versus the aromatase pathway. j clin
endocrinol metab 59:29 –33
87. reed mj, purohit a, woo lw, newman sp, potter bv
2005  xxxg2222xxx : molecular biology, regulation, and
inhibition. endocr rev 26:171–202
88. masamura s, santner sj, santen rj 1996 evidence of in situ
estrogen synthesis in nitrosomethylurea-induced rat mammary tumors via the enzyme  xxxg2222xxx . j steroid
biochem mol biol 58:425– 429
89. brodie am, schwarzel wc, shaikh aa, brodie hj 1977
the effect of an aromatase inhibitor,  xxxd2153xxx , on estrogen-dependent processes in reproduction and breast cancer. endocrinology 100:1684 –
1695
90. bellino fl, gilani ss, eng ss, osawa y, duax wl 1976
active-site-directed inactivation of aromatase from human
placental microsomes by brominated androgen derivatives. biochemistry 15:4730 – 4736
91. brueggemeier rw, floyd ee, counsell re 1978 synthesis
and biochemical evaluation of inhibitors of estrogen biosynthesis. j med chem 21:1007–1011
92. henderson d, norbisrath g, kerb u 1986 1-methyl-1,4androstadiene-3, xxxd2153xxx  (sh 489): characterization of an
irreversible inhibitor of estrogen biosynthesis. j steroid
biochem 24:303–306
93. kellis jr jt, childers we, robinson ch, vickery le 1987

366

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.
108.

109.

110.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

inhibition of aromatase cytochrome p-450 by 10-oxirane
and 10-thiirane substituted androgens. implications for the
structure of the active site. j biol chem 262:4421– 4426
childers we, shih mj, furth ps, robinson ch 1987 stereoselective inhibition of human placental aromatase. steroids 50:121–134
bednarski pj, porubek dj, nelson sd 1985 thiol-containing androgens as suicide substrates of aromatase. j med
chem 28:775–779
burkhart jp, weintraub pm, wright cl, johnston jo
1985 novel silylated steroids as aromatase inhibitors. steroids 45:357–374
peet np, burkhart jp, wright cl, johnston jo 1992 timedependent inhibition of human placental aromatase with a
2,19-methyleneoxy-bridged androstenedione. j med chem
35:3303–3306
johnston jo, wright cl, burkhart jp, peet np 1993 biological characterization of a-ring steroids. j steroid biochem mol biol 44:623– 631
brueggemeier rw 1994 aromatase inhibitors—mechanisms of steroidal inhibitors. breast cancer res treat 30:
31– 42
brodie am, garrett wm, hendrickson jr, tsai-morris
ch, marcotte pa, robinson ch 1981 inactivation of aromatase in vitro by  xxxd2153xxx 
and 4-acetoxy- xxxd176xxx  and sustained effects in vivo. steroids 38:693–702
flynn ga, johnston jo, wright cl, metcalf bw 1981 the
time-dependent inactivation of aromatase by 17␤-hydroxy-10-methylthioestra-1,4-dien-3-one. biochem biophys res commun 103:913–918
covey df, hood wf, parikh vd 1981 10 ␤-propynylsubstituted steroids. mechanism-based enzyme-activated
irreversible inhibitors of estrogen biosynthesis. j biol
chem 256:1076 –1079
favia ad, cavalli a, masetti m, carotti a, recanatini m
2006 three-dimensional model of the human aromatase
enzyme and density functional parameterization of the
iron-containing  xxxd3037xxx  for a molecular dynamics study of heme-cysteinato cytochromes. proteins
62:1074 –1087
brodie am, longcope c 1980 inhibition of peripheral aromatization by aromatase inhibitors, 4-hydroxy- and 4-acetoxy-androstene-3, xxxd2153xxx . endocrinology 106:19 –21
beatson gt 1896 on the treatment of inoperable cases of
carcinoma of the mamma. suggestions for a new method of
treatment with illustrative cases. lancet ii:104 –107
santen rj, manni a, harvey h, redmond c 1990 endocrine treatment of breast cancer in women. endocr rev
11:221–265
lipsett mb, pearson oh 1957 endocrine therapy of metastatic breast cancer. postgrad med 21:571–576
lipsett mb, whitmore jr wf, treves n, west cd, randall
ht, pearson oh 1957 bilateral adrenalectomy in the palliation of metastatic breast cancer. cancer 10:111–119
manni a, trujillo j, brodkey j, marshall js, pearson oh
1977 treatment of breast cancer with antiestrogen: approach to medical hypophysectomy? trans assoc am physicians 90:342–352
segaloff a, cuningham m, weeth jb, rongone el, meyer
kk 1963 hormonal therapy in cancer of the breast. xxii.

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.
123.
124.

125.

126.

127.
128.

129.

effect of 17␣-methyl-5␤-dihydrotestosterone on clinical
course and hormonal excretion. cancer 16:1113–1118
carter ac, sedransk n, kelley rm, ansfield fj, ravdin
rg, talley rw, potter nr 1977 diethylstilbestrol: recommended dosages for different categories of breast cancer patients. report of the cooperative breast cancer
group. jama 237:2079 –2088
cash r, brough aj, cohen mn, satoh ps 1967  xxxd147xxx  ( xxxd147xxx -ciba) as an inhibitor of adrenal steroidogenesis: mechanism of action and therapeutic trial.
j clin endocrinol metab 27:1239 –1248
griffiths ct, hall tc, saba z, barlow jj, nevinny hb
1973 preliminary trial of  xxxd147xxx  in breast cancer. cancer 32:31–37
newsome hh, brown pw, terz jj, lawrence jr w 1977
medical and surgical adrenalectomy in patients with advanced breast carcinoma. cancer 39:542–546
santen rj, lipton a, kendall j 1974 successful medical
adrenalectomy with amino- xxxd2214xxx . role of altered
drug metabolism. jama 230:1661–1665
santen rj 1981 suppression of estrogens with  xxxd147xxx  and hydrocortisone (medical adrenalectomy) as
treatment of advanced breast carcinoma: a review. breast
cancer res treat 1:183–202
santen rj, santner s, davis b, veldhuis j, samojlik e, ruby
e 1978  xxxd147xxx  inhibits extraglandular estrogen production in postmenopausal women with breast carcinoma. j clin endocrinol metab 47:1257–1265
goss pe, strasser k 2001 aromatase inhibitors in the treatment and prevention of breast cancer. j clin oncol 19:
881– 894
gibson lj, dawson ck, lawrence dh, bliss jm 2007 aromatase inhibitors for treatment of advanced breast cancer in
postmenopausal women. cochrane database of systematic
reviews: cd003370
lonning pe 2004 oestrogen suppression—lessons from
clinical studies. best pract res clin endocrinol metab 18:
33– 45
rose c 2003 a comparison of the efficacy of aromatase
inhibitors in second-line treatment of metastatic breast
cancer. am j clin oncol 26:s9 –s16
mokbel k 2002 the evolving role of aromatase inhibitors
in breast cancer. int j clin oncol 7:279 –283
de crémoux p 2000 [aromatase inhibitors: pharmacological aspects]. [french]. bull cancer 87 spec no. 23–29
reddy p 1998 a review of the newer aromatase inhibitors
in the management of metastatic breast cancer. j clin
pharm ther 23:81–90
cocconi g 1994 first generation aromatase inhibitors—
 xxxd147xxx  and testololactone. breast cancer res
treat 30:57– 80
dowsett m, coombes rc 1994 second generation aromatase inhibitor—  xxxd2153xxx . breast cancer res treat 30:81– 87
santen rj 1992 obituary regarding william mcguire.
breast cancer res treat 23:7–15
samojlik e, santen rj, worgul tj 1982 plasma estrone-sulfate: assessment of reduced estrogen production during treatment of metastatic breast carcinoma. steroids 39:497–507
samojlik e, santen rj, kirschner ma, ertel nh 1982 steroid hormone profiles in women treated with aminoglu-

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

tethimide for metastatic carcinoma of the breast. cancer
res 42(8 suppl):3349s–3352s
santen rj, worgul tj, samojlik e, boucher ae, lipton a,
harvey h 1982 adequacy of estrogen suppression with
 xxxd147xxx  and hydrocortisone as treatment of human breast cancer: correlation of hormonal data with clinical responses. cancer res 42(8 suppl):3397s–3401s
harvey ha, santen rj, osterman j, samojlik e, white ds,
lipton a 1979 a comparative trial of transsphenoidal hypophysectomy and estrogen suppression with  xxxd147xxx  in advanced breast cancer. cancer 43:2207–2214
santen rj, worgul tj, samojlik e, interrante a, boucher
ae, lipton a, harvey ha, white ds, smart e, cox c,
wells sa 1981 a randomized trial comparing surgical adrenalectomy with  xxxd147xxx  plus hydrocortisone
in women with advanced breast cancer. n engl j med
305:545–551
santen rj, samojlik e, wells sa 1980 resistance of the
ovary to blockade of aromatization with  xxxd147xxx . j clin endocrinol metab 51:473– 477
smith ie, harris al, morgan m, gazet jc, mckinna ja
1982 tamoxifen versus  xxxd147xxx  versus combined tamoxifen and  xxxd147xxx  in the treatment
of advanced breast carcinoma. cancer res 42(8 suppl):
3430s–3433s
gale ke, andersen jw, tormey dc, mansour eg, davis
te, horton j, wolter jm, smith tj, cummings fj 1994
hormonal treatment for metastatic breast cancer. an eastern cooperative oncology group phase iii trial comparing
 xxxd147xxx  to tamoxifen. cancer 73:354 –361
harvey ha, lipton a, white ds, santen rj, boucher ae,
shafik as, dixon rj 1982 cross-over comparison of tamoxifen and  xxxd147xxx  in advanced breast cancer. cancer res 42(8 suppl):3451s–3453s
lipton a, harvey ha, santen rj 1982 closing remarks to
the conference, aromatase: new perspectives for breast
cancer. cancer res 42(8 suppl):3468s
santen rj 1982 introduction to the conference, aromatase: new perspectives for breast cancer. cancer res
42(8 suppl):3268s
dowsett m, jeffcoate sl, santner s, santen rj, stuartharris r, smith ie 1985 low-dose  xxxd147xxx  and
aromatase inhibition. lancet 1:175–176
harris al, dowsett m, smith ie, jeffcoate sl 1983 endocrine effects of low dose  xxxd147xxx  alone in
advanced postmenopausal breast cancer. br j cancer 47:
621– 627
harris al, dowsett m, smith ie, jeffcoate s 1984 hydrocortisone alone vs hydrocortisone plus  xxxd147xxx :
a comparison of the endocrine effects in postmenopausal
breast cancer. eur j cancer clin oncol 20:463– 469
stuart-harris r, dowsett m, d’souza a, donaldson a,
harris al, jeffcoate sl, smith ie 1985 endocrine effects of
low dose  xxxd147xxx  as an aromatase inhibitor in
the treatment of breast cancer. clin endocrinol (oxf) 22:
219 –226
samojlik e, santen rj 1980 potency of the effect of
d-stereoisomer of  xxxd147xxx  on adrenal and extraadrenal steroidogenesis. j clin endocrinol metab 51:
462– 465
coombes rc, goss p, dowsett m, gazet jc, brodie a 1984

edrv.endojournals.org

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

367

 xxxd2153xxx  in treatment of postmenopausal
patients with advanced breast cancer. lancet 2:1237–1239
chen d, washbrook e, sarwar n, bates gj, pace pe,
thirunuvakkarasu v, taylor j, epstein rj, fuller-pace fv,
egly jm, coombes rc, ali s 2002 phosphorylation of
human  xxxg730xxx  ␣ at serine 118 by two distinct
signal transduction pathways revealed by phosphorylation-specific antisera. oncogene 21:4921– 4931
dowsett m, goss pe, powles tj, hutchinson g, brodie
am, jeffcoate sl, coombes rc 1987 use of the aromatase
inhibitor  xxxd2153xxx  in postmenopausal
breast cancer: optimization of therapeutic dose and route.
cancer res 47:1957–1961
dowsett m, cunningham dc, stein rc, evans s, dehennin
l, hedley a, coombes rc 1989 dose-related endocrine effects and pharmacokinetics of oral and intramuscular  xxxd2153xxx  in postmenopausal breast cancer patients. cancer res 49:1306 –1312
goss pe, jarman m, wilkinson jr, coombes rc 1986
metabolism of the aromatase inhibitor  xxxd2153xxx  in vivo. identification of the glucuronide as a
major urinary metabolite in patients and biliary metabolite
in the rat. j steroid biochem 24:619 – 622
pérez carrión r, alberola candel v, calabresi f, michel
rt, santos r, delozier t, goss p, mauriac l, feuilhade f,
freue m 1994 comparison of the selective aromatase
inhibitor  xxxd2153xxx  with tamoxifen as first-line hormonal therapy in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. ann oncol 5(suppl 7):s19 –s24
geisler j, lønning pe 2005 endocrine effects of aromatase
inhibitors and inactivators in vivo: review of data and
method limitations. j steroid biochem mol biol 95:75– 81
steele re, mellor lb, sawyer wk, wasvary jm, browne
lj 1987 in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrating potent
and selective estrogen inhibition with the nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor cgs 16949a. steroids 50:147–161
demers lm, melby jc, wilson te, lipton a, harvey ha,
santen rj 1990 the effects of cgs 16949a, an aromatase
inhibitor on adrenal mineralocorticoid biosynthesis. j clin
endocrinol metab 70:1162–1166
trunet pf, mueller p, girard f, aupetit b, bhatnagar as,
zognbi f, ezzet f, menard j 1992 the effects of  xxxd2080xxx 
hydrochloride on aldosterone secretion in healthy male
subjects. j clin endocrinol metab 74:571–576
demers lm 1994 effects of  xxxd2080xxx  (cgs 16949a) and
letrozole ( xxxd2459xxx ) on the inhibition of aromatase activity in breast cancer patients. breast cancer res treat
30:95–102
tominaga t, adachi i, sasaki y, tabei t, ikeda t, takatsuka y, toi m, suwa t, ohashi y 2003 double-blind randomised trial comparing the non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors letrozole and  xxxd2080xxx  in postmenopausal women with
advanced breast cancer. ann oncol 14:62–70
jordan vc 1987 laboratory models of breast cancer to aid
the elucidation of antiestrogen action. j lab clin med 109:
267–277
mattern j, bak m, hahn ew, volm m 1988 human tumor
xenografts as model for drug testing. cancer metastasis
rev 7:263–284
lee es, schafer jm, yao k, england g, o’regan rm, de
los reyes a, jordan vc 2000 cross-resistance of triphenylethylene-type antiestrogens but not  xxxd2165xxx  in

368

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

tamoxifen-stimulated breast tumors grown in athymic mice.
clinical cancer research 6:4893– 4899
osborne ck, coronado-heinsohn eb, hilsenbeck sg,
mccue bl, wakeling ae, mcclelland ra, manning dl,
nicholson ri 1995 comparison of the effects of a pure
steroidal antiestrogen with those of tamoxifen in a model
of human breast cancer. j natl cancer inst 87:746 –750
yue w, zhou d, chen s, brodie a 1994 a new nude mouse
model for postmenopausal breast cancer using mcf-7
cells transfected with the human aromatase gene. cancer
res 54:5092–5095
zhou dj, pompon d, chen sa 1990 stable expression of
human aromatase complementary dna in mammalian
cells: a useful system for aromatase inhibitor screening.
cancer res 50:6949 – 6954
santner sj, chen s, zhou d, korsunsky z, martel j, santen
rj 1993 effect of androstenedione on growth of untransfected and aromatase-transfected mcf-7 cells in culture. j
steroid biochem mol biol 44:611– 616
yue w, wang j, savinov a, brodie a 1995 effect of aromatase inhibitors on growth of mammary tumors in a nude
mouse model. cancer res 55:3073–3077
lu q, yue w, wang j, liu y, long b, brodie a 1998 the
effects of aromatase inhibitors and antiestrogens in the
nude mouse model. breast cancer res treat 50:63–71
lu q, liu y, long bj, grigoryev d, gimbel m, brodie a
1999 the effect of combining aromatase inhibitors with
antiestrogens on tumor growth in a nude mouse model for
breast cancer. breast cancer res treat 57:183–192
jelovac d, macedo l, goloubeva og, handratta v, brodie
am 2005 additive antitumor effect of aromatase inhibitor
letrozole and antiestrogen  xxxd2165xxx  in a postmenopausal
breast cancer model. cancer res 65:5439 –5444
long bj, jelovac d, handratta v, thiantanawat a,
macpherson n, ragaz j, goloubeva og, brodie am 2004
therapeutic strategies using the aromatase inhibitor letrozole and tamoxifen in a breast cancer model. j natl cancer
inst 96:456 – 465
klein ko, demers lm, santner sj, baron j, cutler jr gb,
santen rj 1995 use of ultrasensitive recombinant cell bioassay to measure estrogen levels in women with breast cancer receiving the aromatase inhibitor, letrozole. j clin endocrinol metab 80:2658 –2660
demers lm, lipton a, harvey ha, kambic kb, grossberg
h, brady c, santen rj 1993 the efficacy of  xxxd2459xxx  in
suppressing estrogen biosynthesis in patients with advanced stage breast cancer. j steroid biochem mol biol
44:687– 691
dowsett m, donaldson k, tsuboi m, wong j, yates r
2000 effects of the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole on serum oestrogens in japanese and caucasian women. cancer
chemother pharmacol 46:35–39
geisler j, lønning pe 2006 aromatase inhibitors as adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. crit rev oncol hematol
57:53– 61
geisler j, king n, dowsett m, ottestad l, lundgren s,
walton p, kormeset po, lønning pe 1996 influence of
anastrozole (arimidex), a selective, non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor, on in vivo aromatisation and plasma oestrogen levels in postmenopausal women with breast cancer. br j cancer 74:1286 –1291
geisler j, king n, anker g, ornati g, di salle e, lønning

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

pe, dowsett m 1998 in vivo inhibition of aromatization by
exemestane, a novel irreversible aromatase inhibitor, in
postmenopausal breast cancer patients. clin cancer res
4:2089 –2093
kleeberg ur, dowsett m, carrion rp, dodwell dj, vorobiof
da, aparicio la, robertson jf 1997 a randomised comparison of oestrogen suppression with anastrozole and  xxxd2153xxx  in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. oncology 54(suppl 2):19 –22
buzzetti f, di salle e, longo a, briatico g 1993 synthesis
and aromatase inhibition by potential metabolites of exemestane
( xxxd2075xxx ).
steroids 58:527–532
trunet pf, bhatnagar as, chaudri ha, hornberger u
1996 letrozole ( xxxd2459xxx ), a new oral aromatase inhibitor for the treatment of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal patients. acta oncol 35(suppl 5):15–18
ingle jn, johnson pa, suman vj, gerstner jb, mailliard
ja, camoriano jk, gesme jr dh, loprinzi cl, hatfield ak,
hartmann lc 1997 a randomized phase ii trial of two dosage levels of letrozole as third-line hormonal therapy for
women with metastatic breast carcinoma. cancer 80:218 –
224
kimijima i, tominaga t, nomizu t, nomura y,
takashima s, koyama h, sano m, tohge t, ueo h, ikeda
s, ohashi y; cgs20267 study group 2002 [cgs20267
(letrozole), a new aromatase inhibitor: late phase ii study
in postmenopausal women with advanced or recurrent
breast cancer (no. 2)— evaluation of efficacy and safety at
the recommended clinical dose cgs20267 study group].
[japanese]. gan to kagaku ryoho 29:741–749
lipton a, demers lm, harvey ha, kambic kb, grossberg
h, brady c, adlercruetz h, trunet pf, santen rj 1995 letrozole ( xxxd2459xxx ). a phase i study of a new potent oral aromatase inhibitor of breast cancer. cancer 75:2132–2138
evans tr, di salle e, ornati g, lassus m, benedetti ms,
pianezzola e, coombes rc 1992 phase i and endocrine study
of exemestane ( xxxd2075xxx ), a new aromatase inhibitor, in
postmenopausal women. cancer res 52:5933–5939
jones s, vogel c, arkhipov a, fehrenbacher l, eisenberg
p, cooper b, honig s, polli a, whaley f, di salle e, tiffany
j, consonni a, miller l 1999 multicenter, phase ii trial of
exemestane as third-line hormonal therapy of postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer.  xxxd2075xxx 
study group. j clin oncol 17:3418 –3425
johannessen dc, engan t, di salle e, zurlo mg, paolini
j, ornati g, piscitelli g, kvinnsland s, lonning pe 1997
endocrine and clinical effects of exemestane (pnu
155971), a novel steroidal aromatase inhibitor, in postmenopausal breast cancer patients: a phase i study. clin
cancer res 3:1101–1108
kvinnsland s, anker g, dirix ly, bonneterre j, prove am,
wilking n, lobelle jp, mariani o, di salle e, polli a,
massimini g 2000 high activity and tolerability demonstrated for exemestane in postmenopausal women
with metastatic breast cancer who had previously failed
on tamoxifen treatment. eur j cancer 36:976 –982
paridaens r, dirix l, beex l, nooij m, cufer t, lohrisch
c, biganzoli l, van hoorebeeck i, duchateau l, lobelle
jp, piccart m 2000 promising results with exemestane in
the first-line treatment of metastatic breast cancer: a ran-

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

domized phase ii eortc trial with a tamoxifen control.
clin  xxxg269xxx (suppl 1):s19 –s21
zilembo n, noberasco c, bajetta e, martinetti a, mariani
l, orefice s, buzzoni r, di bartolomeo m, di leo a,
laffranchi a 1995 endocrinological and clinical evaluation of exemestane, a new steroidal aromatase inhibitor.
br j cancer 72:1007–1012
buzdar au, jones se, vogel cl, wolter j, plourde p, webster
a 1997 a phase iii trial comparing anastrozole (1 and 10
milligrams), a potent and selective aromatase inhibitor, with
 xxxd2557xxx  in postmenopausal women with advanced
breast carcinoma. arimidex study group. cancer 79:730 –
739
buzdar au, robertson jf, eiermann w, nabholtz jm
2002 an overview of the pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of the newer generation aromatase inhibitors anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane. cancer 95:2006 –2016
gershanovich m, chaudri ha, campos d, lurie h,
bonaventura a, jeffrey m, buzzi f, bodrogi i, ludwig h,
reichardt p, o’higgins n, romieu g, friederich p, lassus
m 1998 letrozole, a new oral aromatase inhibitor: randomised trial comparing 2.5 mg daily, 0.5 mg daily and
 xxxd147xxx  in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. letrozole international trial group
(ar/bc3). ann oncol 9:639 – 645
thürlimann b, robertson jf, nabholtz jm, buzdar a,
bonneterre j, arimidex study group 2003 efficacy of tamoxifen following anastrozole (‘arimidex’) compared
with anastrozole following tamoxifen as first-line treatment for advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal
women. eur j cancer 39:2310 –2317
bonneterre j, buzdar a, nabholtz jm, robertson jf,
thürlimann b, von euler m, sahmoud t, webster a,
steinberg m 2001 anastrozole is superior to tamoxifen as
first-line therapy in  xxxg1603xxx  positive advanced
breast carcinoma. cancer 92:2247–2258
nabholtz jm, bonneterre j, buzdar a, robertson jf,
thürlimann b 2003 anastrozole (arimidex) versus tamoxifen as first-line therapy for advanced breast cancer in
postmenopausal women: survival analysis and updated
safety results. eur j cancer 39:1684 –1689
goss pe, ingle jn, martino s, robert nj, muss hb, piccart
mj, castiglione m, tu d, shepherd le, pritchard ki, livingston rb, davidson ne, norton l, perez ea, abrams js,
therasse p, palmer mj, pater jl 2003 a randomized trial of
letrozole in postmenopausal women after five years of tamoxifen therapy for early-stage breast cancer. n engl j med
349:1793–1802
howell a, cuzick j, baum m, buzdar a, dowsett m, forbes
jf, hoctin-boes g, houghton j, locker gy, tobias js;
atac trialists’ group 2005 results of the atac (arimidex, tamoxifen, alone or in combination) trial after completion of 5 years’ adjuvant treatment for breast cancer. lancet 365:60 – 62
coates as, keshaviah a, thürlimann b, mouridsen h,
mauriac l, forbes jf, paridaens r, castiglione-gertsch
m, gelber rd, colleoni m, láng i, del mastro l, smith i,
chirgwin j, nogaret jm, pienkowski t, wardley a, jakobsen
eh, price kn, goldhirsch a 2007 five years of letrozole
compared with tamoxifen as initial adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal women with endocrine-responsive early breast
cancer: update of study big 1–98. j clin oncol 25:486 – 492

edrv.endojournals.org

369

195. goldhirsch a, glick jh, gelber rd, coates as, thürlimann b, senn hj 2005 meeting highlights: international
expert consensus on the primary therapy of early breast
cancer 2005. ann oncol 16:1569 –1583
196. winer ep, hudis c, burstein hj, wolff ac, pritchard ki,
ingle jn, chlebowski rt, gelber r, edge sb, gralow j,
cobleigh ma, mamounas ep, goldstein lj, whelan tj,
powles tj, bryant j, perkins c, perotti j, braun s, langer as,
browman gp, somerfield mr 2005 american society of
clinical oncology technology assessment on the use of aromatase inhibitors as adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal
women with  xxxg1603xxx -positive breast cancer: status
report 2004. j clin oncol 23:619 – 629
197. coombes rc, hall e, gibson lj, paridaens r, jassem j,
delozier t, jones se, alvarez i, bertelli g, ortmann o,
coates as, bajetta e, dodwell d, coleman re, fallowfield
lj, mickiewicz e, andersen j, lønning pe, cocconi g, stewart
a, stuart n, snowdon cf, carpentieri m, massimini g, bliss
jm, van de velde c; intergroup exemestane study 2004 a
randomized trial of exemestane after two to three years of
tamoxifen therapy in postmenopausal women with primary
breast cancer. n engl j med [errata (2004) 351:2461 and
(2006) 355:1746] 350:1081–1092
198. jakesz r, jonat w, gnant m, mittlboeck m, greil r, tausch
c, hilfrich j, kwasny w, menzel c, samonigg h, seifert
m, gademann g, kaufmann m, wolfgang j; abcsg and the
gabg 2005 switching of postmenopausal women with
endocrine-responsive early breast cancer to anastrozole after
2 years’ adjuvant tamoxifen: combined results of abcsg trial
8 and arno 95 trial. lancet 366:455– 462
199. coombes rc, kilburn ls, snowdon cf, paridaens r,
coleman re, jones se, jassem j, van de velde cj, delozier
t, alvarez i, del mastro l, ortmann o, diedrich k, coates
as, bajetta e, holmberg sb, dodwell d, mickiewicz e,
andersen j, lønning pe, cocconi g, forbes j, castiglione m,
stuart n, stewart a, fallowfield lj, bertelli g, hall e, bogle
rg, carpentieri m, colajori e, subar m, ireland e, bliss jm;
intergroup exemestane study 2007 survival and safety of
exemestane versus tamoxifen after 2–3 years’ tamoxifen
treatment (intergroup exemestane study): a randomised controlled trial. lancet [erratum (2007) 369:906] 369:559 –570
200. jonat w, gnant m, boccardo f, kaufmann m, rubagotti
a, zuna i, greenwood m, jakesz r 2006 effectiveness of
switching from adjuvant tamoxifen to anastrozole in postmenopausal women with hormone-sensitive early-stage
breast cancer: a meta-analysis. lancet oncol [erratum
(2007) 8:6] 7:991–996
201. boccardo f, rubagotti a, aldrighetti d, buzzi f, cruciani
g, farris a, mustacchi g, porpiglia m, schieppati g,
sismondi p 2007 switching to an aromatase inhibitor provides mortality benefit in early breast carcinoma: pooled analysis of 2 consecutive trials. cancer 109:1060 –1067
202. mouridsen ht, giobbie-hurder a, mauriac l, paridaens r,
colleoni m, thuerlimann b, forbes jf, gelber rd, wardley
a, smith i, price kn, coates a, goldhirsch a; big i-98 collaborative and the international breast cancer study group,
big 1–98: a randomized double-blind phase iii study evaluating letrozole and tamoxifen given in sequence as adjuvant
endocrine therapy for postmenopausal women with receptor-positive breast cancer. san antonio breast cancer symposium, san antonio, tx, 2008 (abstract 13)
203. bajetta e, martinetti a, zilembo n, pozzi p, la torre i,

370

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

ferrari l, seregni e, longarini r, salvucci g, bombardieri
e 2002 biological activity of anastrozole in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer: effects on
estrogens and bone metabolism. ann oncol 13:1059 –
1066
nabholtz jm, gligorov j 2006 cardiovascular safety profiles of aromatase inhibitors: a comparative review. drug
saf [erratum (2007) 30:201]29:785– 801
ellis mj 2005 neoadjuvant endocrine therapy for breast
cancer: more questions than answers. j clin oncol 23:
4842– 4844
dixon jm, renshaw l, bellamy c, stuart m, hoctin-boes
g, miller wr 2000 the effects of neoadjuvant anastrozole
(arimidex) on tumor volume in postmenopausal women
with breast cancer: a randomized, double-blind, singlecenter study. clin cancer res 6:2229 –2235
eiermann w, paepke s, appfelstaedt j, llombart-cussac a,
eremin j, vinholes j, mauriac l, ellis m, lassus m, chaudriross ha, dugan m, borgs m 2001 preoperative treatment of
postmenopausal breast cancer patients with letrozole: a randomized double-blind multicenter study. ann oncol
12:1527–1532
ellis mj, coop a, singh b, mauriac l, llombert-cussac a,
jänicke f, miller wr, evans db, dugan m, brady c,
quebe-fehling e, borgs m 2001 letrozole is more effective
neoadjuvant endocrine therapy than tamoxifen for  xxxg682xxx -1and/or  xxxg682xxx -2-positive,  xxxg730xxx -positive primary
breast cancer: evidence from a phase iii randomized trial.
j clin oncol 19:3808 –3816
martin la, farmer i, johnston sr, ali s, dowsett m 2005
elevated  xxxg1369xxx / xxxg1366xxx / xxxg730xxx  cross-talk enhances estrogen-mediated signaling during long-term estrogen deprivation. endocr relat cancer 12(suppl 1):s75–
s84
santen rj, song rx, zhang z, kumar r, jeng mh,
masamura a, lawrence jr j, berstein l, yue w 2005 longterm estradiol deprivation in breast cancer cells up-regulates growth factor signaling and enhances estrogen sensitivity. endocr relat cancer 2(suppl 1):s61–s73
jelovac d, sabnis g, long bj, macedo l, goloubeva og,
brodie am 2005 activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase in xenografts and cells during prolonged treatment
with aromatase inhibitor letrozole. cancer res 65:5380 –
5389
masamura s, santner sj, heitjan df, santen rj 1995 estrogen deprivation causes estradiol hypersensitivity in human
breast cancer cells. j clin endocrinol metab 80:2918 –2925
jeng mh, shupnik ma, bender tp, westin eh, bandyopadhyay d, kumar r, masamura s, santen rj 1998 estrogen
receptor expression and function in long-term estrogen-deprived human breast cancer cells. endocrinology 139:4164 –
4174
santen rj, song rx, mcpherson r, kumar r, adam l,
jeng mh, yue w 2002 the role of mitogen-activated protein (map) kinase in breast cancer. j steroid biochem mol
biol 80:239 –256
song rx, zhang z, santen rj 2005 estrogen rapid action
via protein complex formation involving er␣ and src.
trends endocrinol metab 16:347–353
song rx, mor g, naftolin f, mcpherson ra, song j,
zhang z, yue w, wang j, santen rj 2001 effect of longterm estrogen deprivation on apoptotic responses of breast

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

217.
218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.
229.

230.

231.

cancer cells to 17␤-estradiol. j natl cancer inst 93:1714 –
1723
song rx, santen rj 2003 apoptotic action of estrogen.
apoptosis 8:55– 60
song rx, barnes cj, zhang z, bao y, kumar r, santen rj
2004 the role of shc and  xxxg1145xxx  in mediating the translocation of  xxxg730xxx 
␣ to the plasma membrane. proc natl acad sci usa 101:
2076 –2081
massarweh s, osborne ck, creighton cj, qin l, tsimelzon
a, huang s, weiss h, rimawi m, schiff r 2008 tamoxifen
resistance in breast tumors is driven by growth factor receptor
signaling with repression of classic  xxxg730xxx  genomic
function. cancer res 68:826 – 833
massarweh s, schiff r 2007 unraveling the mechanisms of
endocrine resistance in breast cancer: new therapeutic opportunities. clin cancer res 13:1950 –1954
shim ws, conaway m, masamura s, yue w, wang jp,
kmar r, santen rj 2000 estradiol hypersensitivity and
mitogen-activated protein kinase expression in long-term
estrogen deprived human breast cancer cells in vivo. endocrinology 141:396 – 405
sogon t, masamura s, hayashi s, santen rj, nakachi k,
eguchi h 2007 demethylation of promoter c region of
 xxxg730xxx  ␣ gene is correlated with its enhanced
expression in estrogen-ablation resistant mcf-7 cells. j
steroid biochem mol biol 105:106 –114
song rx, zhang z, mor g, santen rj 2005 down-regulation of bcl-2 enhances estrogen apoptotic action in longterm estradiol-depleted er(⫹) breast cancer cells. apoptosis 10:667– 678
sabnis g, traztizamab increases sensitivity of hormone
dependent and hormone refractory breast cancer cells to
endocrine agents. in: schayowitz a, ed. proc 98th annual
meeting of the american association for cancer research,
los angeles, ca, 2007 (abstract 991)
yue w, wang j, li y, fan p, santen rj 2005  xxxd3161xxx  blocks mammalian  xxxg1478xxx 
signaling in breast cancer cells. int j cancer 117:746 –754
sabnis gj, macedo lf, goloubeva o, schayowitz a, brodie
am 2008 stopping treatment can reverse acquired resistance
to letrozole. cancer res 68:4518 – 4524
sabnis g, schayowitz a, goloubeva o, macedo l, brodie
a 2009 trastuzumab reverses letrozole resistance and amplifies the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to estrogen. cancer res 69:1416 –1428
johnston sr 2008 integration of endocrine therapy with
targeted agents. breast cancer res 10(suppl 4):s20
dodwell d, wardley a, johnston s 2006 postmenopausal
advanced breast cancer: options for therapy after tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors. breast 15:584 –594
mackey jr, kaufman b, clemens m, bapsy pp, vaid a,
wardley a, tjulandin s, jahn m, lehle m, jones a 2006
trastuzumab prolongs progression-free survival in hormone dependent and her-2 positive metastatic breast
cancer. 29th annual san antonio breast cancer symposium, san antonio, texas, december 4, 2006, abstract 3
marcom pk, isaacs c, harris l, wong zw, kommarreddy
a, novielli n, mann g, tao y, ellis mj 2007 the combination of letrozole and trastuzumab as first or secondline biological therapy produces durable responses in a

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

232.

233.

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.
244.
245.

subset of her2 positive and er positive advanced breast
cancers. breast cancer res treat 102:43– 49
kaufman b, clemens m, bapsy pp, vaid a, wardley a,
tjulandin s, jahn m, lehle m, jones a 2006 traztuzamab
prolongs progression free survival in hormone dependent
and her2 positive metastatic breast cancer. breast cancer
res treat 100(supp1):3
cristofanilli m, a phase ii multicenter, double blind, randomized trial to compare anastrozole plus gefitinib with
anastrozole plus placebo in postmenopausal women with
 xxxg1603xxx  positive metastatic breast cancer. proc
of 44th annual meeting of the american society of clinical
oncology, chicago, il, 2008 (abstract 1012)
baselga j 2005 treatment of postmenopausal women with
locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer with letrozole
alone or in combination with  xxxd3307xxx : a randomized,
3 arm phase 2 study. breast cancer res treat 94(suppl
1):1068 (abstract)
chow lw 2006 phase 3 study of  xxxd3307xxx  with letrozole or letrozole alone in postmenopausal women with
locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer. breast cancer res treat 100(suppl 1):6091 (abstract)
baselga j 2007 phase ii double blind randomized trial of
daily oral  xxxd2072xxx  ( xxxd2072xxx ) plus letrozole (let) or
placebo (p) plus let as neoadjuvant therapy for er⫹
breast cancer. breast cancer res treat 106(suppl 1):2066
(abstract)
safi r, kovacic a, gaillard s, murata y, simpson er,
mcdonnell dp, clyne cd 2005 coactivation of liver receptor homologue-1 by peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1␣ on aromatase promoter ii
and its inhibition by activated retinoid x receptor suggest
a novel target for breast-specific antiestrogen therapy.
cancer res 65:11762–11770
urs an, dammer e, sewer mb 2006 sphingosine regulates the transcription of  xxxg573xxx  by binding to  xxxg1604xxx . endocrinology 147:5249 –5258
santen rj 2007 endocrine responsive cancer. in: kronenberg
hm, melmed s, polonsky ks, larsen pr, eds. williams textbook of endocrinology. 11th ed. philadelphia: w. b. saunders; 1763–1801
tekmal rr, ramachandra n, gubba s, durgam vr,
mantione j, toda k, shizuta y, dillehay dl 1996 overexpression of int-5/aromatase in mammary glands of
transgenic mice results in the induction of hyperplasia and
nuclear abnormalities. cancer res 56:3180 –3185
keshava n, mandava u, kirma n, tekmal rr 2001 acceleration of mammary neoplasia in aromatase transgenic
mice by 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene. cancer lett
167:125–133
cavalieri e, chakravarti d, guttenplan j, hart e, ingle j,
jankowiak r, muti p, rogan e, russo j, santen r, sutter t
2006 catechol estrogen quinones as initiators of breast and
other human cancers: implications for biomarkers of susceptibility and cancer prevention. biochim biophys acta 1766:
63–78
liehr jg 1990 genotoxic effects of estrogens. mutat res
238:269 –276
yager jd, davidson ne 2006 estrogen carcinogenesis in
breast cancer. n engl j med 354:270 –282
pasanen m, pelkonen o 1981 solubilization and partial

edrv.endojournals.org

246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

258.

371

purification of human placental cytochromes p-450. biochem biophys res commun 103:1310 –1317
mendelson cr, wright ee, evans ct, porter jc, simpson
er 1985 preparation and characterization of polyclonal
and monoclonal antibodies against human aromatase cytochrome p-450 ( xxxg574xxx ), and their use in its purification. arch biochem biophys 243:480 – 491
kellis jr jt, vickery le 1987 purification and characterization of human placental aromatase cytochrome p-450.
j biol chem 262:4413– 4420
osawa y, yoshida n, fronckowiak m, kitawaki j 1987
immunoaffinity purification of aromatase cytochrome
p-450 from human placental microsomes, metabolic
switching from aromatization to 1␤ and 2␤-monohydroxylation, and recognition of aromatase isozymes. steroids 50:11–28
hall pf, chen s, nakajin s, shinoda m, shively je 1987
purification and characterization of aromatase from human placenta. steroids 50:37–50
muto n, tan l 1985 purification of oestrogen synthetase
by high-performance liquid chromatography. two membrane-bound enzymes from the human placenta. j chromatogr 326:137–146
evans ct, ledesma db, schulz tz, simpson er, mendelson
cr 1986 isolation and characterization of a complementary
dna specific for human aromatase-system cytochrome
p-450 mrna. proc natl acad sci usa 83:6387– 6391
tanaka m, telecky tm, fukada s, adachi s, chen s,
nagahama y 1992 cloning and sequence analysis of the
cdna encoding p-450 aromatase (p450arom) from a rainbow trout (oncorhynchus mykiss) ovary; relationship between the amount of p450arom mrna and the production
of  xxxd2037xxx -17 ␤ in the ovary. j mol endocrinol 8:53– 61
mcphaul mj, noble jf, simpson er, mendelson cr, wilson
jd 1988 the expression of a functional cdna encoding the
chicken  xxxg574xxx  (aromatase) that catalyzes
the formation of estrogen from androgen. j biol chem 263:
16358 –16363
hickey gj, krasnow js, beattie wg, richards js 1990
aromatase cytochrome p450 in rat ovarian granulosa cells
before and after luteinization: adenosine 3⬘,5⬘-monophosphate-dependent and independent regulation. cloning and
sequencing of rat aromatase cdna and 5⬘ genomic dna.
mol endocrinol 4:3–12
terashima m, toda k, kawamoto t, kuribayashi i,
ogawa y, maeda t, shizuta y 1991 isolation of a fulllength cdna encoding mouse aromatase p450. arch biochem biophys 285:231–237
corbin cj, graham-lorence s, mcphaul m, mason ji,
mendelson cr, simpson er 1988 isolation of a full-length
cdna insert encoding human aromatase system cytochrome p-450 and its expression in nonsteroidogenic cells.
proc natl acad sci usa 85:8948 – 8952
harada n 1988 cloning of a complete cdna encoding
human aromatase: immunochemical identification and sequence analysis. biochem biophys res commun 156:725–
732
toda k, terashima m, mitsuuchi y, yamasaki y,
yokoyama y, nojima s, ushiro h, maeda t, yamamoto
y, sagara y 1989 alternative usage of different poly(a)
addition signals for two major species of mrna encoding
human aromatase p-450. febs lett 247:371–376

372

santen et al.

history of aromatase

259. means gd, mahendroo ms, corbin cj, mathis jm, powell
fe, mendelson cr, simpson er 1989 structural analysis of
the gene encoding human aromatase cytochrome p-450, the
enzyme responsible for estrogen biosynthesis. j biol chem
264:19385–19391
260. harada n, yamada k, saito k, kibe n, dohmae s, takagi
y 1990 structural characterization of the human estrogen
synthetase (aromatase) gene. biochem biophys res commun 166:365–372
261. toda k, terashima m, kawamoto t, sumimoto h,
yokoyama y, kuribayashi i, mitsuuchi y, maeda t,
yamamoto y, sagara y 1990 structural and functional
characterization of human aromatase p-450 gene. eur
j biochem 193:559 –565
262. means gd, kilgore mw, mahendroo ms, mendelson cr,
simpson er 1991 tissue-specific promoters regulate aromatase cytochrome p450 gene expression in human ovary
and fetal tissues. mol endocrinol 5:2005–2013
263. toda k, shizuta y 1993 molecular cloning of a cdna
showing alternative splicing of the 5⬘-untranslated sequence of mrna for human aromatase p-450. eur j biochem 213:383–389
264. mahendroo ms, means gd, mendelson cr, simpson er
1991 tissue-specific expression of human  xxxg574xxx .
the promoter responsible for expression in adipose tissue
is different from that utilized in placenta. j biol chem 266:
11276 –11281
265. bulun se, takayama k, suzuki t, sasano h, yilmaz b,
sebastian s 2004 organization of the human aromatase
p450 ( xxxg574xxx ) gene. semin reprod med 22:5–9
266. hinshelwood mm, liu z, conley aj, simpson er 1995
demonstration of tissue-specific promoters in nonprimate
species that express aromatase p450 in placentae. biol reprod 53:1151–1159
267. michael md, kilgore mw, morohashi k, simpson er
1995  xxxg1604xxx / xxxg1604xxx  regulates  xxxd1773xxx -induced transcription from the proximal promoter (pii) of the human aromatase p450 ( xxxg574xxx ) gene in the ovary. j biol chem 270:
13561–13566
268. zhao y, nichols je, bulun se, mendelson cr, simpson
er 1995 aromatase p450 gene expression in human adipose tissue. role of a jak/stat pathway in regulation of
the adipose-specific promoter. j biol chem 270:16449 –
16457
269. zhou j, suzuki t, kovacic a, saito r, miki y, ishida t,
moriya t, simpson er, sasano h, clyne cd 2005 interactions between  xxxd1903xxx (2), liver receptor homologue-1, and aromatase in breast cancer. cancer res 65:
657– 663
270. shozu m, sumitani h, murakami k, segawa t, yang hj,
inoue m 2001 regulation of aromatase activity in bonederived cells: possible role of mitogen-activated protein
kinase. j steroid biochem mol biol 79:61– 65
271. ribot c, trémollieres f, pouillés jm 2006 aromatase and
regulation of bone remodeling. joint bone spine 73:37– 42
272. balthazart j, baillien m, charlier td, cornil ca, ball gf
2003 multiple mechanisms control brain aromatase activity at the genomic and non-genomic level. j steroid biochem mol biol 86:367–379
273. clyne cd, speed cj, zhou j, simpson er 2002 liver receptor homologue-1 (lrh-1) regulates expression of aromatase in preadipocytes. j biol chem 277:20591–20597

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

274. clyne cd, kovacic a, speed cj, zhou j, pezzi v, simpson
er 2004 regulation of aromatase expression by the nuclear receptor lrh-1 in adipose tissue. mol cell endocrinol 215:39 – 44
275. bourguiba s, genissel c, lambard s, bouraïma h, carreau
s 2003 regulation of aromatase gene expression in leydig
cells and germ cells. j steroid biochem mol biol 86:335–343
276. stocco c 2008 aromatase expression in the ovary: hormonal and molecular regulation. steroids 73:473– 487
277. mendelson cr, jiang b, shelton jm, richardson ja,
hinshelwood mm 2005 transcriptional regulation of
aromatase in placenta and ovary. j steroid biochem mol
biol 95:25–33
278. fitzpatrick sl, richards js 1994 identification of a cyclic
adenosine 3⬘,5⬘-monophosphate-response element in the
rat aromatase promoter that is required for transcriptional
activation in rat granulosa cells and r2c leydig cells. mol
endocrinol 8:1309 –1319
279. richards js, russell dl, ochsner s, hsieh m, doyle kh,
falender ae, lo yk, sharma sc 2002 novel signaling
pathways that control ovarian follicular development,
ovulation, and luteinization. recent prog horm res 57:
195–220
280. hosogi h, nagayama s, kawamura j, koshiba y, nomura
a, itami a, okabe h, satoh s, watanabe g, sakai y 2008
molecular insights into peutz-jeghers syndrome: two probands with a germline mutation of  xxxg2218xxx . j gastroenterol
43:492– 497
281. coen p, kulin h, ballantine t, zaino r, frauenhoffer e,
boal d, inkster s, brodie a, santen r 1991 an aromataseproducing sex-cord tumor resulting in prepubertal gynecomastia. n engl j med 324:317–322
282. bulun se, rosenthal im, brodie am, inkster se, zeller
wp, digeorge am, frasier sd, kilgore mw, simpson er
1994 use of tissue-specific promoters in the regulation of
aromatase cytochrome p450 gene expression in human testicular and ovarian sex cord tumors, as well as in normal
fetal and adult gonads. j clin endocrinol metab 78:1616 –
1621
283. hu y, ghosh s, amleh a, yue w, lu y, katz a, li r 2005
modulation of aromatase expression by brca1: a possible link to tissue-specific tumor suppression. oncogene 24:
8343– 8348
284. ghosh s, lu y, katz a, hu y, li r 2007 tumor suppressor
brca1 inhibits a breast cancer-associated promoter of the
aromatase gene ( xxxg574xxx ) in human adipose stromal cells.
am j physiol endocrinol metab 292:e246 –e252
285. lu m, chen d, lin z, reierstad s, trauernicht am, boyer
tg, bulun se 2006 brca1 negatively regulates the cancerassociated aromatase promoters i, 3 and ii in breast adipose
fibroblasts and malignant epithelial cells. j clin endocrinol
metab 91:4514 – 4519
286. harada n, utsumi t, takagi y 1993 tissue-specific expression of the human aromatase cytochrome p-450 gene
by alternative use of multiple exons 1 and promoters, and
switching of tissue-specific exons 1 in carcinogenesis. proc
natl acad sci usa 90:11312–11316
287. chen s, ye j, kijima i, kinoshita y, zhou d 2005 positive
and negative transcriptional regulation of aromatase expression in human breast cancer tissue. j steroid biochem
mol biol 95:17–23
288. nettles kw, bruning jb, gil g, o’neill ee, nowak j, guo

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

289.

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

297.
298.
299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

y, kim y, desombre er, dilis r, hanson rn, joachimiak
a, greene gl 2007 structural plasticity in the oestrogen
receptor ligand-binding domain. embo rep [erratum
(2007) 8:610] 8:563–568
laughton ca, zvelebil mj, neidle s 1993 a detailed molecular model for human aromatase. j steroid biochem
mol biol 44:399 – 407
koymans lm, moereels h, vanden bossche h 1995 a
molecular model for the interaction between vorozole and
other non-steroidal inhibitors and human cytochrome
p450 19 (p450 aromatase). j steroid biochem mol biol
53:191–197
williams pa, cosme j, sridhar v, johnson ef, mcree de
2000 mammalian microsomal  xxxg578xxx : structural adaptations for membrane binding
and functional diversity. mol cell 5:121–131
zhang f, zhou d, kao yc, ye j, chen s 2002 expression and
purification of a recombinant form of human aromatase from
escherichia coli. biochem pharmacol 64:1317–1324
kagawa n, hori h, waterman mr, yoshioka s 2004
characterization of stable human aromatase expressed in
e. coli. steroids 69:235–243
amarneh b, simpson er 1995 expression of a recombinant derivative of human aromatase p450 in insect cells
utilizing the baculovirus vector system. mol cell endocrinol 109:r1–r5
maffei l, rochira v, zirilli l, antunez p, aranda c, fabre
b, simone ml, pignatti e, simpson er, houssami s, clyne
cd, carani c 2007 a novel compound heterozygous mutation of the aromatase gene in an adult man: reinforced
evidence on the relationship between congenital oestragen
deficiency, adiposity and the metabolic syndrome. clin endocrinol (oxf) 67:218 –224
jones mee, boon wc, proietto j, simpson er 2006 of
mice and men: the evolving phenotype of aromatase deficiency. trends endocrinol metab 17:55– 64
siiteri pk 2005 the continuing saga of dehydroepiandrosterone (dhea). j clin endocrinol metab 90:3795–3796
diczfalusy e 1984 the early history of estriol. j steroid
biochem 20:945–953
resnik r, killam ap, battaglia fc, makowski el, meschia
g 1974 the stimulation of uterine blood flow by various
estrogens. endocrinology 94:1192–1196
harris j, gorski j 1978 evidence for a discontinuous requirement for estrogen in stimulation of deoxyribonucleic
acid synthesis in the immature rat uterus. endocrinology
103:240 –245
müller re, traish am, wotiz hh 1985 interaction of
estradiol and estriol with uterine  xxxg730xxx  in vivo
and in excised uteri or cell suspensions at 37 c: noncooperative estradiol binding and absence of estriol inhibition
of estradiol-induced receptor activation and transformation. endocrinology 117:1839 –1847
naftolin f, ryan kj, petro z 1971 aromatization of androstenedione by the diencephalon. j clin endocrinol
metab 33:368 –370
callard gv, petro z, ryan kj 1980 aromatization and 5
␣-reduction in brain and nonneural tissues of a cyclostome,
petromyzon marinus. gen comp endocrinol 42:155–159
callard gv, hoffman ra, petro z, ryan kj 1979 in vitro
aromatization and other androgen transformations in the

edrv.endojournals.org

305.

306.

307.

308.

309.
310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

319.
320.

321.

373

brain of the hamster (mesocricetus auratus). biol reprod
21:33–38
callard gv, petro z, ryan kj 1978 phylogenetic distribution of aromatase and other androgen-converting enzymes in the central nervous system. endocrinology 103:
2283–2290
abdelgadir se, roselli ce, choate jv, resko ja 1997 distribution of aromatase cytochrome p450 messenger ribonucleic acid in adult rhesus monkey brains. biol reprod
57:772–777
boon wc, diepstraten j, van der burg j, jones me, simpson
er, van den buuse m 2005 hippocampal nmda receptor
subunit expression and watermaze learning in estrogen deficient female mice. brain res mol brain res 140:127–132
roselli ce, larkin k, schrunk jm, stormshak f 2004 sexual partner preference, hypothalamic morphology and
aromatase in rams. physiol behav 83:233–245
roselli cf 2007 brain aromatase: roles in reproduction and
neuroprotection. j steroid biochem mol biol 106:143–150
schlinger ba, london se 2006 neurosteroids and the
songbird model system. j exp zoolog a comp exp biol
305:743–748
roselli ce, larkin k, resko ja, stellflug jn, stormshak f
2004 the volume of a sexually dimorphic nucleus in the
ovine medial preoptic area/anterior hypothalamus varies
with sexual partner preference. endocrinology 145:478 –
483
adkins-regan e, leung ch 2006 sex steroids modulate
changes in social and sexual preference during juvenile development in zebra finches. horm behav 50:772–778
charlier td, harada n, ball gf, balthazart j 2006 targeting  xxxg1510xxx  expression with
locked nucleic acids antisense reveals different thresholds
for the hormonal regulation of male sexual behavior in
relation to aromatase activity and protein expression. behav brain res 172:333–343
forlano pm, schlinger ba, bass ah 2006 brain aromatase: new lessons from non-mammalian model systems.
front neuroendocrinol 27:247–274
huddleston gg, paisley jc, clancy an 2006 effects of estrogen in the male rat medial amygdala: infusion of an aromatase inhibitor lowers mating and bovine serum albuminconjugated estradiol implants do not promote mating.
neuroendocrinology 83:106 –116
carswell hv, dominiczak af, garcia-segura lm, harada
n, hutchison jb, macrae im 2005 brain aromatase expression after experimental stroke: topography and time
course. j steroid biochem mol biol 96:89 –91
garcia-segura lm, wozniak a, azcoitia i, rodriguez jr,
hutchison re, hutchison jb 1999 aromatase expression by
astrocytes after brain injury: implications for local estrogen
formation in brain repair. neuroscience 89:567–578
mccullough ld, blizzard k, simpson er, oz ok, hurn
pd 2003 aromatase cytochrome p450 and extragonadal
estrogen play a role in ischemic neuroprotection. j neurosci 23:8701– 8705
garcia-segura lm 2008 aromatase in the brain: not just for
reproduction anymore. j neuroendocrinol 20:705–712
gennari l, nuti r, bilezikian jp 2004 aromatase activity
and bone homeostasis in men. j clin endocrinol metab
89:5898 –5907
smith ep, boyd j, frank gr, takahashi h, cohen rm,

374

322.

323.

324.

325.

326.
327.

328.
329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

334.

335.

336.

337.

santen et al.

history of aromatase

specker b, williams tc, lubahn db, korach ks 1994
estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in the estrogenreceptor gene in a man. n engl j med [erratum (1995)
332:131] 331:1056 –1061
jones me, boon wc, mcinnes k, maffei l, carani c,
simpson er 2007 recognizing rare disorders: aromatase
deficiency. nat clin pract endocrinol metab 3:414 – 421
oz ok, hirasawa g, lawson j, nanu l, constantinescu
a, antich pp, mason rp, tsyganov e, parkey rw, zerwekh
je, simpson er 2001 bone phenotype of the aromatase deficient mouse. j steroid biochem mol biol 79:49 –59
payne ah, kelch rp, musich ss, halpern me 1976 intratesticular site of aromatization in the human. j clin endocrinol metab 42:1081–1087
robertson km, o’donnell l, jones me, meachem sj,
boon wc, fisher cr, graves kh, mclachlan ri, simpson
er 1999 impairment of spermatogenesis in mice lacking a
functional aromatase (cyp 19) gene. proc natl acad sci
usa 96:7986 –7991
bosland mc 2000 the role of steroid hormones in prostate
carcinogenesis. j natl cancer inst monogr 27:39 – 66
ellem sj, schmitt jf, pedersen js, frydenberg m, risbridger
gp 2004 local aromatase expression in human prostate is
altered in malignancy. j clin endocrinol metab 89:2434 –
2441
ellem sj, risbridger gp 2006 aromatase and prostate cancer. minerva endocrinol 31:1–12
smith mr, kaufman d, george d, oh wk, kazanis m,
manola j, kantoff pw 2002 selective aromatase inhibition
for patients with androgen-independent prostate carcinoma. cancer 95:1864 –1868
santen rj, petroni gr, fisch mj, myers ce, theodorescu
d, cohen rb 2001 use of the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole in the treatment of patients with advanced prostate
carcinoma. cancer 92:2095–2101
casper rf, mitwally mf 2006 review: aromatase inhibitors for ovulation induction. j clin endocrinol metab 91:
760 –771
mittwally mf 2000 aromatase inhibition : a novel method
of ovulation induction in women wtih polycystic ovarian
syndrome. reprod technol 10:244 –247
vendola ka, zhou j, adesanya oo, weil sj, bondy ca
1998 androgens stimulate early stages of follicular growth
in the primate ovary. j clin invest 101:2622–2629
weil s, vendola k, zhou j, bondy ca 1999 androgen and
follicle-stimulating hormone interactions in primate ovarian
follicle development. j clin endocrinol metab 84:29512956
sammour a 2001 prospective randomized trial comparing
the effects of letrozole with  xxxd1726xxx  on follicular
development, endometrial thickness, and pregnancy rates
in patients undergoing superovulation prior to intrauterine
insemination. fertil steril 76:s110
cortínez a, de carvalho i, vantman d, gabler f,
iñiguez g, vega m 2005 hormonal profile and endometrial morphology in letrozole-controlled ovarian hyperstimulation in ovulatory infertile patients. fertil
steril 83:110 –115
al-fozan h, al-khadouri m, tan sl, tulandi t 2004 a
randomized trial of letrozole versus  xxxd1726xxx  in
women undergoing superovulation. fertil steril 82:1561–
1563

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

338. fatemi hm, al-turki ha, papanikolaou eg, kosmas l,
de sutter p, devroey p 2005 successful treatment of an
aggressive recurrent post-menopausal endometriosis with
an aromatase inhibitor. reprod biomed online 11:455–
457
339. al-omari wr, sulaiman wr, al-hadithi n 2004 comparison of two aromatase inhibitors in women with clomipheneresistant polycystic ovary syndrome. int j gynaecol obstet
85:289 –291
340. tulandi t, martin j, al-fadhli r, kabli n, forman r,
hitkari j, librach c, greenblatt e, casper rf 2006 congenital malformations among 911 newborns conceived after infertility treatment with letrozole or  xxxd1726xxx . fertil steril 85:1761–1765
341. biljan mm 2008 the outcome of 150 babies following the
treatment with letrozole or letrozole plus gonadotropins.
fertil steril 84:s95
342. noble ls, takayama k, zeitoun km, putman jm, johns
da, hinshelwood mm, agarwal vr, zhao y, carr br,
bulun se 1997  xxxd1903xxx  stimulates aromatase expression in endometriosis-derived stromal cells. j clin endocrinol metab 82:600 – 606
343. noble ls, simpson er, johns a, bulun se 1996 aromatase expression in endometriosis. j clin endocrinol
metab 81:174 –179
344. attar e, bulun se 2006 aromatase inhibitors: the next
generation of therapeutics for endometriosis? fertil steril
85:1307–1318
345. soysal s, soysal me, ozer s, gul n, gezgin t 2004 the
effects of post-surgical administration of  xxxd2229xxx  plus
anastrozole compared to  xxxd2229xxx  alone in patients with
severe endometriosis: a prospective randomized trial. hum
reprod 19:160 –167
346. braunstein gd 1999 aromatase and gynecomastia. endocr relat cancer 6:315–324
347. gruntmanis u, braunstein gd 2001 treatment of gynecomastia. curr opin invest drugs 2:643– 649
348. riepe fg, baus i, wiest s, krone n, sippell wg, partsch
cj 2004 treatment of pubertal gynecomastia with the specific aromatase inhibitor anastrozole. horm res 62:113–
118
349. morishima a, grumbach mm, simpson er, fisher c, qin
k 1995 aromatase deficiency in male and female siblings
caused by a novel mutation and the physiological role of
estrogens. j clin endocrinol metab 80:3689 –3698
350. mauras n, gonzalez de pijem l, hsiang hy, desrosiers p,
rapaport r, schwartz id, klein ko, singh rj, miyamoto a,
bishop k 2008 anastrozole increases predicted adult
height of short adolescent males treated with growth
hormone: a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter
trial for one to three years. j clin endocrinol metab
93:823– 831
351. dunkel l 2006 use of aromatase inhibitors to increase
final height. mol cell endocrinol 254 –255:207–216
352. demura m, martin rm, shozu m, sebastian s, takayama
k, hsu wt, schultz ra, neely k, bryant m, mendonca
bb, hanaki k, kanzaki s, rhoads db, misra m, bulun se
2007 regional rearrangements in chromosome 15q21
cause formation of cryptic promoters for the  xxxg574xxx 
(aromatase) gene. hum mol genet 16:2529 –2541
353. martin rm, lin cj, nishi my, billerbeck ae, latronico
ac, russell dw, mendonca bb 2003 familial hyperestro-

endocrine reviews, june 2009, 30(4):343–375

354.

355.

356.

357.

358.

genism in both sexes: clinical, hormonal, and molecular
studies of two siblings. j clin endocrinol metab 88:3027–
3034
berkovitz gd, guerami a, brown tr, macdonald pc,
migeon cj 1985 familial gynecomastia with increased extraglandular aromatization of plasma carbon 19-steroids.
j clin invest 75:1763–1769
paulshock bz 1980 tutankhamun and his brothers. familial gynecomastia in the eighteenth dynasty. jama 244:
160 –164
santen rj 2001 gynecomastia. in: degroot l, ed. textbook of endocrinology. vol 3, 4th ed. philadelphia: w. b.
saunders; 2474 –2484
stratakis ca, vottero a, brodie a, kirschner ls, deatkine
d, lu q, yue w, mitsiades cs, flor aw, chrousos gp
1998 the aromatase excess syndrome is associated with
feminization of both sexes and autosomal dominant transmission of aberrant p450 aromatase gene transcription.
j clin endocrinol metab 83:1348 –1357
achermann jc 2008 disorders of sex development. in:

edrv.endojournals.org

359.

360.

361.

362.

375

hughes la, ed. williams textbook of endocrinology. 11th
ed. philadelphia: saunders; 834
couse jf, korach ks 1999  xxxg730xxx  null mice:
what have we learned and where will they lead us? endocr
rev [erratum (1999) 20:459] 20:358 – 417
carani c, qin k, simoni m, faustini-fustini m, serpente
s, boyd j, korach ks, simpson er 1997 effect of testosterone and estradiol in a man with aromatase deficiency.
n engl j med 337:91–95
honda s, harada n, takagi y 1994 novel exon 1 of the
aromatase gene specific for aromatase transcripts in human brain. biochem biophys res commun 198:1153–
1160
maffei l, murata y, rochira v, tubert g, aranda c,
vazquez m, clyne cd, davis s, simpson er, carani c
2004 dysmetabolic syndrome in a man with a novel
mutation of the aromatase gene: effects of testosterone,
alendronate, and estradiol treatment. j clin endocrinol
metab 89:61–70

