liver transplantation 15:540-543, 2009

original article

successful liver transplantation for budd-chiari
syndrome in a patient with paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria treated with the
anti-complement antibody eculizumab
andrew l. singer, jamye e. locke, zoe a. stewart, bonnie e. lonze, james p. hamilton,2
jennifer r. scudiere,3 robert a. anders,3 russell p. rother, robert a. brodsky,2 and
andrew m. cameron
departments of 1surgery, 2medicine, and 3pathology, comprehensive transplant center, johns hopkins
university school of medicine, baltimore, md

paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (pnh) is a rare, acquired hemolytic anemia caused by somatic mutations in the
phosphatidylinositol glycan-complementation class a gene and the resulting absence of a key complement regulatory protein,
cd59. affected red blood cells in patients with pnh undergo intravascular complement-mediated lysis with resulting anemia,
hemoglobinuria, and venous thromboses. hepatic venous outﬂow thrombosis [budd-chiari syndrome (bcs)] is especially
common in pnh patients and often fatal. the few case reports of outcomes in patients undergoing liver transplant for bcs
secondary to pnh detail instances of recurrent bcs as well as early thrombotic portal vein occlusion and hepatic artery
thrombosis requiring retransplantation. pnh is therefore generally considered a contraindication to liver transplantation. here
we present the ﬁrst report of a patient with pnh and bcs undergoing successful liver transplantation while receiving
eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks the activation of the terminal complement at c5. liver transpl 15:
540-543, 2009. © 2009 aasld.
received october 7, 2008; accepted november 16, 2008.

paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (pnh) is a rare,
acquired hemolytic anemia resulting from the clonal
expansion of hematopoietic stem cells having undergone somatic mutations in the phosphatidylinositol glycan-complementation class a (pig-a) gene.1,2 pig-a is
necessary for the synthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol, which anchors a variety of proteins to the cell
surface. among the missing glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked proteins in pnh is cd59, a key complement
regulatory protein. because of the absence of cd59,
pnh red blood cells undergo intravascular complement-mediated lysis with resulting anemia and hemoglobinuria and the release of free hemoglobin into the
plasma. free hemoglobin is a potent  xxxd2738xxx  scavenger and leads to a spectrum of additional clinical

manifestations, including fatigue, thrombosis, abdominal pain, headache, esophageal spasm, erectile dysfunction, and pulmonary hypertension.
thrombosis occurs in up to 40% of pnh patients,
commonly involves abdominal and cerebral veins, and
is the leading cause of death in the disease.2-4 hepatic
vein thrombosis resulting in budd-chiari syndrome
(bcs) is particularly common in pnh patients. anticoagulation is often administered to prevent further
thromboses but is often ineffective. transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts, surgical shunts, and
liver transplantation may lead to transient improvement, but these modalities are ultimately unsuccessful
because of ongoing hypercoagulability and recurrent
thrombosis. the rare reports of outcomes in patients

abbreviations: bcs, budd-chiari syndrome; flaer, ﬂuorescein-labeled proaerolysin; gpi, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; hat,
hepatic artery thrombosis; pig-a, phosphatidylinositol glycan-complementation class a; pnh, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria;
pvt, portal vein thrombosis.
address reprint requests to andrew l. singer, johns hopkins hospital, 600 north wolfe street, ross building 771, baltimore, md 21287.
telephone: 410-955-1532; fax: 410-614-7649; e-mail: asinger1@jhmi.edu
doi 10.1002/lt.21714
published online in wiley interscience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

© 2009 american association for the study of liver diseases.

liver transplantation for budd-chiari syndrome 541

table 1. case reports of liver transplantation for bcs in patients with pnh
authors

country

year

patients

outcomes

united states
germany

1990
1993

1
1

rückert et al.8
bahr et al.7

germany
germany

1999
2003

1
1

vivarelli et al.9
chang et al.10

italy
united states

2003
2007

1
1

repeated hat, retransplant ⫻ 2, and death
life-threatening gi bleeding during
anticoagulation with warfarin, late hat
after anticoagulation withdrawal, and
retransplantation
late recurrent bcs
development of chronic subdural
hematoma during anticoagulation with
warfarin, late recurrent bcs, and pvt after
anticoagulation withdrawal
repeated hat, retransplant ⫻ 5, and death
pvt with refractory ascites treated with
splenic artery embolization

5

halff et al.
schattenfroh et al.6

abbreviations: bcs, budd-chiari syndrome; gi, gastrointestinal; hat, hepatic artery thrombosis; pnh, paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria; pvt, portal vein thrombosis.

undergoing liver transplant for bcs secondary to pnh
not only detail instances of recurrent bcs but also
indicate the occurrence of early portal vein occlusion
and hepatic artery thrombosis requiring retransplantation5-10 (table 1). given the high risk of thrombotic
complications, most centers regard pnh as a contraindication to liver transplantation.
eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody
that inhibits the activation of the terminal complement
at c5, thereby blocking both the generation of the anaphylotoxin c5a and the membrane attack complex
 xxxg285xxx -9.11 on the basis of the results of 2 multicenter
phase iii clinical trials, eculizumab was recently approved by the food and drug administration for the
treatment of pnh.12,13 eculizumab decreases intravascular hemolysis, decreases the need for red cell transfusions, improves quality of life, and markedly decreases the risk for thrombosis.14 here we present the
ﬁrst case report of a pnh patient with bcs that received
an orthotopic liver transplant.

case report
in 1992, at the age of 17, the previously healthy male
patient developed severe hemoglobinuria associated
with ﬂank pain, nausea with emesis, and signiﬁcant
anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. the diagnosis of pnh was initially established with a ham test
and subsequently with a ﬂuorescein-labeled proaerolysin assay (fig. 1).15 for 12 years, the disease was manifest by chronic hemolysis with occasional paroxysms of
abdominal pain, fatigue, and hemoglobinuria. he required 20 units of packed red blood cells over this time
period and was evaluated for allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation, but no suitable donor was identiﬁed.
treatment consisted of  xxxd2146xxx  supplementation and
intermittent pulses of prednisone. in 2004, he developed persistent right upper quadrant pain and weight
loss over a period of months. workup, including 3-dimensional abdominal computed tomography scan,

figure 1. flow cytometry for pnh. top: granulocytes from a
healthy donor (red) and the pnh patient (blue) after staining
with flaer. flaer binds with high speciﬁcity to gpi-anchored proteins.15 the absence of gpi-anchored proteins is
demonstrated by reduced ﬂuorescence intensity. bottom: red
cells from a healthy donor (red) and the pnh patient (blue)
after staining with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate– conjugated anti-cd59. cd59 is a gpi-anchored protein and is missing from
the cell surface of pnh cells. abbreviations: flaer, ﬂuorescein-labeled proaerolysin; gpi, glycosylphosphatidylinositol;
pnh, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.

magnetic resonance imaging, and hepatic duplex, revealed cholelithiasis without cholecystitis, splenic vein
thrombosis with marked splenomegaly and gastric varices, and portal vein occlusion with cavernous transformation. in an attempt to relieve his thrombocytopenia
and gastric varices, he underwent splenic artery embolization in april 2005. to prevent further venous thromboses, he was started on warfarin, but his clinical con-

liver transplantation.doi 10.1002/lt. published on behalf of the american association for the study of liver diseases

542 singer et al.

figure 2. histologic examination of the liver explant. (a) the
liver explant shows centrilobular areas of hemorrhagic necrosis (right side of the ﬁeld) with sparing of portal areas (left
side of the ﬁeld; 200ⴛ magniﬁcation, hematoxylin and eosin).
(b) a higher magniﬁcation image shows an area of hemorrhagic necrosis (upper portion of the ﬁeld) with adjacent hepatic parenchyma (lower portion of the ﬁeld). hepatic sinusoids are dilated with clusters of red blood cells at the
interface between the hemorrhagic and viable hepatic parenchyma (400ⴛ magniﬁcation, hematoxylin and eosin).

dition progressively deteriorated. he developed severe
frontal and retro-orbital headaches and, despite continuous anticoagulation, was found to have sagittal
vein thrombosis. new thrombi were also found in the
infrahepatic and retrohepatic inferior vena cava as well
as the hepatic veins with hepatomegaly, caudate hypertrophy, and worsening ascites; these changes were consistent with hepatic venous outﬂow obstruction (bcs).
ultimately, he developed acute renal insufﬁciency and
required dialysis.
eculizumab treatment was initiated on december 1,
2006, at a dose of 600 mg intravenously every 7 days for
4 weeks and then was increased to 900 mg intravenously every 14 days. an immediate reduction in intravascular hemolysis was documented by a decrease in
lactate dehydrogenase to nearly normal levels and a
decreased need for blood transfusions. breakthrough
hemolysis occurred 7 to 8 days after each eculizumab
dose, most likely because of removal of the drug during
weekly paracentesis. on february 7, 2007, a high-quality organ became available from a 55-year-old brain
dead man who had suffered cardiac arrest after smoke
inhalation. the recipient model for end-stage liver disease score at the time of transplant was 24 (international normalized ratio ⫽ 1, total bilirubin ⫽ 10.1 mg/
dl, and creatinine ⫽ 2.4 mg/dl; the frequency of
dialysis was less than twice weekly). as the recipient
was known to have an area of thrombus within his cava
just above the renal veins, it was felt that this area
might need to be resected during caval reconstruction.
therefore, during back-table preparation of the liver, a
ring of donor infrarenal vena cava that had been retrieved was sutured in running fashion to the infrahepatic cava, adding a length of approximately 2 cm.
the recipient was explored through a chevron incision with a return of 12 l of ascites. the liver was large
secondary to congestion with massive enlargement of
the caudate lobe. the microscopic appearance of the
explant was consistent with bcs (fig. 2). the dissection
of the porta hepatis revealed the portal vein to be completely clotted as anticipated, so a superior mesenteric
vein jump graft was created with a donor iliac vein.

during venovenous bypass, the suprahepatic and infrahepatic inferior vena cava was clamped, and the liver
and retrohepatic vena cava were resected so as to completely remove the segment of cava containing thrombus. suprahepatic and infrahepatic inferior vena cava
anastomoses were sewn with running prolene in the
usual fashion. the donor portal vein was then anastomosed to the superior mesenteric vein jump graft. the
graft reperfused well, and bile production was almost
immediate. the hepatic arteries were joined with a 7-0
prolene interrupted anastomosis and reperfused. biliary reconstruction was performed with interrupted
maxon without a biliary stent or t-tube.
the patient’s postoperative hospital course was unremarkable. he was started on standard 3-agent immunosuppression with tacrolimus, prednisone, and  xxxd2677xxx . he required no dialysis after surgery,
with a creatinine level of 1.1 mg/dl by the time of
discharge on postoperative day 9. his liver function also
slowly improved, with a total bilirubin level of 0.8 mg/
dl, an  xxxg941xxx  level of 44 u/l, an
aspartate aminotransferase level of 22 u/l, an alkaline
phosphatase level of 118 u/l, and an international
normalized ratio of 1.0 at discharge. he required no
postoperative blood transfusions and, with lactate dehydrogenase levels stably under 200 u/l, had no evidence of pnh-related hemolysis. protocol hepatic duplex showed patent vasculature.
treatment with eculizumab was continued during
surgery and maintained thereafter; he has had no evidence of overt hemolysis or complement-mediated
breakthroughs since surgery. he was found to have
lower extremity deep vein thrombosis in april 2007,
although it is unclear whether it was old or new. nevertheless, given his diagnosis, he was put on anticoagulation initially with  xxxd1997xxx  and
then maintained on warfarin with an international normalized ratio of 2 to 3 for 6 months. with stable graft
function, his  xxxd2677xxx  was discontinued
1 month after the operation, and prednisone was tapered off by month 5. six months after transplant, a
slow rise in his alkaline phosphatase to 299 u/l was
noted. all other liver functions remained within the
normal range. magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography suggested moderate stricture of his biliary
anastomosis, and in september 2007, he underwent
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with
sphincterotomy, balloon dilatation of the anastomosis,
and placement of a stent. he has been otherwise well,
his karnofsky performance status has improved from
20 around the time of surgery to 100 at this point, and
he has returned to work as an accountant.

discussion
hepatic failure due to portal or hepatic vein thrombosis
is a common cause of mortality in pnh. until recently,
there was no effective therapy for treating pnh other
than allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, which is
associated with high incidences of morbidities and mortality. liver transplantation was contraindicated in

liver transplantation.doi 10.1002/lt. published on behalf of the american association for the study of liver diseases

liver transplantation for budd-chiari syndrome 543

pnh because of the high risk of recurrent thrombosis.
eculizumab was recently approved by the food and
drug administration for the treatment of pnh and has
been shown to markedly decrease the risk for thrombosis.11 to this point, all pnh patients described in the
literature who had bcs and underwent liver transplantation developed recurrent bcs, portal vein thrombosis, hepatic artery thrombosis, or some combination
thereof (table 1). many underwent early retransplantation, and survival was poor.
in the case presented, we demonstrate the utility of
eculizumab in the prevention of recurrent bcs and
hepatic artery and portal vein thromboses in the post–
liver transplant setting. our patient is now more than
1.5 years post-transplant, and with ongoing, twice
monthly eculizumab infusion, he has stable graft function and no radiographic evidence of thrombotic recurrence, is not maintained on anticoagulation therapy,
has had no hospital readmissions, and has returned to
work full-time. eculizumab therapy appears to offer
new hope to patients with end-stage liver disease secondary to pnh-induced bcs. pnh should no longer be
considered a contraindication for liver transplantation.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

references
1. brodsky ra. paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: the
physiology of complement-related hemolytic anemia. ann
intern med 2008;148:587-595.
2. moyo vm, mukhina gl, garrett es, brodsky ra. natural
history of paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria using
modern diagnostic assays. br j haematol 2004;126:133138.
3. hillmen p, lewis sm, bessler m, luzzatto l, dacie jv.
natural history of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
n engl j med 1995;333:1253-1258.
4. socié g, mary jy, de gramont a, rio b, leporrier m, rose
c, et al. paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria: longterm follow-up and prognostic factors. french society of
haematology. lancet 1996;348:573-577.
5. halff g, todo s, tzakis ag, gordon rd, starzl te. liver

13.

14.

15.

transplantation for the budd-chiari syndrome. ann surg
1990;211:43-49.
schattenfroh n, bechstein wo, blumhardt g, langer r,
lobeck h, langrehr jm, neuhaus p. liver transplantation
for pnh with budd-chiari syndrome. a case report.
transpl int 1993;6:354-358.
bahr mj, schubert j, bleck js, tietge uj, boozari b,
schmidt re, et al. recurrence of budd-chiari syndrome
after liver transplantation in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. transpl int 2003;16:890-894.
rückert jc, rückert ri, rudolph b, müller jm. recurrence
of the budd-chiari syndrome after orthotopic liver transplantation. hepatogastroenterology 1999;46:867-871.
vivarelli m, la barba g, legnani c, cucchetti a, bellusci
r, palareti g, cavallari a. repeated graft loss caused by
recurrent hepatic artery thrombosis after liver transplantation. liver transpl 2003;9:629-631.
chang cy, singal ak, ganeshan sv, schiano td, lookstein r, emre s. use of splenic artery embolization to
relieve tense ascites following liver transplantation in a
patient with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. liver
transpl 2007;13:1532-1537.
rother rp, rollins sa, mojcik cf, brodsky ra, bell l.
discovery and development of the complement inhibitor
eculizumab for the treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. nat biotechnol 2007;25:1256-1264.
hillmen p, young ns, schubert j, brodsky ra, socié g,
muus p, et al. the complement inhibitor eculizumab in
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. n engl j med
2006;355:1233-1243.
brodsky ra, young ns, antonioli e, risitano am, schrezenmeier h, schubert j, et al. multicenter phase 3 study
of the complement inhibitor eculizumab for the treatment
of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
blood 2008;111:1840-1847.
hillmen p, muus p, dührsen u, risitano am, schubert j,
luzzatto l, et al. effect of the complement inhibitor eculizumab on thromboembolism in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. blood 2007;110:41234128.
brodsky ra, mukhina gl, li s, nelson kl, chiurazzi pl,
buckley jt, borowitz mj. improved detection and characterization of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria using
ﬂuorescent aerolysin. am j clin pathol 2000;114:459466.

liver transplantation.doi 10.1002/lt. published on behalf of the american association for the study of liver diseases

