2677

j physiol 587.11 (2009) pp 2677–2692

opioid receptor mechanisms at the hypoglossal motor
pool and effects on tongue muscle activity in vivo
mohammad hajiha, marq-andré dubord, hattie liu and richard l. horner
departments of medicine and physiology, university of toronto, toronto, canada, m5s 1a8

opioids can modulate breathing and predispose to respiratory depression by actions at various
central nervous system sites, but the mechanisms operating at respiratory motor nuclei have
not been studied. this study tests the hypotheses that (i) local delivery of the mu-opioid receptor
agonist fentanyl into the hypoglossal motor nucleus (hmn) will suppress genioglossus activity
in vivo, (ii) a component of this suppression is mediated by opioid-induced acetylcholine release
acting at muscarinic receptors, and (iii) delta- and kappa-opioid receptors also modulate genioglossus
activity. seventy-two isoflurane-anaesthetised, tracheotomised, spontaneously breathing rats
were studied during microdialysis perfusion into the hmn of (i) fentanyl and naloxone
(mu-opioid receptor antagonist), (ii) fentanyl with and without co-application of muscarinic
receptor antagonists, and (iii) delta- and kappa-opioid receptor agonists and antagonists. the results
showed (i) that fentanyl at the hmn caused a suppression of genioglossus activity (p < 0.001)
that reversed with naloxone (p < 0.001), (ii) that neither atropine nor scopolamine affected the
fentanyl-induced suppression of genioglossus activity, and (iii) that delta-, but not kappa-, opioid receptor
stimulation also suppressed genioglossus activity (p = 0.036 and p = 0.402 respectively). we
conclude that mu-opioid receptor stimulation suppresses motor output from a central respiratory
motoneuronal pool that activates genioglossus muscle, and this suppression does not involve
muscarinic receptor-mediated inhibition. this mu-opioid receptor-induced suppression of tongue
muscle activity by effects at the hypoglossal motor pool may underlie the clinical concern
regarding adverse upper airway function with mu-opioid analgesics. the inhibitory effects of muand delta-opioid receptors at the hmn also indicate an influence of endogenous enkephalins and
endorphins in respiratory motor control.
(received 2 march 2009; accepted after revision 14 april 2009; first published online 29 april 2009)
corresponding author r. l. horner: room 7308, medical sciences building, 1 kings college circle, toronto, on,
canada, m5s 1a8. email: richard.horner@utoronto.ca
abbreviations dpdpe, [d-pen 2,5 ]-enkephalin hydrate; gg, genioglossus; hmn, hypoglossal motor nucleus; nor-bni,
nor-binaltorphimine dihydrochloride; osa, obstructive sleep apnoea.

the analgesic properties of the juice extracted from the
opium poppy have been recognized for centuries, and
opioid drugs remain the mainstay of pain management
in clinical medicine today (gutstein & akil, 2001; dahan,
2007b). morphine and other analgesic drugs derived from
opium exert their effects by mimicking the action of endogenous opioid peptides, the natural ligands for opioid
receptors. most of the exogenously administered opioid
drugs used clinically preferentially activate mu-opioid
receptors (gutstein & akil, 2001; dahan, 2007b). however,
the most widely recognized adverse side effect of mu-opioid
analgesics is respiratory depression, which can be lethal
(santiago & edelman, 1985; mccrimmon & alheid, 2003;
wang & teichtahl, 2007; pattinson, 2008), especially with
overdose (gutstein & akil, 2001; teichtahl & wang,

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2007). medical concern for opioid-induced respiratory
depression is such that provision of effective analgesia is
often suboptimal (pattinson, 2008).
opioid-induced respiratory depression may be caused
by effects at multiple central nervous system sites. these
include effects at medullary respiratory neurons leading
to suppression of respiratory rate and inhibition of
premotor respiratory drive (greer et al. 1995; ballanyi
et al. 1997; gray et al. 1999; takeda et al. 2001; lalley,
2003; manzke et al. 2003; mccrimmon & alheid, 2003;
mellen et al. 2003), effects at sites of chemoreception
leading to suppression of ventilatory responses to hypoxia
and hypercapnia (bailey et al. 2000; zhang et al. 2007;
pattinson, 2008), suppression of brain arousal systems
leading to sedation (teichtahl & wang, 2007; wang &
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.171678

2678

m. hajiha and others

teichtahl, 2007), and/or suppression of activity at central
respiratory motoneurons innervating the respiratory
muscles. importantly for the latter possibility, despite the
fact that respiratory motoneurons are the final common
output pathway for the influence of the brain on the
muscles of breathing (sherrington, 1906; burke, 2007),
we know of no studies determining whether opioids
suppress respiratory muscle activity by direct influences at
central respiratory motor nuclei, and there is also no such
information in major reviews of either motor function
or opioids and breathing (santiago & edelman, 1985;
yeadon & kitchen, 1989; rekling et al. 2000; mccrimmon
& alheid, 2003; dahan, 2007b; pattinson, 2008).
upper airway obstruction and hypoventilation are
serious clinical concerns associated with opioid
administration (kryger, 2000; brown et al. 2006; lerman,
2006). the hypoglossal motor nucleus innervates the
genioglossus (gg) and other muscles of the tongue,
relaxation of which is a key factor in the pathogenesis
of upper airway obstruction (remmers et al. 1978).
clinically, adult patients with obstructive sleep apnoea
(osa) are at particular risk for respiratory complications
post-operatively, i.e. at a time when opioids are routinely
administered (kryger, 2000). children undergoing
adenotonsillectomy for osa have a higher sensitivity to
mu-opioid receptor agonists, and higher post-operative
difficulty in breathing and oxygen desaturation compared
to children without osa (brown et al. 2006; lerman,
2006). caution and close respiratory monitoring is
considered ‘mandatory’ in osa patients post-operatively,
and it is recommended that opioid drugs ‘only be
administered if the airway is under control’ (kryger, 2000).
in practice, however, there is a large population of
patients with undiagnosed osa (young et al. 2002), and
many individuals with patient-controlled analgesia are
at risk for impaired breathing post-operatively (dahan,
2007a; teichtahl & wang, 2007; wang & teichtahl, 2007).
based on the above considerations, this study aims to
characterize for the first time the effects on respiratory
muscle activity of opioid receptor agonists and antagonists
applied directly to a respiratory motor pool in vivo, to test
the hypothesis that application of the mu-receptor agonist
fentanyl to the hypoglossal motor nucleus will suppress
gg muscle activity.
a recent study has also shown that application
of morphine to the hypoglossal motor nucleus of
isoflurane-anaesthetized rats leads to increased acetylcholine at that motor pool, a change that was postulated
to have an inhibitory effect on motor activity (skulsky
et al. 2007). however, the physiological consequence of
that opioid-induced acetylcholine release on gg activity
was not investigated (skulsky et al. 2007). this is
particularly relevant as we have shown previously that
increased endogenous acetylcholine at the hypoglossal
motor nucleus suppresses gg activity via a muscarinic

j physiol 587.11

receptor mechanism (liu et al. 2005). accordingly, a
second aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis
that a component of the fentanyl-induced suppression of
gg activity is reduced by muscarinic receptor antagonism
at the hypoglossal motor nucleus. finally, given that this
study is the first to characterize the effects on respiratory
muscle activity of opioid receptor stimulation at a
respiratory motor pool, further studies were performed
to determine the effects on gg muscle activity of delta- and
kappa-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal motor
pool.

methods
studies were performed on a total of 72 adult
male wistar rats (mean body weight = 270 ± 2 g
(s.e.m.), range = 230–330 g, charles river). the number
of animals studied for each experiment is listed
where appropriate. all procedures conformed to the
recommendations of the canadian council on animal
care, and the university of toronto animal care
committee approved the experimental protocol.

surgical preparation

all experiments were performed in isofluraneanaesthetized rats. following induction of surgical levels
of anaesthesia, as judged by the abolition of the hindlimb withdrawal and corneal blink reflexes, the rats were
tracheotomized and the femoral artery and vein were
cannulated. throughout the surgery, and the experiments,
the rats spontaneously breathed a 50 : 50 mixture of room
air and oxygen. in initial experiments in 33 rats (study
1, protocols 1a–d, see below), anaesthesia was maintained
with isoflurane (typically 0.2–0.9%) after initial initiation
with urethane (1 g kg−1 ) via intraperitoneal injection.
we have routinely used this anaesthetic regime in
previous studies because it provides highly reliable preparations (liu et al. 2005; sood et al. 2005; steenland
et al. 2008), compared to, for example, periodic bolus
doses of supplemental urethane, which can transiently
suppress gg activity and alter the electroencephalogram
(eeg). once isoflurane was initiated within an animal,
typically no further adjustment was necessary across the
experiment to maintain stable eeg activity. additional
experiments (studies 2–4) were performed in 39 rats
that were anaesthetized with isoflurane only (2–3.2%).
these experiments were performed with isoflurane
because of a recent study showing that mu-opioid receptor
stimulation at the hypoglossal motor nucleus can lead
to increased levels of acetylcholine at that motor pool in
isoflurane-anaesthetized rats (skulsky et al. 2007), and
we wished to study the physiological consequence of that

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

effect on gg activity in a similar preparation, i.e. without
the potential influence of urethane.
in all experiments, core body temperature was
maintained between 36 and 38◦ c with a water pump
and heating pad (t/pump-heat therapy system, gaymar,
ny, usa). the rats received continuous intravenous
fluid (0.4 ml h−1 ) containing 7.6 ml saline, 2 ml 5%
dextrose and 0.4 ml of 1 m nahco 3 . for electromyogram
(emg) recordings of diaphragm activity, two insulated,
multi-stranded stainless steel wires (as636; coorner wire,
chatsworth, ca, usa) were sutured into the costal
diaphragm via an abdominal approach. the rats were
placed in a stereotaxic apparatus (kopf model 962,
tujunga, ca, usa) and the head was secured with blunt
ear bars. to ensure consistent positioning between rats,
the flat skull position was achieved with an alignment tool
(kopf model 944). to record the cortical eeg two stainless
steel screws attached to insulated wire were implanted onto
the skull over the frontal-parietal cortex (liu et al. 2005;
sood et al. 2005; steenland et al. 2008). two stainless
steel wire electrodes were also inserted bilaterally under
direct observation into the body of the tongue, via an
oral approach, to record gg activity. we have shown that
such electrode placements record activity from muscles
innervated by the medial branch of the hypoglossal nerve
(morrison et al. 2002).

microdialysis

a microdialysis probe (cma/11 14/01, csc, st laurent,
qc, canada) was placed through a small hole drilled
at the junction of the interparietal and occipital bones.
the probes were lowered into the hypoglossal motor
nucleus at the following final coordinates: 13.6 ± 0.05 mm
posterior to bregma, 0.1 ± 0.02 mm lateral to the midline and 9.9 ± 0.09 mm ventral to bregma. in each rat, a
brief burst of gg activity was observed when the probe
initially penetrated the hypoglossal motor nucleus, and
then the probe was advanced another 0.5 mm before being
left at the final coordinates. this burst of gg activity
during probe insertion was transient (typically < 5 min)
and did not affect diaphragm activity, blood pressure or
respiratory rate, and was useful as a preliminary indication
of probe placement (liu et al. 2005; sood et al. 2005;
steenland et al. 2008). the rats stabilized for an average of
30 ± 5 min before any interventions.
the microdialysis probes were 240 mum in diameter with
a 1 mm cuprophane membrane and a 6000 da cut-off.
the probes were connected to fep teflon tubing (inside
diameter = 0.12 mm) and connected to 1.0 ml syringes
via a zero dead space switch (uniswitch, b.a.s. west
lafayette, in, usa). the probes were continually flushed
with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (acsf) at a flow rate of
2.0 mul min−1 using a syringe infusion pump (pump 22;

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2679

harvard apparatus; holliston, ma, usa). the lag time
for fluid to travel to the tip of the probe at this flow rate
was approximately 5 min. the composition (in mm) of the
acsf was nacl (125), kcl (3), kh 2 po 4 (1),  xxxg2125xxx  2 (2),
mgso 4 (1), nahco 3 (25) and glucose (30). the acsf
was made fresh each day, warmed to 37◦ c and bubbled
with co 2 to a ph of 7.42 ± 0.003.
recording

the electrical signals were amplified and filtered (super-z
head-stage amplifiers and bma-400 amplifiers/filters,
cwe inc., ardmore, pa, usa). the eeg was amplified
and filtered between 1 and 100 hz, whereas the emg
signals were amplified and filtered between 100 and
1000 hz. the gg and diaphragm signals were recorded
at the same amplification across all experiments. it was
not necessary to alter the gain of the recording apparatus
between experiments and baseline emg activity was
similar across rats. the electrocardiogram was removed
from the diaphragm signal using an oscilloscope and
electronic blanker (model  xxxd2017xxx , cwe inc.). in addition,
the moving time averages (time constant = 100 ms) of
the gg and diaphragm signals were obtained (coulbourn
s76-01, lehigh valley, pa, usa). each signal, along with
blood pressure (dt-xx transducer, ohmeda, madison,
wi, usa and pm-1000 amplifier, cwe inc.) were
digitized and recorded on computer (spike 2 software,
1401 interface, ced ltd., cambridge, uk).
protocol

multiple studies were performed in separate groups of rats
to determine the mechanisms underlying suppression of
gg activity by opioids applied to the hypoglossal motor
nucleus. drugs were purchased from sigma (st. louis,
mo, usa).
study 1: modulation of gg activity by mu-opioid receptor
mechanisms at the hypoglossal motor pool. signals were

recorded continuously during microdialysis perfusion
of acsf into the hypoglossal motor nucleus (control
condition), and then during perfusion of the mu-opioid
receptor agonist fentanyl at 1, 10 and 100 mum. for these
experiments, following application of the last dose of
fentanyl the perfusion medium was then switched to one
of (a) the mu-opioid receptor antagonist naloxone (100 mum,
n = 9 rats, protocol 1a); (b) the muscarinic receptor
antagonist atropine (10 mum, n = 8 rats, protocol 1b), with
previous studies (using the same techniques) showing that
this dose of atropine significantly reduces the suppression
of gg activity produced by increases in endogenous acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor nucleus (liu et al. 2005);
or (c) back to acsf, i.e. washout (n = 8 rats, protocol

2680

m. hajiha and others

j physiol 587.11

1c). in each of these protocols, each intervention lasted
30 min. importantly, to next examine if any of the observed
changes in gg activity were caused by effects of time
per se, i.e. independent of the drug interventions, further
experiments were performed in which repeated switches
to perfusion of acsf into the hypoglossal motor nucleus
were performed (i.e. ‘sham interventions’) over the same
time course as the drug interventions (n = 8 rats, protocol
1d).

acsf into the hypoglossal motor nucleus (control), and
then during perfusion of the delta-opioid receptor agonist
[d-pen 2,5 ]-enkephalin hydrate (dpdpe) at 1, 10 and
100 mum (n = 9 rats, protocol 3). following application
of the last dose of dpdpe, the perfusion medium
was then switched to the delta-opioid receptor antagonist
naltrindole (100 mum). any changes in gg muscle activity
were compared to the equivalent time control experiments
performed in protocol 2d (see above).

study 2: continuous mu-opioid receptor stimulation at the
hypoglossal motor pool with and without muscarinic
receptor antagonism. an additional study was performed

study 4: kappa-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool. in a final set of experiments,

to further characterize mu-opioid induced suppression
of gg muscle activity and the potential role of
fentanyl-induced acetylcholine release at the hypoglossal
motor nucleus in contributing to the gg suppression.
given that the experiments performed in study 1 were
to characterize gg activity in response to increasing
doses of fentanyl, further experiments were performed
in which acsf was applied to the hypoglossal motor
nucleus for 60 min, followed by a switch to continuous
delivery of one dose of 100 mum fentanyl for 90 min (in
three 30 min periods). in these experiments, fentanyl
was delivered to the hypoglossal motor nucleus either
alone (n = 6 rats, protocol 2a) or in the combined
presence of 10 mum atropine (n = 6 rats, protocol 2b).
again, previous studies using the same techniques have
shown that this dose of atropine significantly reduces
the suppression of gg activity by increases in endogenous acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor nucleus
(liu et al. 2005). in a third set of experiments, 100 mum
fentanyl was also continuously applied to the hypoglossal motor nucleus in the presence of a different
muscarinic receptor antagonist, (–)-scopolamine methyl
bromide (100 nm, n = 4 rats, protocol 2c). this dose of
scopolamine delivered by microdialysis perfusion into the
spinal cord significantly inhibits the release of acetylcholine in isoflurane-anaesthetized rats (hoglund et al.
2000). finally, to again examine if any of the observed
changes in gg activity were caused by effects of time
per se, i.e. independent of the drug interventions, further
experiments were performed in which repeated switches
to perfusion of acsf into the hypoglossal motor nucleus
were performed (i.e. ‘sham interventions’) over the same
time course as the drug interventions (n = 8 rats, protocol
2d).
study 3: delta-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool. delta-receptors have also been localized

to the hypoglossal motor pool, and as such are also
positioned to modulate gg activity (sales et al. 1985;
richardson & gatti, 2005). accordingly, signals were
monitored continuously during microdialysis perfusion of

signals were monitored during microdialysis perfusion
of acsf into the hypoglossal motor nucleus (control),
and then during perfusion of the kappa-opioid receptor
agonist u-50488 at 1, 10 and 100 mum (n = 6 rats,
protocol 4). following application of the last dose
of u-50488, the perfusion medium was switched to
the kappa-opioid receptor antagonist nor-binaltorphimine
dihydrochloride (nor-bni) (100 mum). any changes in
gg muscle activity were compared to the equivalent
time-control experiments performed in protocol 2d (see
above).
analyses

for each agent delivered to the hypoglossal motor nucleus,
measurements were taken over 1 min periods at the end
of each 30 min drug or sham intervention (i.e. studies 1,
3 and 4), and at the end of each successive 30 min time
period for the more prolonged interventions (study 2).
breath-by-breath measurements of gg and diaphragm
activities were calculated and averaged in consecutive 5 s
time bins (liu et al. 2005; sood et al. 2005; steenland
et al. 2008). all values were written to a spreadsheet
and matched to the corresponding intervention at the
hypoglossal motor nucleus to provide a grand mean for
each variable, for each intervention, in each rat. the
emg signals were analysed from the moving time average
signals (above electrical zero) and quantified in arbitrary
units and expressed as a percentage (%) of the respective
acsf controls. electrical zero was the voltage recorded
with the amplifier inputs grounded. gg activity was
quantified as mean tonic activity (i.e. basal activity during
expiration), peak activity and respiratory-related activity
(i.e. peak inspiratory minus tonic activity). in practice
there was no tonic gg activity in these experiments
performed under anaesthesia, so only respiratory-related
gg activity is presented. mean diaphragm amplitudes
(i.e. respiratory-related diaphragm activity), respiratory
rate and mean arterial blood pressure were also calculated
for each 5 s period. the eeg was sampled by computer
at 500 hz and subjected to a fast-fourier transform for
each 5 s time bin, and the power within frequency bands
spanning the 0.5–30 hz range was calculated (liu et al.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

2005; sood et al. 2005; steenland et al. 2008). the ratio
of high (beta 2 , 20–30 hz) to low (delta 1 , 2–4 hz) frequency
activity was calculated and used as a relative marker of
eeg activation (liu et al. 2005; sood et al. 2005; steenland
et al. 2008).
tests of function of hypoglossal motor nucleus
and histology

at the end of each experiment for each protocol, 10 mm
serotonin (creatinine sulphate complex) was applied to
the hypoglossal motor nucleus as a positive control to
confirm that it was still functional and able to respond
to manipulation of neurotransmission as judged by the
expected increase in gg activity (jelev et al. 2001; liu et al.
2005; sood et al. 2005; steenland et al. 2008). at the end of
each study the rats were killed under anaesthesia by intravenous injection of 3–5 ml of saturated kcl and a high dose
of anaesthetic. the rats then were perfused intracardially
with 0.9% saline and 10% formalin, following which the
brain was removed and fixed in 10% formalin. medullary
regions containing the hypoglossal motor nucleus were
blocked and transferred to a 30% sucrose solution for
cryoprotection. the tissue was then sectioned at 50 mum
using a cryostat (cm1850, leica, nussloch, germany).
sections were mounted and stained with neutral red,
and the lesion sites left by the microdialysis probes were
recorded on a corresponding standard cross-section using
a stereotaxic atlas of the rat brain (paxinos & watson,
1998).
statistics

the analyses performed for each statistical test are
included in the text where appropriate. for all
comparisons, differences were considered significant if
the null hypothesis was rejected at p < 0.05. where
post hoc comparisons were performed after analysis
of variance with repeated measures (anova-rm), the
bonferroni-corrected p value was used to infer statistical
significance. analyses were performed using sigmastat
(systat software inc., san jose, ca, usa). data are
presented as means ± s.e.m. unless otherwise indicated.
results
sites of microdialysis

figure 1 shows an example of a lesion site left by a microdialysis probe in the hypoglossal motor nucleus. the
distribution of microdialysis sites from all the experiments
in study 1 are also shown in fig. 1, with the sites located
within or immediately adjacent to the hypoglossal motor
nuclei in all animals.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2681

study 1: modulation of gg activity by mu-opioid
receptor mechanisms at the hypoglossal motor pool
opioid-induced suppression of gg activity. figure 2a
shows an example of the progressive decrease in gg
activity with increasing concentration of the mu-opioid
receptor agonist fentanyl applied locally to the hypoglossal motor pool. the group data in fig. 2b show
that there was a statistically significant effect of fentanyl
on gg activity (p < 0.001, 2-way anova-rm). for
each of protocols 1a–c, significant gg suppression first
occurred  xxxd1891xxx  mum fentanyl compared to the preceding
baseline acsf controls (p < 0.001, post hoc paired t-tests,
asterisks in fig. 2b). nevertheless, for each of protocols
1a–c, it was at 100 mum fentanyl that the levels of gg
activity were all significantly reduced compared to the
same point in the corresponding acsf time-control
experiments (fig. 2b, each p < 0.001 post hoc paired
t-tests, symbol ‘+’ in fig. 2b). finally, although there was
a decline in gg activity in the time-control experiments
with continuous application of acsf to the hypoglossal
motor nucleus (fig. 2b), this only became statistically
significant at the last intervention (p = 0.015, post hoc
paired t-test, asterisks for protocol 1d in fig. 2b, p > 0.178
for each of the other comparisons to baseline acsf in this
protocol).

effects of applied antagonists. the effect on gg activity

of a switch from 100 mum fentanyl at the hypoglossal
motor nucleus to a particular antagonist depended on the
experimental protocol (p < 0.001, 2-way anova-rm). a
switch from fentanyl to naloxone at the hypoglossal motor
nucleus led to a significant increase in gg muscle activity
(p < 0.001, post hoc paired t-test, symbol ‘#’ in fig. 2b)
to levels that were still reduced, but not significantly
different, from the levels of gg activity recorded in the
time-control experiments with acsf (label ‘ns’ in fig. 2b).
this result confirmed that the suppression of gg activity
with fentanyl at the hypoglossal motor nucleus was indeed
mediated by a mu-opioid receptor mechanism per se and
not an effect of time. in contrast to this result with
naloxone, a switch from fentanyl to atropine at the hypoglossal motor nucleus in protocol 1b had no effect on
gg activity (p = 0.252, post hoc paired t-test, fig. 2b),
such that gg activity remained significantly lower than
the levels recorded in the time-control experiments with
acsf (symbol ‘+’ in fig. 2b). this lack of effect with
atropine, despite being an effective dose to block inhibitory
cholinergic effects at the hypoglossal motor nucleus (liu
et al. 2005), showed that any potential effect of increased
acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor pool (skulsky et al.
2007) did not play a significant role in the fentanyl-induced
suppression of gg activity. finally, a switch back to acsf
after fentanyl in protocol 1c also had no effect on gg

2682

m. hajiha and others

activity (p = 0.342, post hoc paired t-test, fig. 2b), such
that again gg activity remained significantly lower than
the levels recorded in the acsf time-control experiments
(symbol ‘+’ in fig. 2b). this result also showed that

j physiol 587.11

fentanyl had persistent effects on gg activity despite its
washout, and that the increase previously observed with
naloxone was not due to washout of fentanyl per se but
was due to the antagonist.

figure 1. example and group data showing the location of the microdialysis probes from all the
experiments in protocols 1a–d from study 1: modulation of genioglossus activity by mu-opioid receptor
mechanisms at the hypoglossal motor pool
the top images show histological sections with the location of microdialysis site indicated by the arrow, with
adjacent regions of the hypoglossal motor pool (rostral and caudal) also shown. abbreviation: hmn, hypoglossal
motor nucleus.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

of responses to fentanyl. in
these
anaesthetized
rats
baseline
respiratory
rate
averaged 73.1 ± 1.6 min−1 , blood pressure averaged
72.4 ± 3.4 mmhg, and respiratory-related gg and
diaphragm muscle activities averaged 177.3 ± 19.7 and
385.1 ± 40.4 arbitrary units respectively. unlike the clear
suppression of gg activity with fentanyl applied locally
to the hypoglossal motor nucleus in protocols 1a–c
(fig. 2), there were no significant effects of these fentanyl
applications on the amplitude of diaphragm activity,
respiratory rate or blood pressure compared to the changes
over time observed in the acsf time-control experiments
(fig. 3, p = 0.092, 0.065 and 0.376, respectively, 2-way
anova-rm), i.e. the effects on gg activity were specific
to the interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool and
did not significantly affect other variables. likewise, there

specificity

figure 2. modulation of gg activity by
mu-opioid receptor mechanisms at the
hypoglossal motor pool
a, example in one rat showing selective
depression of respiratory-related genioglossus
activity with microdialysis perfusion of the
mu-opioid receptor agonist fentanyl into the
hypoglossal motor pool, and the subsequent
reversal of this suppression with application of
the mu-opioid receptor antagonist naloxone. b,
group data showing significant suppression of
respiratory-related genioglossus activity with
fentanyl at the hypoglossal motor pool in
protocols 1a–c. subsequent application of
naloxone led to a significant increase in
genioglossus activity (protocol 1a) that did not
occur with a switch to either atropine or
artificial cerebrospinal fluid (acsf) (protocols 1b
and 1c respectively). see text for further details.
∗ p < 0.05 compared to baseline acsf controls;
+p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding
acsf time-control experiment (i.e. protocol
1d); #p < 0.05 from fentanyl to naloxone.
abbreviations: eeg, electroencephalogram;
emg, electromyogram; mta, moving-time
average.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2683

was no effect of the fentanyl applications on the ratio
of high (beta 2 , 20–30 hz) to low (delta 1 , 2–4 hz) frequency
activity in the eeg, indicating no relative change in
eeg activation compared to the acsf time-control
experiments (p = 0.451, 2-way anova-rm).
study 2: continuous mu-opioid receptor stimulation
at the hypoglossal motor pool with and without
muscarinic receptor antagonism

the distribution of microdialysis sites from all the
experiments in study 2 are shown in fig. 4, which
illustrates that all sites were located within or immediately
adjacent to the hypoglossal motor nuclei in all animals.
the group data in fig. 5 show that there was a statistically
significant effect of experimental protocol on gg activity

2684

m. hajiha and others

(p = 0.005, 2-way anova-rm), with the responses
to the  xxxg1635xxx  agonist fentanyl (protocols 2a–c)
being significantly different from the acsf time-control
experiment (protocol 2d, all p < 0.032, post hoc paired

j physiol 587.11

t-tests). for each of protocols 2a–c, there was significant
suppression of gg activity compared to the preceding
baseline acsf controls (all p < 0.001, post hoc paired
t-tests, asterisks in fig. 5). these decreases in gg activity
with fentanyl at the hypoglossal motor nucleus were
due to the effects of fentanyl per se and not due to the
effects of time, as shown by the significant difference in
gg activity with fentanyl compared to the same point
in the corresponding acsf time-control experiments
(all p < 0.041, post hoc paired t-tests, symbols ‘+’ in
fig. 5). importantly, however, there was no difference
in the magnitude of gg suppression with fentanyl
alone at the hypoglossal motor nucleus (protocol 2a)
compared to when fentanyl was co-applied with either
atropine or scopolamine (protocols 2b and 2c, p = 1.00,
post hoc paired t-tests, fig. 5). this lack of effect of
atropine and scopolamine showed that any potential effect
of fentanyl on acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor
pool (skulsky et al. 2007) did not play a significant
role in the fentanyl-induced suppression of gg activity
via a cholinergic-induced muscarinic receptor-mediated
inhibition.
finally, although there was a decline in gg activity in
the time-control experiments with continuous application
of acsf to the hypoglossal motor nucleus, this only
became statistically significant at the last intervention
(p = 0.008, post hoc paired t-test, asterisks for protocol 2d
in fig. 5). moreover, at this time in the acsf time-control
experiments, gg activity was still significantly increased
compared to the same time point in the fentanyl
experiments (i.e. compared to protocols 2a–c, each
p < 0.016, post hoc paired t-tests, symbols ‘+’ in fig. 5).

specificity of responses. in these anaesthetized rats,

figure 3. responses to the mu-opioid receptor agonist fentanyl
at the hypoglossal motor pool were specific to the genioglossus
muscle as there were no significant effects of these fentanyl
applications on the amplitude of diaphragm activity, respiratory
rate or blood pressure in protocols 1a–c compared to the
changes over time observed in the acsf time-control
experiments (protocol 1d)
see text for further details.

baseline respiratory rate averaged 50.2 ± 1.9 min−1 ,
blood pressure averaged 70.4 ± 3.2 mmhg, and
respiratory-related gg and diaphragm muscle activities
averaged 200.7 ± 45.7 and 331.3 ± 63.9 arbitrary
units, respectively. unlike the clear suppression of gg
activity with fentanyl applied locally to the hypoglossal
motor nucleus in protocols 2a–c (fig. 5), there were
no significant effects of experimental protocol on the
amplitude of diaphragm activity, respiratory rate or blood
pressure during the course of the experiments (p = 0.252,
0.069 and 0.411 respectively, 2-way anova-rm), i.e. the
effects on gg activity observed in fig. 5 were specific to
the interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool and did
not significantly affect other variables. likewise, there was
no effect of the fentanyl applications on the ratio of high
(beta 2 , 20–30 hz) to low (delta 1 , 2–4 hz) frequency activity in
the eeg, indicating no relative change in eeg activation
compared to the acsf time-control group (p = 0.617,
2-way anova-rm).

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

study 3: responses to delta-opioid receptor stimulation
at the hypoglossal motor pool

the distribution of microdialysis sites from protocol 3 are
shown in fig. 6a. the group data in fig. 6b show there
was a significant effect of the experimental protocol on
gg activity (p = 0.043, 2-way anova-rm), with gg
activity in the presence of dpdpe being significantly
reduced compared to the acsf time-control interventions (p = 0.043, post hoc paired t-test). significant gg
suppression occurred at each dose of dpdpe compared to
the preceding baseline acsf controls (all p < 0.013, post
hoc paired t-tests, asterisks in fig. 6b). these decreases
in gg activity with dpdpe at the hypoglossal motor
pool were due to the effects of the delta-opioid receptor
agonist per se and not the effects of time, as shown by
the significant difference in dpdpe response compared to
the acsf time controls (p = 0.036 2-way anova-rm).
further analyses showed that the levels of gg activity
with 10 and 100 mum dpdpe were significantly reduced
compared to the same point in the corresponding acsf
time-control experiments (fig. 6b, each p < 0.013 post hoc
paired t-tests, symbols ‘+’ in fig. 6b).

figure 4. location of the microdialysis probes from
all the experiments in protocols 2a–d from study 2:
continuous mu-opioid receptor stimulation at the
hypoglossal motor pool with and without
muscarinic receptor antagonism
abbreviations are as for fig. 1.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2685

effects of the antagonist. gg activity did not
significantly increase following a switch from 100 mum
dpdpe at the hypoglossal motor nucleus to the
antagonist naltrindole, such that any observed change in
gg activity was statistically indistinguishable from the
change observed in the acsf time-control experiment
(p = 0.743, 2-way anova-rm, see fig. 6b). the relatively
large error bar for gg activity in the presence of
naltrindole in fig. 6b is because gg activity changed
inconsistently following the switch from dpdpe (range
of −27.2% to +173%), with increases occurring in only
three of nine rats.
of responses. baseline respiratory rate
averaged 54.6 ± 2.3 min−1 , blood pressure averaged
68.9 ± 2.9 mmhg, and respiratory-related gg and
diaphragm muscle activities averaged 95.7 ± 18.7 and
576.7 ± 110.5 arbitrary units respectively. unlike the
suppression of gg activity with dpdpe applied to
the hypoglossal motor pool (fig. 6b), there were no
effects of experimental protocol on the amplitude of
diaphragm activity, respiratory rate or blood pressure
specificity

2686

m. hajiha and others

during the course of the experiments (p = 0.910, 0.059
and 0.587 respectively, 2-way anova-rm), i.e. the effects
on gg activity observed in fig. 6b were specific to the
interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool and did
not significantly affect other variables. likewise, there
was no effect of the dpdpe applications on the ratio
of high (beta 2 , 20–30 hz) to low (delta 1 , 2–4 hz) frequency
activity in the eeg, indicating no relative change in
eeg activation compared to the acsf time-control
experiments (p = 0.872, 2-way anova-rm).
study 4: responses to kappa-opioid receptor stimulation
at the hypoglossal motor pool

the distribution of microdialysis sites from protocol 4
are shown in fig. 7a, and the data for effects on gg
activity are shown in fig. 7b. statistical analyses showed
that there was a decline in gg activity over the course of the
experiment (p < 0.001, 2-way anova-rm), which first
became significant at a time point corresponding to 10 mum
u-50488 for protocol 4 and the same for the time control
(p = 0.016, post hoc paired t-test, asterisk in fig. 7b).
importantly, however, there was no effect of experimental
protocol per se on gg activity (p = 0.402). this latter
result indicated that any effect on gg activity observed in
protocol 4 with kappa-receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal
motor pool was statistically indistinguishable from the

j physiol 587.11

corresponding sham experiment with acsf, i.e. the time
control. moreover, there was no significant effect on gg
activity following a switch from 100 mum of the kappa-receptor
agonist u-50488 to the antagonist nor-bni (p = 0.123,
2-way anova-rm), and again no difference between
experimental protocols (p = 0.182, 2-way anova-rm).
overall, these data indicate that compared to the acsf
time-control group, there was no significant difference in
effect of kappa-receptor agonists or antagonists at the hypoglossal motor pool.
nevertheless, because of the apparent visual impression
of a larger suppression of gg activity with u-50488
compared to the acsf time-control experiments in fig. 7b
(especially at 100 mum), we further inspected the data and
observed that three animals showed a decline of gg
activity to less than 50% of the initial baseline value with
100 mum u-50488 (range, 41.5 to 44.4%) whereas the others
showed a lesser decline (range, 60.6 to 94.3%) that was in
the range of the acsf controls at the same time point
(mean = 78.1 ± 8.2%). importantly, none of those three
animals that showed the larger decline in gg activity
with u-50488 responded to subsequent application of
the antagonist, providing further evidence for a lack of
a specific inhibitory effect of the kappa-receptor agonist at the
hypoglossal motor pool.
of responses. baseline respiratory rate
averaged 60.9 ± 2.7 min−1 , blood pressure averaged
71.8 ± 3.6 mmhg, and respiratory-related gg and
diaphragm muscle activities averaged 69.3 ± 11.1 and
404.3 ± 81.9 arbitrary units respectively. there were no
effects of experimental intervention (i.e. a switch from
acsf to the kappa-opioid receptor drugs) or protocol (i.e.
protocol 4 vs. the acsf time-control experiments) on the
amplitude of diaphragm activity, blood pressure, or the
ratio of high (beta 2 , 20–30 hz) to low (delta 1 , 2–4 hz) frequency
activity in the eeg (all p > 0.077, 2-way anova-rm).
however, there was a significant difference in the change in
respiratory rate response between the acsf time-control
group and the kappa-receptor agonist applied to the hypoglossal motor pool (p = 0.009, 2-way anova-rm), with
respiratory rate decreasing less with u-50488 at all time
points compared to the acsf time controls (all p < 0.012,
post hoc paired t-test).
specificity

discussion
figure 5. group data showing significant suppression of
respiratory-related genioglossus activity with microdialysis
perfusion of the mu-opioid receptor agonist fentanyl into the
hypoglossal motor pool in protocols 2a–c, and the lack of effect
of co-applied atropine or scopolamine on these responses
see text for further details. ∗ p < 0.05 compared to baseline acsf
controls; +p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding acsf
time-control experiment (i.e. protocol 2d).

major findings and their interpretation

this paper contributes to the field of physiology by
being the first to report a suppression of respiratory
muscle activity caused by the presence of opioids at a
distinct central nervous system motor pool, and the first
characterization of the receptor mechanisms underlying

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

this suppression. the results indicate that the presence of
the mu-opioid receptor agonist fentanyl at the hypoglossal
motor pool causes the suppression of tongue respiratory
muscle activity, with this suppression reversed by
application of the mu-opioid receptor antagonist naloxone.
further experiments involving different protocols for
delivery of fentanyl to the hypoglossal motor pool (i.e.
incrementing doses or continuous steady-state infusion),
with and without co-application of different muscarinic
receptor antagonists (i.e. atropine or scopolamine), also
indicated that a potential mu-opioid-induced release of
acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor nucleus (skulsky
et al. 2007) did not contribute to the observed suppression
of gg activity via cholinergic-induced muscarinic
receptor-mediated inhibition (liu et al. 2005). with
respect to the possible involvement of acetylcholine, we
performed the additional experiments with muscarinic
receptor antagonism because a previous study using
the same anaesthetized rat preparation had shown that
microdialysis perfusion of the mu-opioid receptor agonist
morphine into the hypoglossal motor pool led to an

figure 6. responses to delta-opioid receptor
stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool
a, location of the microdialysis probes from all
the experiments in protocol 3 from study 3:
delta-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal
motor pool. b, group data illustrating
significant suppression of respiratory-related
genioglossus activity with microdialysis
perfusion of the delta-opioid receptor agonist
dpdpe into the hypoglossal motor pool.
∗ p < 0.05 compared to baseline acsf controls;
+p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding
acsf time-control experiment. see text for
further details.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2687

increase in acetylcholine levels by ∼25%, as measured by
high performance liquid chromatography in the recovered
perfusate, a level of change that was postulated to have an
inhibitory effect on motor activity (skulsky et al. 2007).
however, although this percentage increase may at first
seem large, the levels of acetylcholine were normalized to
basal levels before morphine, i.e. a time when absolute
levels of acetylcholine would be expected to be low in
the anaesthetized preparation. consequently, the physiological consequence of that increase in acetylcholine on
tongue muscle activity would be uncertain, and was not
measured in that study (skulsky et al. 2007).
this discussion of a potential mu-opioid receptorinduced release of acetylcholine at the hypoglossal motor
pool is relevant because we have previously identified that
increases in endogenous acetylcholine at the hypoglossal
motor nucleus cause robust suppression of gg activity,
with this suppression being significantly attenuated by
muscarinic receptor antagonism (liu et al. 2005). such
an effect of increased endogenous acetylcholine is also
of potential relevance to upper airway function clinically

2688

m. hajiha and others

(eikermann et al. 2007, 2008). of importance with
respect to the interpretation of results and validity of
the conclusions from the present study, it is notable
that we used a dose of atropine delivered to the hypoglossal motor pool that we have shown previously to
be effective in significantly attenuating the inhibitory
effects on gg activity of increased endogenous acetylcholine (liu et al. 2005). however, in the present
study using the same techniques, there was clearly no
effect of the applied atropine on the magnitude of the
fentanyl-induced suppression of gg activity, with similar
results observed with scopolamine (figs 2b and 5). this
dose of scopolamine delivered by microdialysis perfusion
is also effective in inhibiting the release of acetylcholine in
the spinal cord of isoflurane-anaesthetized rats (hoglund
et al. 2000). overall, these considerations do not dispute
that an increase in endogenous acetylcholine can occur at
the hypoglossal motor pool in the presence of mu-opioid
receptor stimulation, and we consider it highly unlikely
that such an effect would be specific only to morphine
(skulsky et al. 2007). rather, we conclude that any increase

j physiol 587.11

in endogenous acetylcholine that may have occurred
with fentanyl at the hypoglossal motor pool was simply
insufficient to significantly modulate gg activity.
finally, in addition to this characterization of a mu-opioid
receptor-induced suppression of hypoglossal motor
activity and the lack of influence of associated muscarinic
receptor-mediated inhibition, we also characterized the
effects on gg activity of delta- and kappa-opioid-receptor
stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool. these data
identified a significant suppression of gg muscle activity
with delta-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal
motor pool.
physiological and clinical relevance

the results of the present study identify a mechanism
whereby the presence of opioids in the mammalian brainstem could directly predispose to hypoventilation and
respiratory depression by an inhibitory effect at central
respiratory motor pools. in the case of the hypoglossal
motor pool, this inhibition would exert an effect on the

figure 7. responses to kappa-opioid receptor
stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool
a, location of the microdialysis probes from all
the experiments in protocol 4 from study 4:
kappa-opioid receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal
motor pool. b, group data illustrating that there
was a decline in genioglossus activity over the
course of the experiment with microdialysis
perfusion of the kappa-opioid receptor agonist
u-50488 into the hypoglossal motor pool,
which first became statistically significant
(p < 0.05)  xxxd1891xxx  mum u-50488 (indicated by ∗ ).
however, there was no significant difference in
the effect of kappa-receptor agonists or antagonists
at the hypoglossal motor pool compared to the
acsf time controls. see text for further details.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

tongue musculature, and in humans so contribute to hypoventilation via an increase in upper airway resistance,
which is a principal contributor to hypoventilation
(henke et al. 1990, 1992) and upper airway obstruction
(remmers et al. 1978). however, if this opioid-induced
suppression of motor activity is typical of other respiratory
motor pools, it may contribute to a more generalized
respiratory depression via reduced tidal volume and
functional residual capacity. such an effect would therefore
contribute to respiratory depression independently of,
and likely in addition to, the more commonly discussed
mechanisms of inhibition of respiratory proprio-bulbar
and pre-motor neurons, so leading to suppression of
respiratory rate and pre-motor respiratory drive (greer
et al. 1995; ballanyi et al. 1997; gray et al. 1999; takeda
et al. 2001; lalley, 2003; manzke et al. 2003; mccrimmon &
alheid, 2003; mellen et al. 2003), suppression of chemoreflex responses (bailey et al. 2000; zhang et al. 2007;
pattinson, 2008), and/or sedation (teichtahl & wang,
2007; wang & teichtahl, 2007). indeed, the observed
suppression of tongue muscle activity by fentanyl at the
hypoglossal motor pool lends credence to the clinical
caution regarding the upper airway in adult and pediatric
osa patients peri- and post-operatively (kryger, 2000;
brown et al. 2006; lerman, 2006), and may provide the
neurophysiological basis for this clinical concern.
finally, the suppressant effect on gg activity of muand delta-opioid receptor agonists at the hypoglossal motor
pool may also have physiological relevance to endogenous
control of respiratory motor activity, and a functional role
of these receptors in the control of tongue muscle activity.
for example, nerve terminals containing enkephalins,
the endogenous ligands for opioid receptors, are present
in the hypoglossal motor nucleus (connaughton et al.
1986; aldes, 1998; richardson & gatti, 2005). medullary
enkephalinergic pathways have been hypothesized to
function in the normal modulation of oro-facial motor
tone (aldes, 1998), even in a state-dependent fashion
(fort et al. 1998). however, these conjectures remain to be
formally tested.
critique of preparation and importance of adequate
controls

the present study was performed in intact anaesthetized
rats to allow measurements of gg muscle activity during
controlled delivery of a variety of opioid receptor agonists
and antagonists into the hypoglossal motor pool in
different protocols, without the influence of unpredictable
changes in ongoing behavioural state and spontaneous
motor behaviours that typify the conscious preparation
(steenland et al. 2008). the levels of respiratory-related
gg activity are also consistent, robust and of larger
magnitude with isoflurane anaesthesia than without
anaesthesia (roda et al. 2004; sood et al. 2006; steenland

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2689

et al. 2008), so making any motor suppression more easy
to detect and quantify (e.g. as compared to quantifying
suppression of a lower amplitude signal), more easy
to compare across different protocols during stable
conditions, and to characterize better the potential mu-, deltaand kappa-opioid receptor influences. importantly, effort was
also made for each experimental protocol to determine if
the decreases in gg activity that occurred in the presence
of the different opioid receptor agonists at the hypoglossal
motor pool were due to the effects of the drugs per se
or the effects of time. this was achieved by comparing
the responses to the respective agonists with appropriate
acsf time controls, and it is from such comparisons
that evidence for a mu- and delta-opioid receptor-mediated
suppression of hypoglossal motor output to gg muscle
was obtained.
the main focus of this paper was identification
of mu-opioid receptor-induced suppression of hypoglossal motor activity and the potential role of
cholinergic-induced muscarinic receptor-mediated
inhibition in that response. however, this paper also
provides some evidence for delta-opioid receptor-induced
suppression of hypoglossal motor activity. this latter
evidence was based largely on the significant suppression
of gg activity following application of the selective
delta-opioid receptor agonist dpdpe to the hypoglossal
motor pool compared to the preceding baseline acsf
values and, importantly, the corresponding acsf time
controls. these data are consistent with anatomical
evidence for delta-opioid receptors at the hypoglossal
motor pool (richardson & gatti, 2005). nevertheless,
application of the delta-opioid receptor antagonist naltrindole
caused inconsistent and non-significant changes in gg
activity (fig. 6b). this lack of response to naltrindole may
relate to the insufficient time for the response to manifest
after 30 min application. longer periods of observation
and application of other agonists and antagonists were
not performed in this study.
with respect to the experimental protocols, it was
also noted that there was no effect on gg activity of a
switch from fentanyl to acsf in study 1 (protocol 1c
in fig. 2b), i.e. an increase toward the values observed
in the corresponding acsf time-control experiment did
not occur. the most likely explanations for this persistent
suppression of gg activity after 30 min washout of
fentanyl include lingering inhibition due to downstream
signalling mechanisms activated by the mu-opioid receptor
activation, relatively tight binding of fentanyl to the
mu-opioid receptor such that it is not so readily uncoupled
by washout with acsf compared to a switch to naloxone,
and insufficient time for full washout and recovery with
acsf. changes in gg activity with longer periods of
fentanyl washout were not investigated in this study.
in addition to the identification of a mu- and delta-opioid
receptor-mediated suppression of gg activity following

2690

m. hajiha and others

perfusion of the respective opioid agonists into the
hypoglossal motor pool, the specificity of this motor
suppression in response to these interventions was also
indicated by the lack of changes in control variables
compared to the acsf time controls. such control
variables included the amplitude of diaphragm activity (a
control respiratory motor signal that should be unaffected
by the interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool),
respiratory rate (an indicator of the rhythmic activity
generated by nearby medullary respiratory neurons that
should also be unaffected by interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool), blood pressure (to rule out reflex
hemodynamic effects on gg activity), and eeg activity
(used as a marker of arousal state which may also indirectly
influence gg activity). importantly, unlike the significant
suppressant effects on gg activity with mu- and delta-opioid
receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool, there
were no significant effects of those interventions on any
of the aforementioned control variables compared to
the acsf time controls. the only statistically significant
change observed in any control variable across each of
studies 1 to 4 was a lesser decline in respiratory rate
compared to the acsf time controls during kappa-opioid
receptor stimulation at the hypoglossal motor pool (i.e.
study 4). overall, therefore, the most parsimonious
explanation of the results reported in this paper is that the
observed changes in gg activity in response to application
of the opioid receptor agonists and antagonists were the
result of specific effects occurring at the hypoglossal motor
pool and not via indirect influences at other brainstem
sites. nevertheless, it is relevant to mention that in studies
1–3 the decreases in respiratory rate approached statistical
significance in each case (p = 0.065, 0.069 and 0.059),
perhaps indicative that the application of fentanyl to the
hypoglossal motor pool was capable of affecting distant
structures, although not so readily and consistently as the
robust local effects on hypoglossal motor output.
previous studies and relevance to current findings

although the isolated changes in gg activity in response to
the interventions at the hypoglossal motor pool strongly
suggest that opioid-induced responses were confined to
influences at the motor nucleus, a justifiable criticism of
the microdialysis method to locally apply these agents
is that it is not possible to determine whether the
observed changes in motor activity are exerted via preand/or post-synaptic receptor elements. effects could
even be mediated via influences on hypoglossal interneurons, although these constitute a small population
in the hypoglossal motor nucleus (travers, 1995). the
concern regarding an inability to separate pre- and/or
post-synaptic effects is fully acknowledged. nevertheless, it
is important to mention that this concern is more relevant
to studies investigating the control of motor function by

j physiol 587.11

endogenously released neurochemicals, and is less of a
concern with studies aiming to characterize the effects
on motor activity with agents that are commonly used
clinically, and that will access brainstem motor nuclei
indiscriminately when so administered.
nevertheless, with this caveat in mind, the simplest
explanation of the present results in light of previous data
regarding the distribution of opioid receptors in the hypoglossal motor nucleus is that the observed suppression
of gg activity with delta-opioid receptor stimulation
was mediated via presynaptic inhibition of excitatory
inputs to hypoglossal motoneurons (richardson & gatti,
2005). in richardson & gatti (2005), the presynaptic
location of delta-opioid receptors was hypothesized to inhibit
excitatory glutamatergic inputs, inputs which mediate the
transmission of respiratory drive to hypoglossal
motoneurons in vitro (greer et al. 1991; funk et al. 1993)
and in vivo (steenland et al. 2006, 2008). in contrast, mubut not delta-opioid receptors are located on the presynaptic
terminals of raphé inputs to hypoglossal motoneurons,
where they also act to decrease glutamate release from these
projections (bouryi & lewis, 2004), an effect that would
also contribute significantly to the observed suppression
of hypoglossal motor activity (sood et al. 2006). the clear
suppression of gg activity by fentanyl at the hypoglossal
motor pool is consistent with the presence of mu-opioid
receptor binding sites at this motor pool, these being
present in amounts over twice that of delta-opioid receptor
binding sites (sales et al. 1985; xia & haddad, 1991).
one previous study performed using slices of neonatal
rodent medulla in vitro showed suppression of hypoglossal nerve activity with bath application of mu-opioid
receptor agonists (greer et al. 1995). however, whether
that suppression occurred via effects at the motor nuclei
per se or via suppression of premotor inputs such as
from the medullary raphé (bouryi & lewis, 2004; zhang
et al. 2007) or central respiratory premotor neurons
(greer et al. 1995; ballanyi et al. 1997; gray et al. 1999;
takeda et al. 2001; lalley, 2003; manzke et al. 2003;
mccrimmon & alheid, 2003; mellen et al. 2003) was not
determined as the drugs were bath applied (greer et al.
1995). likewise, the mechanisms underlying the major
suppression of hypoglossal nerve activity following intravenous administration of morphine was not determined
in a previous study in decerebrate cats (bartlett & st
john, 1986). the results of the present study with local
application of these agents to the hypoglossal motor pool
suggests that the suppression of hypoglossal nerve activity
in these previous studies may have occurred via effects
occurring at the motor pool per se.
summary

the results of the present study show that mu-opioid
receptor mechanisms operating at the hypoglossal motor

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

j physiol 587.11

opioids at the hypoglossal motor pool

pool cause a suppression of the drive to the gg
muscle of the tongue, and that any effect of muscarinic
receptor-mediated inhibition does not play a significant
role in this suppression. this mu-opioid receptor-induced
suppression of tongue muscle activity by effects at the
hypoglossal motor pool may underlie the clinical concern
regarding adverse upper airway function in adult and
pediatric osa patients peri- and post-operatively in the
presence of mu-opioid analgesics (kryger, 2000; brown
et al. 2006; lerman, 2006). the inhibitory effects of muand delta-opioid receptors at the hypoglossal motor pool also
indicate an influence of the endogenous enkephalinergic
and endorphinergic systems in respiratory motor control.
references
aldes ld (1998). the enkephalinergic innervation of the
genioglossus musculature in the rat: implications for the
respiratory control of the tongue. brain res 780, 67–73.
bailey pl, lu jk, pace nl, orr ja, white jl, hamber ea,
slawson mh, crouch dj & rollins de (2000). effects of
intrathecal morphine on the ventilatory response to hypoxia.
n engl j med 343, 1228–1234.
ballanyi k, lalley pm, hoch b & richter dw (1997).
camp-dependent reversal of opioid- and
prostaglandin-mediated depression of the isolated
respiratory network in newborn rats. j physiol 504, 127–134.
bartlett d & st john wm (1986). influence of morphine on
respiratory activities of phrenic and hypoglossal nerves in
cats. respir physiol 64, 289–294.
bouryi va & lewis di (2004). enkephalinergic inhibition of
raphe pallidus inputs to rat hypoglossal motoneurones in
vitro. neuroscience 129, 55–64.
brown ka, laferriere a, lakheeram i & moss ir (2006).
recurrent hypoxemia in children is associated with increased
analgesic sensitivity to opiates. anesthesiology 105, 665–669.
burke re (2007). sir charles sherrington’s the integrative
action of the nervous system: a centenary appreciation. brain
130, 887–894.
connaughton m, priestley jv, sofroniew mv, eckenstein f &
cuello ac (1986). inputs to motoneurones in the
hypoglossal nucleus of the rat: light and electron
microscopic immunocytochemistry for choline
acetyltransferase,  xxxg2240xxx  and enkephalins using
monoclonal antibodies. neuroscience 17, 205–224.
dahan a (2007a). novel data on opioid effect on breathing and
analgesia. semin anesth perioperat med pain 26, 58–64.
dahan a (2007b). respiratory depression with opioids. j pain
palliat care pharmacother 21, 63–66.
eikermann m, fassbender p, malhotra a, takahashi m, kubo
s, jordan as, gautam s, white dp & chamberlin nl
(2007). unwarranted administration of acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors can impair genioglossus and diaphragm muscle
function. anesthesiology 107, 621–629.
eikermann m, zaremba s, malhotra a, jordan as, rosow c &
chamberlin nl (2008). neostigmine but not sugammadex
impairs upper airway dilator muscle activity and breathing.
br j anaesth 101, 344–349.

c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

2691

fort p, rampon c, gervasoni d, peyron c & luppi ph (1998).
anatomical demonstration of a medullary enkephalinergic
pathway potentially implicated in the oro-facial muscle
atonia of paradoxical sleep in the cat. sleep res online 1,
102–108.
funk gd, smith jc & feldman jl (1993). generation and
transmission of respiratory oscillations in medullary slices:
role of excitatory amino acids. j neurophysiol 70, 1497–1515.
gray pa, rekling jc, bocchiaro cm & feldman jl (1999).
modulation of respiratory frequency by peptidergic input to
rhythmogenic neurons in the prebotzinger complex. science
286, 1566–1568.
greer jj, carter je & al-zubaidy z (1995). opioid depression of
respiration in neonatal rats. j physiol 485, 845–855.
greer jj, smith jc & feldman jl (1991). role of excitatory
amino acids in the generation and transmission of
respiratory drive in neonatal rat. j physiol 437, 727–749.
gutstein hb & akil h (2001). opioid analgesics. in goodman
and gilmans’s the pharmacologial basis for therapeutics, 10th
edn, ed. hardman jg, limbird le & gilman ag,
pp. 569–618. mcgraw-hill, new york.
henke kg, badr ms, skatrud jb & dempsey ja (1992). load
compensation and respiratory muscle function during sleep.
j appl physiol 72, 1221–1234.
henke kg, dempsey ja, kowitz jm & skatrud jb (1990).
effects of sleep-induced increases in upper airway resistance
on ventilation. j appl physiol 69, 617–624.
hoglund au, hamilton c & lindblom l (2000). effects of
microdialyzed oxotremorine, carbachol, epibatidine, and
scopolamine on intraspinal release of acetylcholine in the
rat. j pharmacol exp ther 295, 100–104.
jelev a, sood s, liu h, nolan p & horner rl (2001).
microdialysis perfusion of 5-ht into hypoglossal motor
nucleus differentially modulates genioglossus activity across
natural sleep-wake states in rats. j physiol 532, 467–481.
kryger mh (2000). management of obstructive sleep
apnea-hypopnea syndrome: overview. in principles and
practice of sleep medicine, 3rd edn, ed. kryger mh, roth t &
dement wc, pp. 940–954. w. b. saunders, philadelphia.
lalley pm (2003). mu-opioid receptor agonist effects on
medullary respiratory neurons in the cat: evidence for
involvement in certain types of ventilatory disturbances. am
j physiol regul integr comp physiol 285, r1287–1304.
lerman j (2006). unraveling the mysteries of sleep-disordered
breathing in children. anesthesiology 105, 645–647.
liu x, sood s, liu h & horner rl (2005). opposing
muscarinic and nicotinic modulation of hypoglossal motor
output to genioglossus muscle in rats in vivo. j physiol 565,
965–980.
manzke t, guenther u, ponimaskin eg, haller m,
dutschmann m, schwarzacher s & richter dw (2003).
 xxxg1117xxx (a) receptors avert opioid-induced breathing
depression without loss of analgesia. science 301, 226–229.
mccrimmon dr & alheid gf (2003). on the opiate trail of
respiratory depression. am j physiol regul integr comp
physiol 285, r1274–1275.
mellen nm, janczewski wa, bocchiaro cm & feldman jl
(2003). opioid-induced quantal slowing reveals dual
networks for respiratory rhythm generation. neuron 37,
821–826.

2692

m. hajiha and others

morrison jl, sood s, liu x, liu h, park e, nolan p & horner
rl (2002). glycine at the hypoglossal motor nucleus:
genioglossus activity, co 2 responses and the additive effects
of gaba. j appl physiol 93, 1786–1796.
pattinson kt (2008). opioids and the control of respiration. br
j anaesth 100, 747–758.
paxinos g & watson c (1998). the rat brain in stereotaxic
coordinates. academic press, san diego.
rekling jc, funk gd, bayliss da, dong xw & feldman jl
(2000). synaptic control of motoneuronal excitability.
physiol rev 80, 767–852.
remmers je, degroot wj, sauerland ek & anch am (1978).
pathogenesis of upper airway occlusion during sleep. j appl
physiol 44, 931–938.
richardson ka & gatti pj (2005). genioglossal hypoglossal
muscle motoneurons are contacted by nerve terminals
containing  xxxg1632xxx  but not mu opioid
receptor-like immunoreactivity in the cat: a dual labeling
electron microscopic study. brain res 1032, 23–29.
roda f, pio j, bianchi al & gestreau c (2004). effects of
anesthetics on hypoglossal nerve discharge and c-fos
expression in brainstem hypoglossal premotor neurons.
j comp  xxxd122xxx  468, 571–586.
sales n, riche d, roques bp & denavit-saubie m (1985).
localization of mu- and delta-opioid receptors in cat
respiratory areas: an autoradiographic study. brain res 344,
382–386.
santiago tv & edelman nh (1985). opioids and breathing.
j appl physiol 59, 1675–1685.
sherrington cs (1906). the integrative action of the nervous
system. yale university press, new haven, ct, usa.
skulsky em, osman ni, baghdoyan ha & lydic r (2007).
microdialysis delivery of morphine to the hypoglossal motor
nucleus of wistar rat increases hypoglossal acetylcholine
release. sleep 30, 566–573.
sood s, morrison jl, liu h & horner rl (2005). role of
endogenous serotonin in modulating genioglossus muscle
activity in awake and sleeping rats. am j respir crit care med
172, 1338–1347.
sood s, raddatz e, liu x, liu h & horner rl (2006).
inhibition of serotonergic medullary raphe obscurus
neurons suppresses genioglossus and diaphragm activities in
anesthetized but not conscious rats. j appl physiol 100,
1807–1821.
steenland hw, liu h & horner rl (2008). endogenous
glutamatergic control of rhythmically active mammalian
respiratory motoneurons in vivo. j neurosci 28, 6826–6835.
steenland hw, liu h, sood s, liu x & horner rl (2006).
respiratory activation of the genioglossus muscle involves
both non-nmda and nmda glutamate receptors at the
hypoglossal motor nucleus in-vivo. neuroscience 138,
1407–1424.

j physiol 587.11

takeda s, eriksson li, yamamoto y, joensen h, onimaru h &
lindahl sg (2001). opioid action on respiratory neuron
activity of the isolated respiratory network in newborn rats.
anesthesiology 95, 740–749.
teichtahl h & wang d (2007). sleep-disordered breathing with
chronic opioid use. expert opin drug safety 6, 641–649.
travers jb (1995). oromotor nuclei. in the rat nervous
system, 2nd edn, ed. paxinos g, pp. 239–255. academic
press, new york.
wang d & teichtahl h (2007). opioids, sleep architecture and
sleep-disordered breathing. sleep med rev 11, 35–46.
xia y & haddad gg (1991). ontogeny and distribution of
opioid receptors in the rat brainstem. brain res 549,
181–193.
yeadon m & kitchen i (1989). opioids and respiration. progr
neurobiol 33, 1–16.
young t, peppard pe & gottlieb dj (2002). epidemiology of
obstructive sleep apnea: a population health perspective. am
j respir crit care med 165, 1217–1239.
zhang z, xu f, zhang c & liang x (2007). activation of opioid
mu receptors in caudal medullary raphe region inhibits the
ventilatory response to hypercapnia in anesthetized rats.
anesthesiology 107, 288–297.
author contributions
m.h.: (1) conception, design, analysis and interpretation of data,
(2) drafting the article and revising it critically for important
intellectual content, (3) final approval of the version to be
published. m.-a.d.: (1) conception, design, analysis and interpretation of data, (2) drafting the article and revising it critically
for important intellectual content, (3) final approval of the
version to be published. h.l.: (1) conception, design, analysis
and interpretation of data, (2) revising the article critically for
important intellectual content, (3) final approval of the version
to be published. r.l.h.: (1) conception, design, analysis and
interpretation of data, (2) drafting the article and revising it
critically for important intellectual content, (3) final approval of
the version to be published. the experiments were performed in
the medical sciences building at the university of toronto.
acknowledgements
this work was supported by funds from the canadian institutes
of health research (cihr, grant mt-15563) and the ontario
thoracic society. rlh is supported by a tier i canada research
chair in sleep and respiratory neurobiology. the authors thank
dr. karen brown md, associate professor, department of
anesthesia, montreal children’s hospital for her clinical interest
and input, and the stimulation to perform this work.


c 2009 the authors. journal compilation 
c 2009 the physiological society

