t

he anti-alcoholism drug disulfiram (antabuse), which is an inhibitor of aldehyde dehydrogenase,
induces an aversive reaction to alcohol consumption and thereby helps patients reduce alcohol
intake. recent clinical trials, initiated to investigate whether disulfiram could be used to treat indi-

viduals who abuse both alcohol and cocaine, have indicated that disulfiram effectively decreases cocaine
consumption. yet the ability of disulfiram to curb cocaine intake cannot be explained by the disruption of
ethanol metabolism. here, we synthesize clinical and animal data that point to  xxxg608xxx 
inhibition as a mechanism underlying the efficacy of disulfiram in the treatment of cocaine dependence.

meriem gaval-cruz and david weinshenker
department of human genetics, emory university school of medicine, whitehead 301,
615 michael st, atlanta, ga 30322

august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

175

review

introduction
disulfiram (antabuse) first received pharmacological interest in
the 1930s, after workers in a rubber factory, where the compound
was used as an antioxidant, became ill. in particular, workers
who consumed alcohol after having been exposed to disulfiram
experienced flushing of the face, nausea, vertigo, headache, and
hypotension. this series of unpleasant symptoms, now known
as the “disulfiram-ethanol reaction” (1), eventually led, in 1951,
to the approval of disulfiram, under the name antabuse, by the
food and drug administration for the treatment of alcoholism.
the drug’s efficacy relies on aversive conditioning; simply put,
alcoholics who are prescribed antabuse learn to avoid alcohol in
order to avoid the negative consequences of the disulfiram-alcohol
reaction. today, there is a growing body of evidence to suggest
that disulfiram also reduces cocaine use in dependent individuals,
regardless of whether they abuse alcohol (2–4).
in this review, we discuss several pharmacological targets of
disulfiram, including those involved in cocaine metabolism and
catecholamine synthesis, with a focus on  xxxg608xxx 
(dbh), which catalyzes the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine and thereby controls the norepinephrine-to-dopamine
ratio in central noradrenergic neurons (5). we also review the role
of norepinephrine signaling in reward and drug-seeking behavior,
and we propose an integrated mechanism to account for disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence.

disulfiram and ethanol metabolism
ethanol is converted to acetaldehyde by the enzyme  xxxg110xxx , and acetaldehyde is further metabolized to acetate by
aldehyde dehydrogenase (6). disulfiram is an inhibitor of aldehyde
dehydrogenase, which is directly relevant to its role in curbing
alcohol consumption (figure 1). the high levels of acetaldehyde
that accumulate following alcohol ingestion in patients taking
disulfiram cause the mild to moderate levels of facial flushing,
weakness, throbbing headache, nausea, vomiting, sweating, vertigo, hypotension, and other unpleasant symptoms that typify the
disulfiram-ethanol reaction (also known as the antabuse reaction)
(7, 8). the direct association of this aversive reaction with alcohol
consumption establishes a psychological deterrent in alcoholic
patients who abide by the dosing regimen. it is important to note
here that, in addition to its effects on aldehyde dehydrogenase,
disulfiram has many other targets. upon absorption, disulfiram
is immediately reduced to  xxxd1917xxx  (ddc) when
it reacts with thiol groups (9). this metabolite of disulfiram is a
potent copper chelator (10), and it can thereby affect the activity
of copper-dependent enzymes such as monooxygenases, amine
oxidase, cytochrome oxidase, microsomal carboxylesterase, and
plasma cholinesterase.
to date, there have been eight supervised clinical trials, ranging from 56 to 270 days in duration, that assess oral disulfiram

176

ethanol
metabolism

ne synthesis
pathway
ty
tyrosine
th
h
l-dopa
a

ethanol

aad
ad
 xxxg618xxx 

adh

dopamine
do

acetaldehyde
aldh
acetate

disulfiram

dbh
db
bh
b
norepinephrine
n

figure 1. disulfiram inhibition of ethanol metabolism. ethanol is first converted into acetaldehyde by  xxxg110xxx  (adh). acetaldehyde is
then transformed into acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase (aldh). disulfiram
inhibits aldh and thereby results in "the disulfiram-ethanol reaction" that promotes abstinence from alcohol. see text for details.

for the treatment of alcoholics [see (11)]. the percentage of disulfiram-treated patients who completed these trials, ranging from
eighteen to eighty-five percent, was higher for those populations in
which drug administration was supervised by clinic staff or a family member. only one study (comprising four disulfiram-treated
patients and one placebo control) reported adverse side effects as
a factor in patient drop-out (12). four trials had a completely randomized design; three of these compared supervised versus unsupervised disulfiram administration (13–15). all groups reported
better abstinence from drinking after supervised disulfiram administration compared with unsupervised administration or placebo.
the studies of robichaud et al. (16) and sereny et al. (17), both
using a within-subject design, found that disulfiram treatment led
to alcohol abstinence in ninety-nine percent of patients during a
14-day treatment period, with fifty-eight percent of patients reaching “significant periods of sobriety.” in a six-month study (18),
patterns of compliance within a supervised treatment program
revealed that forty-five percent of subjects who took disulfiram
regularly remained abstinent for the duration, whereas twenty-four
percent of treated subjects relapsed. a recent investigation of 180
alcoholic patients randomly assigned to placebo or administration
of the glutamatergic modulator acamprosate included a subset of
subjects who volunteered to receive disulfiram (19). the simultaneous administration of acamprosate and disulfiram doubled the
“mean cumulative abstinence” score in patients compared with the
placebo-alone group.
adherence to treatment must be recognized as a confounding
factor in interpreting the effectiveness of disulfiram from clinical
trial data. problems with adherence pose the main clinical challenge in using disulfiram to treat alcoholism. other limitations
of its use are side effects (20–22) and hepatic toxicity in alcoholics with compromised liver function (10, 23), both of which are

antabuse and cocaine relapse

a result of disulfiram’s multiple enzymatic targets and lead to
the underuse of the drug as a pharmacotherapy for alcoholism.
disulfiram can be an effective treatment for alcoholism, especially
when patient compliance is supervised or supported within the
context of stable social circles and community ties. it is against
this backdrop that the idea of treating cocaine dependence with
disulfiram emerged in the early 1990s.

disulfiram and cocaine addiction
cocaine and alcohol co-abuse
according to clinical and epidemiological studies, fifty to ninety
percent of patients who abuse cocaine also abuse alcohol (24–27),
and several factors could account for this comorbidity. not only
is there evidence that ethanol inhibits cocaine metabolism, but
in addition, the simultaneous administration of the two drugs
results in the formation of the active metabolite cocaethylene (ce)
(28–32). ce manifests a pharmacological profile similar to that
of cocaine in a number of respects: it has a high affinity for the
 xxxg2149xxx ; it increases extracellular dopamine concentrations (33–35); it decreases the firing rate of dopamine neurons
in the ventral tegmental area (vta); and it potentiates ethanolinduced excitation of vta neurons (36). in contrast to cocaine,
however, ce is less potent in elevating heart rate and has a longer
half-life (37). in the rat, ce is more reinforcing and less anxiogenic
than cocaine (38), and ce overdose is more lethal than an overdose of either cocaine or ethanol alone (39). taken together, these
observations may explain the frequent anecdotal accounts from
cocaine users who report that alcohol use prolongs their cocaineinduced euphoria (“high”) and reduces their paranoia during a
cocaine binge. similarly, alcohol reportedly helps “take the edge
off” of cocaine-induced anxiety, hyperactivity, and insomnia. and
finally, alcohol intoxication can impair judgment and inhibition,
which may lead to further risky behavior, including illicit drug
use.

disulfiram treatment for dual cocaine and
alcohol dependence: clinical trials
on the hypothesis that withholding alcohol from cocaine-andalcohol–dependent individuals might lead to a decrease in cocaine
use, two research groups examined the use of disulfiram in this
patient population in 1993. in the first study, although disulfiram
treatment reduced both alcohol and cocaine use, the effect on
cocaine use was attributed to a course of behavioral therapy that
had been implemented in the patient population (40). the second study, a randomized twelve-week pilot trial, compared the
effects of disulfiram administration to the effects of naltrexone, an
opioid antagonist that may prevent drug craving; both treatments
were accompanied by cognitive behavioral therapy. disulfiram
proved more effective than naltrexone at lowering the frequency

of cocaine use (41), and a larger clinical trial ensued, in which disulfiram treatment improved abstinence from cocaine as compared
to no treatment; disulfiram treatment in this larger trial appeared
more effective for those outpatients who also received cognitive
behavioral therapy (cbt) (42). the beneficial effect of disulfiram
was still evident a year later in a follow-up study (43), and the efficacy of disulfiram therapy in diminishing cocaine use as observed
earlier in comorbid addicts (41) was corroborated.
the notion that the mechanism of disulfiram-induced cocaine
abstinence might not be related to the disulfiram-alcohol reaction
emerged from the results of two studies published in 2000. in
these trials, the effects of disulfiram on cocaine use were assessed
in patients who were addicted to both cocaine and opiates, and
who were maintained on methadone (3) or buprenorphine (2).
in agreement with previous studies, the addicts treated with disulfiram were better able, relative to those addicts not receiving
disulfiram, to reduce their intake of alcohol, cocaine, and opiates (3). in addition, disulfiram shortened the time necessary for
patients to reach continuous cocaine, but not heroin, abstinence
(2). throughout these trials, alcohol consumption was minimal for
all subjects, regardless of medication group, and baseline alcohol
use did not predict responses to disulfiram. it was therefore something of a conceptual breakthrough when, in 2004, a randomized,
placebo-controlled trial not only confirmed the effectiveness of
disulfiram in treating cocaine dependence, but moreover revealed
that the drug’s effectiveness in this regard could be differentiated from its role in curbing alcohol abuse (4). specifically, the
groundbreaking trial addressed cocaine use both with and without
comorbidity for alcohol abuse, showing that the benefits of disulfiram therapy were most pronounced in patients who either were
not alcohol dependent at baseline or who fully abstained from
alcohol during treatment. these observations directly suggest that
disulfiram undermines cocaine addiction in a manner independent
of its action in inhibiting alcohol intake. several other doubleblind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials have confirmed the
efficacy of disulfiram on cocaine intake (44, 45), with a potentially
greater effect in males (46), but none have been designed to investigate the mechanisms of disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence.
nevertheless, some clues can be gleaned from human laboratory
and animal studies assessing the interactions between disulfiram
and the physiological, behavioral, and subjective effects of cocaine.

disulfiram and cocaine:
human laboratory and animal studies
to understand how disulfiram treatment affects an individual’s
response to cocaine, and to shed light on the mechanism driving
the drop in cocaine intake, a series of human laboratory studies
looked at whether disulfiram influences the self-reported subjective effects of cocaine. the results have been conflicting. two
groups reported no difference in the subjective effects of cocaine,
such as cravings or high, using a “yes/no” scale (3) or a visual
august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

177

review

analog scale (47). another group reported a modest, non-significant increase in “high” and “anxiety” (48), whereas others found
increases in nervousness, paranoia (49, 50), or psychosis (51, 52).
two other studies report decreased “rush,” “high,” or “craving” (44,
53). disulfiram is also reported to enhance some subjective effects
of the psychostimulant dextroamphetamine, including “high,”
anxiety, “bad drug effects,” “craving,” and “drug liking” (54). the
modulation of subjective effects by disulfiram may in fact vary,
increasing or decreasing the rewarding effects of cocaine; the most
consistent finding is a worsening of the aversive effects of cocaine,
such as anxiety and paranoia. other side effects of disulfiram clinical trials on cocaine dependence are headaches, fatigue, and paranoia (55). thus, there may be a “disulfiram-cocaine” reaction that
is similar to but distinct from the “disulfiram-alcohol” reaction and
that promotes cocaine abstinence.
there are a few published preclinical studies in rodents that
address how disulfiram pretreatment affects behavioral responses
to cocaine. early studies showed that disulfiram pretreatment
suppresses amphetamine-induced (56) and cocaine-induced (57)
locomotor activity in mice and rats. more recent studies indicate
that disulfiram has minimal effects on baseline activity levels, but
repeated administration prior to cocaine facilitates the development of behavioral sensitization to cocaine in rats (58) and mice
(our unpublished data). disulfiram pretreatment also enhances
cocaine-induced seizures in mice (59).

molecular mechanisms of
disulfiram action
dopamine metabolism and release
because dopamine mediates many of the addictive properties of
cocaine and other psychostimulants, the effect of disulfiram on
dopamine neurotransmission is a logical place to look for clues
to the drug’s clinical efficacy. although clinical trials have shown
that the disulfiram-ethanol reaction cannot account for effects on
cocaine dependence, aldehyde dehydrogenase in fact plays two
important roles in dopamine metabolism. dopamine is metabolized by monoamine oxidase into the intermediate metabolite
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde ( xxxd2471xxx ), which is then converted by aldehyde dehydrogenase into 3,4-dihydroxypenylacetic
acid (dopac) (60).  xxxd2471xxx  is a reactive electrophile and is toxic
to dopaminergic neurons (61). in a separate metabolic pathway,
dopamine is converted by  xxxg487xxx  and
monoamine oxidase to produce 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (mhpa), which is a substrate of aldehyde dehydrogenase. in this way, disulfiram might be expected to increase levels
of both  xxxd2471xxx  and mhpa (figure 2). because the accumulation
of  xxxd2471xxx  decreases dopamine uptake into synaptic vesicles and
is toxic to dopamine neurons, disulfiram might be predicted to
undermine dopamine transmission and dampen the euphoric and
stimulant effects of cocaine. however, patients in some labora-

178

intracellular

comt

3-mt

mao

mhpa

aldh

da

hva
mao

 xxxd2471xxx 

aldh

dopac

comt

extracellular

figure 2. dopamine metabolism. dopamine (da) is metabolized intracellularly and extracellularly by the same group of enzymes, but in different orders.
inside dopaminergic cells, monoamine oxidase (mao) converts dopamine
into 3,4-dihydrophenylacetaldeyde ( xxxd2471xxx ), a substrate of aldehyde dehydrogenase (aldh). aldh then converts  xxxd2471xxx  into 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic
acid (dopac). after dopac diffuses out of the cell,  xxxg487xxx  (comt) converts it into homovanillic acid (hva). extracellularly, dopamine metabolism begins by transformation into 3-methoxytyramine (3-mt)
by comt. 3-mt is then oxidized into 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde
(mhpa) by mao, and finally transformed into hva by aldh.

tory studies report just the opposite, namely, augmentation of the
“high” elicited from cocaine (48) and dextroamphetamine (54);
these results are inconsistent with the inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase as a basis for disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence.
there has been one microdialysis investigation into the effects
of disulfiram upon the storage and release of striatal dopamine
and dopac in rats (62). in this study, disulfiram was reported
to increase dopamine and dopac release in the striatum; however, the acute systemic dose (500 mg/kg) was notably higher
than behaviorally relevant doses administered in previous studies
(56–58, 63–66). the observed increase in dopamine release (145%
above baseline level), moreover, peaked at forty minutes after
treatment and returned to baseline after eighty minutes, whereas
lower (behaviorally relevant) disulfiram dosing has been observed
by ourselves (unpublished data) and others (65, 66) to elevate tissue dopamine concentrations for hours following administration.
in vitro indications that disulfiram inhibits uptake and increases
efflux of dopamine in bovine striatal synaptic vesicles (62) are
similarly problematic, because the concentration of disulfiram
used (1.7 mm) was well beyond physiologically relevant levels.
nevertheless, the data indicate that disulfiram can directly disrupt
dopamine metabolism and homeostasis. there is not sufficient
evidence, however, to support the conclusion that such disruption
can account for the drug’s efficacy in promoting cocaine abstinence. it is, rather, an indirect effect upon dopamine release that
likely accounts for the therapeutic effect of disulfiram (see below).

glutamate neurotransmission
glutamate is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system. brain regions that mediate the
addictive properties of cocaine, such as the mesolimbic dopamine
system (vta and nucleus accumbens), amygdala, and frontal cor-

antabuse and cocaine relapse

tex, all receive extensive glutamatergic projections [see (67) and
(68)]. given this anatomical correlation, as well as the functional
correlation between dopamine and glutamate in learning and
memory, much recent research has focused on dopamine-glutamate interactions in the modulation of psychostimulant-induced
synaptic plasticity and addiction (69–71). pharmacological manipulation of glutamate receptors can have profound effects on behavioral responses to psychostimulants in animal models of addiction.
for example, ionotropic and metabotropic  xxxg981xxx 
antagonism impairs the acquisition and expression of cocaineconditioned place preference (72, 73) and attenuates cue-induced
cocaine seeking in rats (74–79).
the effects of disulfiram on glutamatergic neurotransmission
are not well characterized. one study showed that s-methyln,n-diethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide (detc-meso), a metabolite
of disulfiram, blocked glutamate binding to receptors in mouse
brains (80). the blockade was dose- and time-dependent partially
(up to 50%) irreversible, and affected more than one receptor subtype. another group reported that disulfiram, but not its primary
metabolite ddc, attenuated synaptic glutamate uptake in rat brain
and in cultured neurons, resulting in higher extracellular levels of
glutamate (81). still another study showed that both disulfiram
and ddc increased extracellular glutamate levels in the rat striatum (82); here, dcc (290 mg/kg) elicited a brief two-fold increase
in glutamate, whereas disulfiram (500 mg/kg) was less potent
but longer-lasting. the interpretation of this microdialysis study
is limited by the high doses of drug used. furthermore, extracellular levels of glutamate during cocaine withdrawal differ among
brain areas, and there are disulfiram interactions with cocaine in
this regard. for example, during cocaine withdrawal, glutamate is
decreased in the nucleus accumbens (83–85) but increased in the
prefrontal cortex (86). although normalizing glutamatergic transmission in the nucleus accumbens might therefore seem like a
promising therapeutic strategy for treating psychostimulant addiction (87), there is currently insufficient evidence to support a critical role for altered glutamatergic transmission in the therapeutic
efficacy of disulfiram.

cocaine metabolism
disulfiram is an inhibitor of plasma cholinesterase and microsomal
carboxylesterase activities (88), both of which are essential
for cocaine metabolism (89, 90). this inhibitory activity likely
explains the reported three- to sixfold increase in plasma cocaine
levels following intranasal administration of disulfiram (47–49).
in one study (48), serum cholinesterase activity was surprisingly not affected by disulfiram treatment; however, the authors
acknowledged the limitations of the assay used and their sample
preparation, so that cholinesterase inhibition may have been present but undetected. we observed no effect of disulfiram on peak
serum cocaine levels in wild-type mice despite potent behavioral
effects (59). in theory, increases in plasma cocaine levels in disul-

ethanol
metabolism

ne synthesis
pathway
tyrosine
th
h
l-dopa

et
ethanol

aa
ad
ad
 xxxg618xxx 

adh
dh

dopamine

acetaldehyde
ehy
aldh
ald
al
dh

dbh
db
b

d
disulfiram

acetate

norepinephrine

figure 3. disulfiram inhibition of the norepinephrine (ne) biosynthetic
pathway. in the catecholamine synthesis pathway, tyrosine is converted into
 xxxd2471xxx  (l-dopa) by  xxxg2276xxx  (th), which
is then transformed into dopamine by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase
( xxxg618xxx ), whereupon dopamine b-hydroxylase (dbh) converts dopamine into
norepinephrine. disulfiram inhibits dbh, reducing the production of norepinephrine and increasing the pool of dopamine.

firam-treated addicts could enhance both rewarding and aversive
responses to cocaine. nonetheless, addicts are quite adept at titrating their doses to maximize euphoric and minimize unpleasant
effects and could thereby circumvent the abstinence-promoting
effects of treatment.

 xxxg608xxx  inhibition
although any of the possible mechanisms described above could
contribute to disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence, none of
them are especially compelling, and some are difficult to test. in
contrast, data from animal and human laboratory studies strongly
support an important role for dbh inhibition in the ability of
disulfiram to reduce cocaine use. the following section will
review and integrate the available data and suggest further testable hypotheses concerning dbh inhibition and the blockade
of norepinephrine synthesis as primary mechanisms underlying
disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence.
cocaine inhibits the reuptake of dopamine, serotonin, and
norepinephrine by transporters at the plasma membrane of monoaminergic neurons and thus elevates extracellular concentrations
of these neurotransmitters (91–93). the psychostimulant effects of
cocaine are mediated primarily by enhancement of dopaminergic
transmission in the mesolimbic system in the brain, while serotonin and norepinephrine play a modulatory role. based on how
these neurotransmitters mediate drug responses and reward, most
pharmacotherapeutic strategies to combat cocaine addiction have
focused on the modulation of dopamine signaling.
dbh converts dopamine to norepinephrine, thereby playing
a direct role in determining the ratio of dopamine to norepinephaugust 2009
volume 9, issue 4

179

review

rine in noradrenergic neurons (64, 94). the enzyme is copperdependent (95), and because the primary metabolite of disulfiram,
ddc, is a copper chelator, dbh activity is inhibited by disulfiram
(65, 96). disulfiram administration decreases central conversion of
dopamine into norepinephrine and significantly lowers the ratio of
norepinephrine to dopamine in the brains of mice and rats (57, 64,
66, 97). (see figure 3.)

dbh inhibition in cocaine reward,
aversion, and relapse
we begin this section with three ways in which dbh inhibition
has been hypothesized to decrease cocaine use: (1) by acting as a
“dopamine replacement therapy;” (2) by decreasing the rewarding effects of cocaine; and (3) by increasing the aversive effects of
cocaine. ultimately, however, we will argue that relapse prevention mediated by decreased levels of norepinephrine is likely the
most important mechanism underlying disulfiram-induced cocaine
abstinence.

the “dopamine agonist” hypothesis of
dbh inhibition
chronic cocaine users are hypothesized to be hypodopaminergic,
and a popular treatment strategy has been to “normalize” dopaminergic tone [e.g., dopamine agonist therapy; reviewed by grabowski
et al. (98)]. indeed, disulfiram has sometimes been classified as a
“dopamine agonist,” as its beneficial effect on cocaine intake has
been attributed to increased dopamine concentration following
dbh inhibition (99). however, we will argue that, because of the
functional interaction between the noradrenergic and dopaminergic
systems, this hypothesis is unlikely to be correct.
anatomical and functional connections between the noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems affect the responsiveness of
the mesolimbic reward system to psychostimulants. the locus
coeruleus, the primary noradrenergic nucleus in the brain, directly
innervates the vta and the prefrontal cortex. the a1 and a2
noradrenergic cell groups in the brain stem also project to the vta
and the nucleus accumbens. in general, norepinephrine (i.e., the
product of dbh activity) provides excitatory drive onto midbrain
dopamine neurons, both directly (through the vta) and indirectly
(via glutamatergic projections from the prefrontal cortex to the
vta) [reviewed by weinshenker and schroeder (100) and mejíasaponte et al. (101)]. in this way, dbh inhibition would decrease
excitatory drive onto midbrain dopamine neurons, and thus,
despite increased tissue levels of dopamine, the firing of dopaminergic neurons (particularly burst firing) would be attenuated, and
extracellular da levels would actually fall. for example, pharmacological blockade of norepinephrine signaling inhibits basal and
psychostimulant-induced burst firing in midbrain dopaminergic
neurons (102, 103), and lesions of the locus coeruleus, along with
norepinephrine depletion, reduce dopamine release in terminal

180

chronic
dbh inhibition

decreased ne

decreased
da release

increased high-affinity
state da receptors

hypersensitivity to
psychostimulants

figure 4. effect of chronic dbh inhibition on dopamine transmission.
genetic dbh inhibition, and presumably pharmacological dbh inhibition by
disulfiram, leads to decreased norepinephrine synthesis in the locus coeruleus and brainstem and norepinephrine release in the midbrain. because
midbrain dopaminergic neurons require noradrenergic drive for normal burst
firing and neurotransmitter release, dopamine release is decreased and a
compensatory upregulation of high-affinity state dopamine receptors ensues,
resulting in behavioral hypersensitivity to psychostimulants.

regions (104). also, norepinephrine depletion in the prefrontal
cortex attenuates psychostimulant-induced dopamine release
in the nucleus accumbens (105, 106). finally, although dbh
knockout (dbh–/–) mice completely lack norepinephrine and have
high tissue dopamine levels, the animals manifest low basal and
psychostimulant-evoked extracellular dopamine levels in the dorsal and ventral striatum (107). the specific effects of disulfiram on
extracellular catecholamines have yet to be tested, but treatment of
mice with another copper chelator (fusaric acid) also acts to inhibit dbh and diminishes basal and methamphetamine-provoked
dopamine release in the striatum (108). these results suggest that
extracellular dopamine levels are likely reduced, not raised, by
disulfiram, effectively refuting the idea that disulfiram treatment
promotes cocaine abstinence by “normalizing” dopamine levels in
addicts (see figure 4).

reduction in cocaine-induced reward
effects by dbh inhibition
because noradrenergic facilitation of dopamine transmission is
crucial for the rewarding effects of psychostimulants, disulfiram
might be reasoned to reduce cocaine use by inhibiting the noradrenergic-mediated high. indeed, norepinephrine depletion or
adrenergic receptor blockade attenuates the stimulant and rewarding effects of amphetamine and cocaine in rodents [reviewed in
(100)]. for example, norepinephrine promotes the locomotor-

antabuse and cocaine relapse

activating effects of psychostimulants and also facilitates dopamine
release in the nucleus accumbens and conditioned place preference (105, 106, 109–112). consistent with this hypothesis of dbh
inhibition, one human laboratory study found that disulfiram
decreased cocaine “high” and “rush” (53). on the other hand,
several studies show no effect or even higher levels of psychostimulant reward following disulfiram administration (3, 47–49,
54). in any event, therapeutic strategies to blunt the rewarding
effects of psychostimulants are unlikely to be successful, because
drug addicts can easily defeat such measures by adjusting their
drug intake. for instance, dopamine receptor antagonists actually
tend to increase rather than decrease cocaine self-administration in
rats (113–116). it is thus not reasonable to expect partial reduction
of cocaine reward to significantly modify the behavior of cocainedependent individuals.

cocaine aversion via dbh inhibition
the mesolimbic system and dopamine release are important not
only for reward, but also for responses to aversive stimuli (117–
119). because norepinephrine depletion attenuates drug-induced
dopamine release, as described above, dbh inhibition might also
be expected to blunt the aversive effects of cocaine. although this
may be true for acute dbh inhibition, chronic dbh inhibition (as
might be observed following days or weeks of disulfiram treatment)
leads to compensatory changes in the dopaminergic system that
result, paradoxically perhaps, in a hypersensitivity to the aversive
effects of cocaine. a striking example of this phenomenon occurs
in dbh–/– mice, which essentially have total and lifelong dbh inhibition (120, 121). given their low basal levels of dopamine release,
which remains low in spite of stimulant administration, these mice
manifest a compensatory increase in striatal high-affinity state dopamine receptors (107). consequently, dbh–/– mice have a paradoxical hypersensitivity to psychostimulants, manifested in heightened
locomotor activity and related stereotypical behavior (107, 122).
even more relevant to this discussion is the observation that the
same cocaine doses that evoke conditioned place preference in
wild-type mice result in conditioned place aversion in dbh–/– mice.
the dbh–/– phenotype thus suggests that chronic norepinephrine
deficiency augments the aversive effects of cocaine.
the augmentation of aversive behavior in dbh–/– mice may
offer an explanation for similar behavior seen in people. plasma
dbh activity is highly variable in humans, and a significant proportion of this variability is genetic (123). a common polymorphism, a c-to-t change at nucleotide position -1021 of the dbh
gene (allele frequency ~0.2) accounts for most of the genetic variance in dbh activity; individuals heterozygous for the low-activity
t allele (i.e., individuals who are “ct”) have approximately 50%
lower dbh activity than cc homozygotes; dbh activity in tt
homozygotes is typically reduced by greater than 90% relative
to that of cc individuals (124). strikingly, cocaine addicts with
genetically low dbh activity report increased cocaine-induced

paranoia (125, 126), an effect that is phenocopied by disulfiram
treatment prior to cocaine administration [r. malison, personal
communication; see also (49, 50, 127)].
could an increase in the aversive effects of cocaine, such as
paranoia, underlie disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence? the
success of disulfiram in the treatment of alcoholism depends on
just such a negative response to the addictive drug. in the case
of ethanol, inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase produces an
aversive reaction mediated by acetaldehyde. perhaps in the case of
cocaine, chronic inhibition of dbh produces an aversive reaction
mediated by the induced expression of high-affinity dopamine
receptors and excessive dopamine signaling. appealing as this
hypothesis may be, however, increased cocaine aversion is probably not a major contributor to the clinical efficacy of disulfiram.
as discussed above, cocaine addicts habitually titrate their cocaine
intake to achieve the desired subjective effects. if high doses of
cocaine were producing a negative experience, they would probably lower their intake, not abstain. in fact, at low doses of cocaine,
dbh–/– mice actually seem to experience increased reward instead
of aversion (107). furthermore, neither adrenergic receptor antagonists nor disulfiram affect operant cocaine self-administration
in rats (128–130). finally, if cocaine aversion induced by chronic
dbh inhibition discouraged cocaine use, one would predict that
low-activity dbh alleles would be underrepresented in addicts, a
prediction that is refuted by current data (131).
in summary, dbh inhibition is by far the most likely mechanism underlying disulfiram-induced cocaine abstinence for several
reasons: i) the inhibition of dbh alters neurotransmitter levels
known to be critical for the rewarding, aversive, and addictive
properties of cocaine; ii) both mice and humans with low dbh
activity have altered responses to cocaine; and iii) the altered
responses to cocaine in dbh-deficient animals can be mimicked by
disulfiram treatment. interestingly, a pharmacogenetic interaction
between disulfiram and dbh may exist; disulfiram appears to lower
cocaine use primarily in individuals carrying at least one low-activity dbh allele (132, 133). this intriguing finding reinforces the idea
that dbh inhibition contributes to the therapeutic effects of disulfiram in the treatment of cocaine dependence. however, all the
potential hypotheses to account for why dbh inhibition is effective
(e.g., dopamine receptor agonism, decreased cocaine reward, and
increased cocaine aversion) fail upon a reasoned consideration of
current data. in the final section, we will argue that relapse prevention, mediated by dbh inhibition and a decrease in norepinephrine, provides the most likely mechanistic explanation.

norepinephrine and reinstatement
drug addiction is a chronic relapsing disorder (134, 135), as
patients in treatment often slip back into drug-taking behaviors
after periods of sobriety. several types of stimuli can trigger drug
craving and lead to relapse. environmental and sensory cues
associated with past drug use can prompt strong urges to renew
august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

181

review

drug use, an occurrence known as cue-induced relapse (136–138).
re-exposure to illicit drugs can also lead to reinstatement of drug
abuse, which is called drug-primed relapse. stress is the classic
trigger for drug use, in the initiation of drug use, and the maintenance of addictive behavior (137, 139). anecdotally, stress is
cited as the most common cause of relapse. the organism’s natural
reward system is neurologically usurped in addiction (140, 141),
and so it is crucial that pharmacotherapies for cocaine addiction
be selective in repressing the drive to seek drugs without altering
the healthy impulse to seek out natural rewards. prevention of
relapse is thus considered one of the most promising strategies for
current pharmacotherapies targeted at cocaine dependence; such
strategies are based on efforts to dissociate drug-related cues and
the effects of stress from drug use.
although pharmacological manipulation of the noradrenergic
system does not affect cocaine self-administration in rats or nonhuman primates, it profoundly affects the reinstatement of cocaine
seeking after a period of abstinence or extinction of the behavior,
and the effect on reinstatement in experimental mammals has
become a commonly used model of human relapse. in such experiments, animals are first conditioned to self-administer a drug by
pressing a lever that results in drug infusion, and then they are
exposed to an “extinction” phase, during which responses on the
active lever result only in saline infusions. during extinction, cues
previously associated with drug delivery (i.e., tone and illumination of cue light) are absent. following the extinction phase, “reinstatement” tests begin, during which rats are exposed to a relapse
trigger, such as an injection of drug, acute stress (e.g., foot shock),
or environmental cues associated with drug delivery (i.e., tone and
light). these tests are referred to as drug-primed, stress-induced,
and cue-induced reinstatement, respectively. reinstatement of
drug seeking is operationally defined as the number of responses
on the active lever that previously resulted in cocaine infusion,
even though the animals are under extinction conditions (i.e., still
receiving saline infusions). the validity of reinstatement tests to
model human addiction is high, as determined in studies of both
humans and laboratory animals (142).
studies have shown that reduction of norepinephrine signaling attenuates reinstatement of amphetamine- (143) and cocaineseeking, although it appears that this attenuation can be mediated
by different receptors; blockade of beta-adrenergic receptors prevents
stress-induced reinstatement, whereas blockade of alpha1-adrenergic
receptors abrogates drug-primed reinstatement (144, 145).
preliminary results indicate that the blockade of cocaine-primed
reinstatement by alpha1-adrenergic receptor antagonists can be mimicked by disulfiram (our unpublished data). conversely, the facilitation of norepinephrine transmission (e.g., induces reinstatement
in rats and non-human primates (146–148).
the contribution of norepinephrine to stress-induced reinstatement is particularly intriguing: emotional stress has been
associated with increases in drug craving (149, 150); high stress is
a good predictor of continued drug use in addicts (149); and indi-

182

viduals exposed to stress are more likely to relapse into drug use
(150, 152). there is an overlap among the neurocircuits implicated
in drug abuse and stress [see (153–155)]. the extended amygdala
[i.e., bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, central amygdala, and
the shell of the nucleus accumbens (156)], receives corticotropinreleasing factor and noradrenergic innervation, and this concerted
innervation underlies the role of the extended amygdala in sensory
information integration, emotion, and appetitive learning. thus,
it functions as a mediator of both stress and drug responses and
integrates the function of norepinephrine in influencing stressinduced reinstatement [see (157)]. for example, local infusions of
beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists within the extended amygdala
block stress-induced reinstatement of cocaine self-administration
in rats (144). finally, we and others have shown that beta-adrenergic
receptor antagonists attenuate cocaine-induced and cocaine withdrawal-induced anxiety (158, 159). together, these results indicate
that norepinephrine mediates stress responses that contribute to
relapse. we propose that by decreasing noradrenergic transmission,
disulfiram can dampen the stress response and lower the likelihood
of relapse in the face of environmental influences and stressors.
currently, there is little direct evidence supporting an effect
of disulfiram on relapse prevention, as most clinical trials have
focused on its effect on current cocaine use. to date, there has
been only one study that measured outcomes in a group of
patients for one year following monitored disulfiram treatment
(43). recorded outcomes in this follow-up study were complete
abstinence and number of days of cocaine use (during the previous four weeks) self-reported at one, three, six, and twelve months
after treatment completion. frequency of drug use is a point-prevalence variable that gives a snapshot of a disease at a specific point
in time. this measure is touted as a good reflection of the nature
of drug use because it takes into account the fact that patients
often relapse briefly into drug use and also allows for validation of
self-reports with biochemical measures. unfortunately, when this
measure is not accompanied by thorough interviewing of the study
participants, it fails to provide a broad view of the effect of a treatment. we speculate that if disulfiram primarily induces an increase
in the aversive effects of cocaine, measures of frequency and
amount of cocaine used would gradually decrease, as drug addicts
would titrate drug intake to achieve the desired subjective effects.
conversely, if disulfiram primarily prevents relapse by blunting the
drive to take drug following environmental stressors or cues, one
might expect to observe a decrease in latency to abstinence and/
or extended periods of abstinence. carroll and colleagues reported
that more study participants assigned to the disulfiram/cbt treatment group achieved complete abstinence from cocaine during the
following year than those assigned to the placebo/cbt group. we
urge that future clinical studies include interviews with participants and measures that can distinguish between abstinence due
to altered subjective drug effects vs healthier responses to environmental triggers.

antabuse and cocaine relapse

and rounsaville, b.j. efficacy of disulfiram and cognitive behavior therapy in cocaine-dependent outpatients: a randomized placebo-controlled
trial. arch. gen. psychiatry 61, 264–272 (2004). this paper reports the
first systematic study of the effect of disulfiram on cocaine use in
a general population of cocaine users, regardless of concurrent
ethanol intake. it put forth the notion that disulfiram’s mechanism
of action in curbing cocaine intake must be independent of its
effects on alcohol metabolism.

conclusion
disulfiram has been used as an alcohol deterrent for decades, and
recent studies indicate that it is also an effective pharmacotherapy
for the treatment of cocaine dependence; however, the mechanisms behind its efficacy for alcohol and for cocaine addiction are
distinct. whereas aldehyde dehydrogenase is the primary target in
treating alcoholism, human laboratory, genetic, and preclinical animal studies indicate that its beneficial effects on cocaine use result
from the inhibition of dbh. despite the potential of dbh and its
inhibition to modulate cocaine reward and aversion, we argue that
the most important clinical effect of disulfiram-mediated dbh
inhibition arises from the drug’s ability to reduce relapse, particularly, relapse precipitated by stress.
this hypothesis will require further studies in preclinical
models of addiction. first, we must explore the effect of acute and
chronic disulfiram treatment on several aspects of dopamine transmission, such as neurochemical and behavioral responses to psychostimulants. second, we need to know the effects of disulfiram
on stress-induced, cue-induced, and drug-primed reinstatement
of cocaine seeking, as well as the brain region(s) critical for these
effects. third, disulfiram as a treatment for dependence on psychostimulants other than cocaine should also be investigated, as
has been suggested by human laboratory studies of amphetaminelike drugs. pharmacogenetic interactions between disulfiram and
dbh genotype may also yield valuable information. finally, the
knowledge acquired by studying disulfiram could be translated
into safer and more effective pharmacotherapies for the treatment
of cocaine dependence. because disulfiram use is limited by its
non-specificity, side effects, and toxicity, the development and
testing of selective dbh inhibitors will be essential to mechanistic
studies as well as to improved therapeutics.
doi:10.1124/mi.9.4.6
acknowledgments
we thank cheryl strauss for assistance with text editing, robert
malison for sharing unpublished results, and the national
institutes of health and the national institute of drug abuse
for financial support. this work was supported by the national
institutes of health national institute of drug abuse [grants
da017963, da25040].
references
1.

kitson, t.m. the disulfiram–ethanol reaction. j. stud. alcohol. 38,
96–113 (1977).

2.

george, t.p., chawarski, m.c., pakes, j., carroll, k.m., kosten, t.r.,
and schottenfeld, r.s. disulfiram versus placebo for cocaine dependence in buprenorphine-maintained subjects: a preliminary trial. biol.
psychiatry 47, 1080–1086 (2000).

3.

petrakis, i.l., carroll, k.m., nich, c., gordon, l.t., mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx .,
frankforter, t., and rounsaville, b.j. disulfiram treatment for cocaine
dependence in methadone-maintained opioid addicts. addiction 95,
219–228 (2000).

4.

carroll, k.m., fenton, l.r., ball, s.a., nich, c., frankforter, t.l., shi, j.,

5.

levin, e.y., levenberg, b., and kaufman, s. the enzymatic conversion
of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine to norepinephrine. j. biol. chem. 235,
2080–2086 (1960).

6.

deitrich, r.a. and erwin, v.g. mechanism of the inhibition of aldehyde
dehydrogenase in vivo by disulfiram and  xxxd1917xxx . mol.
pharmacol. 7, 301–307 (1971).

7.

johansson, b. a review of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of disulfiram and its metabolites. acta psychiatr. scand. suppl. 369,
15–26 (1992).

8.

hald, j. and jacobsen, e. a drug sensitizing the organism to  xxxd102xxx . lancet 2, 1001–1004 (1948).

9.

johnston, c.d. the in vitro reaction between  xxxd1916xxx  (antabuse) and glutathione. arch biochem. biophys. 44, 249–251
(1953).

10.

torronen, r. and marselos, m. changes in the hepatic copper conent
after treatment with foreign compounds. arch. toxicol. suppl. 247–249
(1978).

11.

suh, j.j., pettinati, h.m., kampman, k.m., and o’brien, c.p. the status
of disulfiram: a half of a century later. j. clin. psychopharmacol. 26,
290–302 (2006). this paper provides a thorough summary of recent
supervised clinical trials testing disulfiram in the treatment of
alcoholics.

12.

chick, j., gough, k., falkowski, w., kershaw, p., hore, b., mehta, b.,
ritson, b., ropner, r., and torley, d. disulfiram treatment of alcoholism.
br. j. psychiatry. 161, 84–89 (1992).

13.

gerrein, j.r., rosenberg, c.m., and manohar, v. disulfiram maintenance in outpatient treatment of alcoholism. arch. gen. psychiatry 28,
798–802 (1973).

14.

azrin, n.h. improvements in the community-reinforcement approach to
alcoholism. behav. res. ther. 14, 339–348 (1976).

15.

keane, t.m., foy, d.w., nunn, b., and rychtarik, r.g. spouse contracting to increase antabuse compliance in alcoholic veterans. j. clin.
psychol. 40, 340–344 (1984).

16.

robichaud, c., strickler, d., bigelow, g., and liebson, i. disulfiram
maintenance employee alcoholism treatment: a three-phase evaluation.
behav. res. ther. 17, 618–621 (1979).

17.

sereny, g., sharma, v., holt, j., and gordis, e. mandatory supervised
antabuse therapy in an outpatient alcoholism program: a pilot study.
alcohol. clin. exp. res. 10, 290–292 (1986).

18.

brewer, c. patterns of compliance and evasion in treatment programmes which include supervised disulfiram. alcohol alcohol. 21,
385–388 (1986).

19.

besson, j., aeby, f., kasas, a., lehert, p., and potgieter, a. combined
efficacy of acamprosate and disulfiram in the treatment of alcoholism: a
controlled study. alcohol. clin. exp. res. 22, 573–579 (1998).

20.

frisoni, g.b. and di monda, v. disulfiram neuropathy. (1971–1988) and
report of a case. alcohol alcohol. 24, 429–437 (1989).

21.

kristenson, h. how to get the best out of antabuse. alcohol alcohol. 30,
775–783 (1995).

22.

wilson, h. side effects of disulfiram. br med j. 2, 1610–1611 (1962).

23.

dupuy, o., flocard, f., vial, c., rode, g., charles, n., boisson, d., and
flechaire, a. disulfiram ( xxxd1916xxx ) toxicity. apropos of 3 original cases.
rev. med. interne. 16, 67–72 (1995).

24.

closser, m.h. and kosten, t.r. alcohol and cocaine abuse. a comparison of epidemiology and clinical characteristics. recent dev. alcohol.
10, 115–128 (1992).

25.

grant, b.f. and harford, t.c. concurrent and simultaneous use of alco-

august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

183

review

hol with cocaine: results of national survey. drug. alcohol. depend. 25,
97–104 (1990).
26.

weiss, r.d., mirin, s.m., griffin, m.l., and michael, j.l. psychopathology in cocaine abusers. changing trends. j. nerv. ment. dis. 176,
719–725 (1988).

27.

khalsa, h., paredes, a., and anglin, m.d. the role of alcohol in cocaine
dependence. recent dev. alcohol. 10, 7–35 (1992).

28.

dean, r.a., christian, c.d., sample, r.h., and bosron, w.f. human
liver cocaine esterases:  xxxd102xxx mediated formation of ethylcocaine.
faseb j. 5, 2735–2739 (1991).

29.

30.

44.

grassi, m.c., cioce, a.m., giudici, f.d., antonilli, and l., nencini, p.
short-term efficacy of disulfiram or naltrexone in reducing positive urinalysis for both cocaine and cocaethylene in cocaine abusers: a pilot
study. pharmacol. res. 55, 117–121 (2007).

45.

pettinati, h.m., kampman, k.m., lynch, k.g., xie, h., dackis, c.,
rabinowitz, a.r., and o’brien, c.p. a double blind, placebo-controlled
trial that combines disulfiram and naltrexone for treating co-occurring
cocaine and alcohol dependence. addict. behav. 33, 651–667 (2008).

perez-reyes, m. and jeffcoat, a.r. ethanol/cocaine interaction: cocaine
and cocaethylene plasma concentrations and their relationship to subjective and cardiovascular effects. life sci. 51, 553–563 (1992).

46.

nich, c., mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx ., petrakis, i.l., cubells, j.f., rounsaville,
b.j., and carroll, k.m. sex differences in cocaine-dependent individuals’
response to disulfiram treatment. addict. behav. 29, 1123–1128 (2004).

mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx ., price, l.h., mcdougle, c.j., kosten, t.r., black,
j.e., and jatlow, p.i. concurrent cocaine-ethanol ingestion in humans:
pharmacology, physiology, behavior, and the role of cocaethylene.
psychopharmacology (berl). 111, 39–46 (1993).

47.

mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx ., kosten, t.r., and jatlow, p. disulfiram effects on
acute cocaine administration. drug alcohol depend. 52, 27–39 (1998).

48.

mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx ., kosten, t.r., and jatlow, p. chronic disulfiram
treatment effects on intranasal cocaine administration: initial results.
biol. psychiatry 43, 540–543 (1998).

31.

rose, j.s. cocaethylene: a current understanding of the active metabolite of cocaine and ethanol. am. j. emerg. med. 12, 489–490 (1994).

49.

32.

farre, m., de la torre, r., gonzalez, m.l., teran, m.t., roset, p.n.,
menoyo, e., and cami, j. cocaine and alcohol interactions in humans:
neuroendocrine effects and cocaethylene metabolism. j. pharmacol.
exp. ther. 283, 164–176 (1997).

hameedi, f.a., rosen, m.i., mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx ., mcmahon, t.j., price,
l.h., jatlow, p.i., woods, s.w., and kosten, t.r. behavioral, physiological, and pharmacological interaction of cocaine and disulfiram in
humans. biol. psychiatry 37, 560–563 (1995).

50.

33.

jatlow, p., hearn, w.l., elsworth, j.d., roth, r.h., bradberry, c.w., and
taylor, j.r. cocaethylene inhibits uptake of dopamine and can reach
high plasma concentrations following combined cocaine and ethanol
use. nida res. monogr. 105, 572–573 (1990).

mutschler, j., diehl, a., and kiefer, f. pronounced paranoia as a result
of cocaine-disulfiram interaction: case report and mode of action. j.
clin. psychopharmacol. 29, 99–101 (2009).

51.

murthy, k.k. psychosis during disulfiram therapy for alcoholism. j.
indian. med. assoc. 95, 80–81 (1997).

52.

ceylan, m.e., turkcan, a., mutlu, e., and onal, o. manic episode with
psychotic symptoms associated with high dose of disulfiram: a case
report. j. clin. psychopharmacol. 27, 224–225 (2007).

53.

baker, j.r., jatlow, p., and mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx . disulfiram effects on
responses to intravenous cocaine administration. drug alcohol depend.
87, 202–209 (2007).

54.

sofuoglu, m., poling, j., waters, a., sewell, a., hill, k., and kosten,
t. disulfiram enhances subjective effects of dextroamphetamine in
humans. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 90, 394–398 (2008).

55.

malcolm, r., olive, m.f., and lechner, w. the safety of disulfiram for
the treatment of alcohol and cocaine dependence in randomized clinical
trials: guidance for clinical practice. expert opin. drug saf. 7, 459–72
(2008).

56.

maj, j. and przegalinski, e. disulfiram and some effects of amphetamine
in mice and rats. j. pharm. pharmacol. 19, 341–342 (1967).

57.

maj, j., przegalinski, e., and wielosz, m. disulfiram and the druginduced effects on motility. j pharm pharmacol. 20, 247–248 (1968).

58.

haile, c.n., during, m.j., jatlow, p.i., kosten, t.r., and kosten, t.a.
disulfiram facilitates the development and expression of locomotor sensitization to cocaine in rats. biol. psychiatry 54, 915–921 (2003).

59.

gaval-cruz, m., schroeder, j.p., liles, l.c., javors, m.a., and
weinshenker, d. effects of disulfiram and  xxxg608xxx 
knockout on cocaine-induced seizures. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 89,
556–562 (2008).

60.

wood, p.l. and altar, c.a. dopamine release in vivo from nigrostriatal,
mesolimbic, and mesocortical neurons: utility of 3-methoxytyramine
measurements. pharmacol rev. 40, 163–187 (1988).

61.

burke, w.j., li, s.w., williams, e.a., nonneman, r., and zahm, d.s.
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde is the toxic dopamine metabolite in
vivo: implications for parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. brain res. 989,
205–213 (2003).

62.

vaccari, a., saba, p.l., ruiu, s., collu, m., and devoto, p. disulfiram
and  xxxd1917xxx  intoxication affects the storage and release
of striatal dopamine. toxicol. appl. pharmacol. 139, 102–108 (1996).

63.

musacchio, j., kopin, i.j., and snyder, s. effects of disulfiram on tissue norepinephrine content and subcellular distribution of dopamine,
tyramine and their beta-hydroxylated metabolites. life sci. 3, 769–775
(1964).

34.

hearn, w.l., flynn, d.d., hime, g.w., rose, s., cofino, j.c., manteroatienza, e., wetli, c.v., and mash, d.c. cocaethylene: a unique
cocaine metabolite displays high affinity for the  xxxg2149xxx . j.
neurochem. 56, 698–701 (1991).

35.

jatlow, p., elsworth, j.d., bradberry, c.w., winger, g., taylor, j.r.,
russell, r., and roth, r.h. cocaethylene: a neuropharmacologically
active metabolite associated with concurrent cocaine-ethanol ingestion.
life sci. 48, 1787–1794 (1991).

36.

184

first to show that disulfiram treatment promotes cocaine abstinence and the effect is sustained for at least one year.

bunney, e.b., appel, s.b. and brodie, m.s. electrophysiological effects
of cocaethylene, cocaine, and ethanol on dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral tegmental area. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 297, 696–703 (2001).

37.

hart, c.l., jatlow, p., sevarino, k.a., and mccance-katz,  xxxd1971xxx .
comparison of intravenous cocaethylene and cocaine in humans.
psychopharmacology (berl). 149, 153–162 (2000).

38.

raven, m.a., necessary, b.d., danluck, d.a., and ettenberg, a.
comparison of the reinforcing and anxiogenic effects of intravenous
cocaine and cocaethylene. exp. clin. psychopharmacol. 8, 117–124
(2000).

39.

schechter, m.d. and meehan, s.m. the lethal effects of ethanol and
cocaine and their combination in mice: implications for cocaethylene formation. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 52, 245–248 (1995).

40.

higgins, s.t., budney, a.j., bickel, w.k., hughes, j.r., and foerg,
f. disulfiram therapy in patients abusing cocaine and alcohol. am. j.
psychiatry. 150, 675–676 (1993). this was the first published study
to show disulfiram therapy significantly decreased both cocaine
and alcohol use in comorbid abusers. it laid the foundation for
future studies to examine the direct contribution of disulfiram to
each of these outcomes.

41.

carroll, k., ziedonis, d., o’malley, s., mccance-katez, e., gordon,
l., and rounsaville, b. pharmacologic interventions for alcohol-andcocaine-abusing individuals. am. j. addictions 2, 77–79 (1993).

42.

carroll, k.m., nich, c., ball, s.a., mccance, e., and rounsavile, b.j.
treatment of cocaine and alcohol dependence with psychotherapy and
disulfiram. addiction 93, 713–727 (1998).

43.

carroll, k.m., nich, c., ball, s.a., mccance, e., frankforter, t.l., and
rounsaville, b.j. one-year follow-up of disulfiram and psychotherapy
for cocaine-alcohol users: sustained effects of treatment. addiction 95,
1335–1349 (2000). this paper is the follow-up report to a clinical
trial testing disulfiram on cocaine and alcohol users. it was the

antabuse and cocaine relapse

64.

musacchio, j.m., goldstein, m., anagnoste, b., poch, g., and kopin,
i.j. inhibition of dopamine-beta-hydroxylase by disulfiram in vivo. j.
pharmacol. exp. ther. 152, 56–61 (1966). this was the first demonstration that disulfiram can inhibit  xxxg608xxx  in
vivo.

65.

goldstein, m. inhibition of norepinephrine biosynthesis at the dopaminebeta-hydroxylation stage. pharmacol. rev. 18, 77–82 (1966).

66.

goldstein, m. and nakajima, k. the effects of disulfiram on the repletion
of brain catecholamine stores. life sci. 5, 1133–1138 (1966).

67.

sesack, s.r., carr, d.b., omelchenko, n., and pinto, a. anatomical substrates for glutamate-dopamine interactions: evidence for specificity of
connections and extrasynaptic actions. ann. n.y. acad. sci. 1003, 36–52
(2003). this is a comprehensive review of dopamine and glutamate
interactions in the cortex, ventral tegmental area, basal ganglia
and amygdala. it focuses on tract-tracing and immunocytochemical
evidence of reciprocal anatomical connections and common target
regions.

68.

gass, j.t. and olive, m.f. glutamatergic substrates of drug addiction
and alcoholism. biochem. pharmacol. 75, 218–265 (2008).

69.

pulvirenti, l. and diana, m. drug dependence as a disorder of neural plasticity: focus on dopamine and glutamate. rev. neurosci. 12,
141–158 (2001).

70.

tzschentke, t.m. and schmidt, w.j. glutamatergic mechanisms in
addiction. mol. psychiatry 8, 373–382 (2003).

71.

lapish, c.c., seamans, j.k., and chandler, l.j. glutamate-dopamine
cotransmission and reward processing in addiction. alcohol. clin. exp.
res. 30, 1451–1465 (2006).

72.

kotlinska, j. and biala, g. memantine and acpc affect conditioned
place preference induced by cocaine in rats. pol. j. pharmacol. 52,
179–185 (2000).

73.

maldonado, c., rodriguez-arias, m., castillo, a., aguilar, m.a., and
minarro, j. effect of memantine and cnqx in the acquisition, expression
and reinstatement of cocaine-induced conditioned place preference.
prog. neuropsychopharmacol. biol. psychiatry 31, 932–939 (2007).

74.

pulvirenti, l., balducci, c., and koob, g.f. dextromethorphan reduces
intravenous cocaine self-administration in the rat. eur. j. pharmacol.
321, 279–283 (1997).

75.

hyytia, p., backstrom, p., and liljequist, s. site-specific nmda receptor
antagonists produce differential effects on cocaine self-administration in
rats. eur. j. pharmacol. 378, 9–16 (1999).

76.

papp, m., gruca, p., and willner, p. selective blockade of drug-induced
place preference conditioning by acpc, a functional ndma-receptor
antagonist. neuropsychopharmacology 27, 727–743 (2002).

77.

blokhina, e.a., kashkin, v.a., zvartau, e.e., danysz, w., and bespalov,
a.y. effects of nicotinic and nmda receptor channel blockers on
intravenous cocaine and nicotine self-administration in mice. eur.
neuropsychopharmacol. 15, 219–225 (2005).

78.

backstrom, p. and hyytia, p. ionotropic and metabotropic  xxxg981xxx  antagonism attenuates cue-induced cocaine seeking.
neuropsychopharmacology 31, 778–786 (2006).

79.

backstrom, p. and hyytia, p. involvement of ampa/kainate, nmda, and
 xxxg974xxx  receptors in the nucleus accumbens core in cue-induced reinstatement of cocaine seeking in rats. psychopharmacology (berl). 192,
571–580 (2007).

80.

nagendra, s.n., faiman, m.d., davis, k., wu, j.y., newby, x., and
schloss, j.v. carbamoylation of brain glutamate receptors by a disulfiram metabolite. j. biol. chem. 272, 24247–24251 (1997).

81.

mamatha, r.k. and nagendra, s.n. effect of disulfiram administration on glutamate uptake by synaptosomes in the rat brain. eur. j.
pharmacol. 292, 89–94 (1994).

82.

vaccari, a., ferraro, l., saba, p., ruiu, s., mocci, i., antonelli, t., and
tanganelli, s. differential mechanisms in the effects of disulfiram and
 xxxd1917xxx  intoxication on striatal release and vesicular
transport of glutamate. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 285, 961–967 (1998).

83.

smith, j.a., mo, q., guo, h., kunko, p.m., and robinson, s.e. cocaine
increases extraneuronal levels of aspartate and glutamate in the nucle-

us accumbens. brain res. 683, 264–269 (1995).
84.

meshul, c.k., noguchi, k., emre, n., and ellison, g. cocaine-induced
changes in glutamate and gaba immunolabeling within rat habenula
and nucleus accumbens. synapse 30, 211–220 (1998).

85.

keys, a.s., mark, g.p., emre, n., and meshul, c.k. reduced glutamate
immunolabeling in the nucleus accumbens following extended withdrawal from self-administered cocaine. synapse 30, 393–401 (1998).

86.

williams, j.m. and steketee, j.d. cocaine increases medial prefrontal
cortical glutamate overflow in cocaine-sensitized rats: a time course
study. eur. j. neurosci. 20, 1639–1646 (2004).

87.

kalivas, p.w. neurobiology of cocaine addiction: implications for new
pharmacotherapy. am. j. addict. 16, 71–78 (2007).

88.

faiman, m.d. 1979. biochemical pharmacology of disulfiram. in:
majchowicz, e., novel, e.p. (eds.), biochemistry and pharmacology of
ethanol. plenum, new york, pp. 325–348.

89.

stewart, d.j., inaba, t., lucassen, m., and kalow, w. cocaine metabolism: cocaine and norcocaine hydrolysis by liver and serum esterases.
clin. pharmacol. ther. 25, 464–468 (1979).

90.

benowitz, n.l. clinical pharmacology and toxicology of cocaine.
pharmacol. toxicol. 72, 3–12 (1993).

91.

heikkila, r.e., orlansky, h., and cohen, g. studies on the distinction
between uptake inhibition and release of (3h)dopamine in rat brain tissue slices. biochem. pharmacol. 24, 847–852 (1975).

92.

reith, m.e., meisler, b.e., sershen, h., and lajtha, a. structural requirements for cocaine congeners to interact with dopamine and serotonin
uptake sites in mouse brain and to induce stereotyped behavior.
biochem. pharmacol. 35, 1123–1129 (1986).

93.

ritz, m.c., lamb, r.j., goldberg, s.r., and kuhar, m.j. cocaine receptors on dopamine transporters are related to self-administration of
cocaine. science 237, 1219–1223 (1987).

94.

lake, c.r., major, l.f., ziegler, m.g., and kopin, i.j. increased sympathetic nervous system activity in alcoholic patients treated with disulfiram. am. j. psychiatry 134, 1411–1414 (1977).

95.

frigon, r.p., converse, j.l., and stone, r.a. plasma dopamine betahydroxylase species dependence and in the vitro influence of nem,
copper, and ph. biochem. med. 19, 1–15 (1978).

96.

green, a.l. inhibition of dbh by chelating agents. biochim. biophys.
acta. 81(1964).

97.

bourdelat-parks, b.n., anderson, g.m., donaldson, z.r., weiss, j.m.,
bonsall, r.w., emery, m.s., liles, l.c., and weinshenker, d. effects
of  xxxg608xxx  genotype and disulfiram inhibition on
catecholamine homeostasis in mice. psychopharmacology (berl). 183,
72–80 (2005).

98.

grabowski, j., shearer, j., merrill, j., and negus, s.s. agonist-like,
replacement pharmacotherapy for stimulant abuse and dependence.
addict. behav. 29, 1439–1464 (2004).

99.

sofuoglu, m. and kosten, t.r. emerging pharmacological strategies
in the fight against cocaine addiction. expert opin. emerg. drugs. 11,
91–98 (2006).

100. weinshenker, d., schroeder, j.p. there and back again: a tale of norepinephrine and drug addiction. neuropsychopharmacology. 32, 1433–
1451 (2007). this review focuses on the role of norepinephrine
in reward, dopamine signaling and drug addiction. it thoroughly
summarizes clinical and animal data from an array of behavioral
paradigms used to test drug responses.
101. mejias-aponte, c.a., drouin, c. and aston-jones, g. adrenergic and
noradrenergic innervation of the midbrain ventral tegmental area and
retrorubral field: prominent inputs from medullary homeostatic centers.
j. neurosci. 29, 3613–3626 (2009).
102. grenhoff, j., nisell, m., ferre, s., aston-jones, g., and svensson, t.h.
noradrenergic modulation of midbrain dopamine cell firing elicited by
stimulation of the locus coeruleus in the rat. j. neural transm. gen.
sect. 93, 11–25 (1993).
103. grenhoff, j. and svensson, t.h.  xxxd3000xxx  modulates the firing pattern of
dopamine neurons in rat ventral tegmental area. eur. j. pharmacol. 233,

august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

185

review

79–84 (1993).
104. lategan, a.j., marien, m.r., and colpaert, f.c. effects of locus coeruleus lesions on the release of endogenous dopamine in the rat nucleus
accumbens and caudate nucleus as determined by intracerebral
microdialysis. brain res. 523, 134–138 (1990).
105. ventura, r., cabib, s., alcaro, a., orsini, c., and puglisi-allegra, s.
norepinephrine in the prefrontal cortex is critical for amphetamineinduced reward and mesoaccumbens dopamine release. j. neurosci.
23, 1879–1885 (2003).
106. ventura, r., morrone, c., and puglisi-allegra, s. prefrontal/accumbal
catecholamine system determines motivational salience attribution to
both reward- and aversion-related stimuli. proc. natl. acad. sc.i usa
104, 5181–5186 (2007).
107. schank, j.r., ventura, r., puglisi-allegra, s., alcaro, a., cole, c.d.,
liles, l.c., seeman, p., and weinshenker, d.  xxxg608xxx  knockout mice have alterations in dopamine signaling and are
hypersensitive to cocaine. neuropsychopharmacology 31, 2221–2230
(2006). this paper reports neurochemical changes and behavioral
responses to cocaine in mice  xxxg608xxx  knockout mice, providing strong evidence for the role of norepinephrine
and norepinephrine-dopamine interactions in reward.
108. weinshenker, d., ferrucci, m., busceti, c.l. et al. genetic or pharmacological blockade of noradrenaline synthesis enhances the neurochemical, behavioral, and neurotoxic effects of methamphetamine. j.
neurochem. 105, 471–483 (2008).
109. snoddy, a.m. and tessel, r.e.  xxxd3000xxx : effect on psychomotorstimulant cues and locomotor activity in mice. eur. j. pharmacol. 116,
221–228 (1985).
110. darracq, l., blanc, g., glowinski, j., and tassin, j.p. importance of the
noradrenaline-dopamine coupling in the locomotor activating effects of
d-amphetamine. j. neurosci. 18, 2729–2739 (1998).
111. drouin, c., darracq, l., trovero, f., blanc, g., glowinski, j., cotecchia,
s., and tassin, j.p. alpha1b-adrenergic receptors control locomotor
and rewarding effects of psychostimulants and opiates. j. neurosci. 22,
2873–2884 (2002).
112. auclair, a., drouin, c., cotecchia, s., glowinski, j., and tassin, j.p.
5-ht2a and alpha1b-adrenergic receptors entirely mediate dopamine
release, locomotor response and behavioural sensitization to opiates
and psychostimulants. eur. j. neurosci. 20, 3073–3084 (2004).

122. weinshenker, d., miller, n.s., blizinsky, k., laughlin, m.l., and palmiter,
r.d. mice with chronic norepinephrine deficiency resemble amphetamine-sensitized animals. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 99, 13873–13877
(2002).
123. weinshilboum, r.m., schorott, h.g., raymond, f.a., weidman, w.h.,
and elveback, l.r. inheritance of very low serum dopamine-betahydroxylase activity. am. j. hum. genet. 27, 573–585 (1975).
124. zabetian, c.p., anderson, g.m., buxbaum, s.g. et al. a quantitativetrait analysis of human plasma- xxxg608xxx  activity:
evidence for a major functional polymorphism at the dbh locus. am. j.
hum. genet. 68, 515–522 (2001).
125. cubells, j.f., kranzler, h.r., mccance-katz, e., anderson, g.m.,
malison, r.t., price, l.h., and gelernter, j. a haplotype at the dbh
locus, associated with low plasma  xxxg608xxx  activity, also associates with cocaine-induced paranoia. mol. psychiatry 5,
56–63 (2000).
126. kalayasiri, r., sughondhabirom, a., gueorguieva, r., coric, v., lynch,
w.j., lappalainen, j., gelernter, j., cubells, j.f., and malison, r.t.
 xxxg608xxx  gene (dbetah) -1021c-->t influences selfreported paranoia during cocaine self-administration. biol. psychiatry
61, 1310–1313 (2007).
127. mutschler, j., diehl, a., and kiefer, f. pronounced paranoia as a result
of cocaine-disulfiram interaction: case report and mode of action. j.
clin. psychopharmacol. 29, 99–101 (2009).
128. yokel, r.a. and wise, r.a. attenuation of intravenous amphetamine reinforcement by central dopamine blockade in rats.
psychopharmacology (berl). 48, 311–318 (1976).
129. risner, m. and jones, b.e. role of noradrenergic and dopaminergic
processes in amphetamine self-administration. pharmacol. biochem.
behav. 5, 477–482 (1976).
130. roberts, d.c., corcoran, m.e., and fibiger, h.c. on the role of ascending catecholaminergic systems in intravenous self-administration of
cocaine. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 6, 615–620 (1977).
131. guindalini, c., laranjeira, r., collier, d., messas, g., vallada, h., and
breen, g. dopamine-beta hydroxylase polymorphism and cocaine
addiction. behav. brain funct. 4, 1 (2008).

113. maldonado, r., robledo, p., chover, a.j., caine, s.b., and koob, g.f.
d1 dopamine receptors in the nucleus accumbens modulate cocaine
self-administration in the rat. pharmacol. biochem. behav. 45, 239–242
(1993).

132. schottenfeld, r.s., chawarski, m.c., george, t.p.a., and cubells, j.f.,
2004. pharmacogenetics of disulfiram for cocaine treatment: role of
dbh genotype. the 66th annual cpdd meeting, san juan, puerto
rico.

114. mcgregor, a. and roberts, d.c. dopaminergic antagonism within the
nucleus accumbens or the amygdala produces differential effects on
intravenous cocaine self-administration under fixed and progressive ratio
schedules of reinforcement. brain res. 624, 245–252 (1993).

133. oliveto, o., poling, j., and pruzinsky, r., 2004. efficacy of disulfiram
for cocaine abuse in methadone patients: relevance of dopamine betahydroxylase. the 43rd american college of neuropsychopharmacology
(acnp) meeting, san juan, puerto rico.

115. epping-jordan, m.p., markou, a., and koob, g.f. the dopamine d-1
receptor antagonist sch 23390 injected into the dorsolateral bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis decreased cocaine reinforcement in the
rat. brain res. 784, 105–115 (1998).

134. leshner, a.i. addiction is a brain disease, and it matters. science 278,
45–47 (1997).

116. ahmed, s.h. and koob, g.f. changes in response to a dopamine receptor antagonist in rats with escalating cocaine intake.
psychopharmacology (berl). 172, 450–454 (2004).
117. thierry, a.m., tassin, j.p., blanc, g., and glowinski, j. selective activation of mesocortical dopamine system by stress. nature 263, 242–244
(1976).
118. abercrombie, e.d., keefe, k.a., difrischia, d.s., and zigmond, m.j.
differential effect of stress on in vivo dopamine release in striatum,
nucleus accumbens, and medial frontal cortex. j. neurochem. 52,
1655–1658 (1989).
119. jensen, p.g., curtis, p.d., dunn, j.a., austic, r.e., and richmond, m.e.
field evaluation of capsaicin as a rodent aversion agent for poultry feed.
pest. manag. sci. 59, 1007–1015 (2003).
120. thomas, s.a., matsumoto, a.m., and palmiter, r.d. noradrenaline is
essential for mouse fetal development. nature 374, 643–646 (1995).

186

121. thomas, s.a., marck, b.t., palmiter, r.d., and matsumoto, a.m.
restoration of norepinephrine and reversal of phenotypes in mice lacking  xxxg608xxx . j. neurochem. 70, 2468–2476 (1998).

135. hunt, w.a., barnett, l.w., and branch, l.g. relapse rates in addiction
programs. j clin psychol. 27, 455–456 (1971).
136. kalivas, p.w. and volkow, n.d. the neural basis of addiction: a pathology of motivation and choice. am. j. psychiatry 162, 1403–1413 (2005).
137. sinha, r. and li, c.s. imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: association with relapse and clinical implications. drug
alcohol rev. 26, 25–31 (2007).
138. drummond, d.c. what does cue-reactivity have to offer clinical
research? addiction 95 suppl 2, s129–144 (2000).
139. sinha, r., garcia, m., paliwal, p., kreek, m.j., and rounsaville, b.j.
stress-induced cocaine craving and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
responses are predictive of cocaine relapse outcomes. arch. gen.
psychiatry 63, 324–331 (2006).
140. ikemoto, s. and wise, r.a. mapping of chemical trigger zones for
reward. neuropharmacology. 47 suppl 1, 190–201 (2004).
141. kelley, a.e., schiltz, c.a., and landry, c.f. neural systems recruited by

antabuse and cocaine relapse

drug- and food-related cues: studies of gene activation in corticolimbic
regions. physiol. behav. 86, 11–14 (2005).
142. panlilio, l.v. and goldberg, s.r. self-administration of drugs in animals
and humans as a model and an investigative tool. addiction 102, 1863–
1870 (2007). this review summarizes popular drug self-administration paradigms used in animal research, discussing their variations, advantages, limitations and their validity in modeling drug
addiction in humans.

ing early withdrawal from chronic cocaine administration in rats. prog.
neuropsychopharmacol. biol. psychiatry 31, 1119–1129 (2007).
159. schank j.r., liles, l.c., and weinshenker, d. norepinephrine signaling
through beta-adrenergic receptors is critical for expression of cocaineinduced anxiety. biol. psychiatry 63, 1007–1012 (2008).

meriem gaval-cruz, bs, is a
graduate student in the division
of biological and biomedical
sciences at emory university.
her research interests focus on
the neurobiology of drug addiction, with an emphasis on cocaine
pharmacotherapies. her activities
include neuroscience outreach to
k-12 students and the laboratory

143. davis, w.m., smith, s.g., and khalsa, j.h. noradrenergic role in the
self-administration of morphine or amphetamine. pharmacol. biochem.
behav. 3, 477–484 (1975).
144. leri, f., flores, j., rodaros, d., and stewart, j. blockade of stressinduced but not cocaine-induced reinstatement by infusion of noradrenergic antagonists into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis or the central nucleus of the amygdala. j. neurosci. 22, 5713–5718 (2002). this
paper conclusively demonstrated that blockade of norepinephrine
transmission in stress-related brain circuits attenuates stressinduced reinstatement of drug seeking.
145. zhang, x.y. and kosten, t.a.  xxxd3000xxx , an alpha-1 adrenergic antagonist, reduces cocaine-induced reinstatement of drug-seeking. biol.
psychiatry 57, 1202–1204 (2005).
146. lee, b., tiefenbacher, s., platt, d.m., and spealman, r.d. pharmacological blockade of  xxxg831xxx -adrenoceptors induces reinstatement of cocaine-seeking behavior in squirrel monkeys.
neuropsychopharmacology 29, 686–693 (2004).
147. platt, d.m., rowlett, j.k., and spealman, r.d. noradrenergic mechanisms in cocaine-induced reinstatement of drug seeking in squirrel monkeys. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 322, 894–902 (2007).
148. brown, z.j., tribe, e., d’souza n, a., and erb, s. interaction between
noradrenaline and  xxxd1752xxx -releasing factor in the reinstatement of
cocaine seeking in the rat. psychopharmacology (berl). 203, 121–130
(2009).
149. sinha, r., catapano, d., and o’malley, s. stress-induced craving and
stress response in cocaine dependent individuals. psychopharmacology
(berl). 142, 343–351 (1999).
150. sinha, r., fuse, t., aubin, l.r., and o’malley, s.s. psychological stress,
drug-related cues and cocaine craving. psychopharmacology (berl).
152, 140–148 (2000).

mentoring of undergraduates.
david weinshenker, phd,
is associate professor in the
department of human genetics at
emory university. he has pursued
model systems to better understand genes involved in human
disease. he applies genetic models
combined with pharmacological
tools to investigate various aspects
of neurobiology, with a particular
focus on the role of norepinephrine in brain function and disease. send correspondence to dw.
e-mail dweinshenker@genetics.emory.edu; fax 404-727-3949.

151. brewer, d.d., catalano, r.f., haggerty, k., gainey, r.r., and fleming,
c.b. a meta-analysis of predictors of continued drug use during and
after treatment for opiate addiction. addiction 93, 73–92 (1998).
152. kosten, t.r., rounsaville, b.j., and kleber, h.d. a 2.5-year follow-up of
depression, life crises, and treatment effects on abstinence among opioid addicts. arch. gen. psychiatry 43, 733–738 (1986).
153. piazza, p.v. and le moal, m.l. pathophysiological basis of vulnerability
to drug abuse: role of an interaction between stress, glucocorticoids,
and dopaminergic neurons. annu. rev. pharmacol. toxicol. 36, 359–378
(1996).
154. piazza, p.v. and le moal, m. the role of stress in drug self-administration. trends pharmacol. sci. 19, 67–74 (1998).
155. kreek, m.j. and koob, g.f. drug dependence: stress and dysregulation
of brain reward pathways. drug alcohol depend. 51, 23–47 (1998).
156. heimer, l., alheid, g.f., and zahm, d.s., 1993. basal forebrain organization: an anatomical framework for motor aspects of drive and motivation. in: kalivas, p.w., barnes, c.d. (eds.), limbic motor circuits and
neuropsychiatry. crc press, boca raton, pp. 1–43.
157. smith, r.j. and aston-jones, g. noradrenergic transmission in the
extended amygdala: role in increased drug-seeking and relapse during protracted drug abstinence. brain struct. funct. 213, 43–61 (2008).
this paper gives a detailed analysis of norepinephrine and corticosterone releasing factor interactions in the amygdala and how
it mediates behavioral responses to drugs of abuse. it explains
how stress response systems affect reward processing during protracted drug abstinence.
158. rudoy, c.a. and van bockstaele, e.j. betaxolol, a selective beta(1)adrenergic receptor antagonist, diminishes anxiety-like behavior dur-

august 2009
volume 9, issue 4

187

