current medicinal chemistry, 2009, 16, 3886-3902

3886

role of nuclear steroid receptors in apoptosis
joana d. amaral1, susana solá1, clifford j. steer2 and cecília m.p. rodrigues*,1
1

research institute for medicines and pharmaceutical sciences, faculty of pharmacy, university of lisbon, lisbon,
portugal, and 2departments of medicine, and genetics, cell biology, and development, university of minnesota medical school, minneapolis, mn, usa
abstract: nuclear steroid receptors (nsr) are ligand-activated transcription factors that play a key role in a variety of vital physiological phenomena including developmental or endocrine signaling, reproduction, and homeostasis. in addition,
they are implicated in other important biological processes, such as apoptosis. modulation of apoptosis by nsr is mostly
associated with control of pro-apoptotic versus anti-apoptotic gene expression, and includes both induction and prevention
of apoptosis depending on cell type. however, it is unclear how nsr can affect opposing expression of the same gene in
different cells. of note, recently described nongenomic mechanisms of nsr, in particular  xxxg1601xxx  translocation to mitochondria, were suggested to be crucial steps for triggering apoptosis. nsr often act solely as nuclear transporters of other regulatory molecules, thus indirectly regulating several apoptosis-related genes. curiously, nsr are
thought to cooperate with the anti-apoptotic endogenous bile acid,  xxxd3479xxx  ( xxxd3479xxx ), to prevent programmed
cell death. in fact, as cholesterol-derived molecules and due to their chemical and structural similarities to steroid hormones, bile acids also modulate nsr activation. although the precise link between nsr and  xxxd3479xxx  remains unclear, we
have demonstrated that the bile acid requires nsr for translocation to the cell nucleus as part of a ligand-receptor complex, using a mechanism similar to that of steroid hormones. interestingly, other studies revealed that  xxxd3479xxx  interacts
with the  xxxg1601xxx  as a novel and selective nsr modifier. the huge diversity of natural ligands and xenobiotics that bind to nsr and regulate their function represents one of the most exciting drug targets for potential therapeutic
intervention. the next decade will almost certainly unveil the remarkable role of nsr in modulating cell fate in human
health and disease.

keywords: apoptosis, bcl-2 family, bile acids, glucocorticoids, ligand binding, nuclear steroid receptors, nuclear trafficking,  xxxd3479xxx .
introduction
nuclear steroid receptors (nsr) are usually classified as
a family of intracellular ligand-activated transcription factors. these receptors share similar architecture at the protein
level, but are remarkably diverse in terms of natural ligands
and xenobiotics that bind to and regulate their function. the
ability of nsr to interact with a variety of ligands, and
modulate the transcription of several genes allows these versatile molecules to play critical roles in development, reproduction, homeostasis, and generalized endocrine signaling
[1]. they are also important molecules in other biological
processes, such as apoptosis [2]. apoptosis is one type of
physiological cell death in which specific intrinsic programs
are activated to cause cell destruction. the balance between
cell death and cell division is of paramount importance for
the normal development and maintenance of multicellular
organisms. many health-related disorders are attributed directly or indirectly to unregulated cell death. apoptotic cell
death, in particular, has been documented as a prominent
player in embryonic and postembryonic development, organ
morphogenesis, tissue homeostasis, immune regulation, and
has also been implicated in several pathological and therapeutic settings in humans and vertebrates. an excess of
apoptosis may result in t cell depletion, neurodegenerative
diseases, or hepatocellular degeneration, while impaired
apoptosis is frequently observed in tumorigenesis. surprisingly, we lose and replace ~ 60x109 cells per day, which represents a mass of cells equivalent to an entire body weight on
*address correspondence to this author at the research institute for medicines and pharmaceutical sciences, faculty of pharmacy, university of
lisbon, av. prof. gama pinto, 1649-003 lisbon, portugal; tel: +351 217
946 400; fax: +351 217 946 491; e-mail: cmprodrigues@ff.ul.pt
0929-8673/09 $55.00+.00

an annual basis. this physiological cell death generally occurs through an apoptotic process, in response to diverse
stimuli, underscoring the relevance of this orchestrated form
of cellular suicide [3].
indeed, it is not surprising that cellular mechanisms leading to apoptosis have been a topic of intensive research.
they represent powerful tools to understand human disease
and develop effective therapies in the management of apoptosis-associated disorders.
curiously, in the last decade, it has been shown that nsr
regulate apoptosis in several cell systems. nsr are thought
to be involved in both induction and prevention of apoptosis,
depending on cell type. however, it is still uncertain as to
how nsr differentially modulate the expression of the same
gene in different cell types. an increased understanding of
cell destiny by nsr may prove useful in establishing and
developing new and more effective therapeutic strategies for
apoptosis-related diseases.
1. nuclear steroid receptors
to place current studies of nsr modulation of apoptosis
into their proper context, this chapter begins with a brief
overview of the structural features and molecular/physiological mechanisms shared by nuclear receptors.
1.1. historical perspective
natural ligands for nuclear receptors are generally lipophilic in nature. lipophilic hormones, due to their ability to
diffuse from a source and permeate to a target, are ideal candidates to serve as regulators of the differential control of
gene expression. historically, prior to the late 1950s, most
© 2009 bentham science publishers ltd.

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

information on the role of steroid hormones was derived
from biological observations of changes in animal model
systems after hormone administration. however, during
much of the 1960s, observations from the blossoming field
of molecular biology demonstrated hormonal effects on
rna, dna, and protein synthesis. in addition, many of
these hormones were associated with known human diseases,
and by that time glucocorticoids (gcs) had gained popularity
as therapeutic agents. while the mediators of hormone action
remained illusive, development of radiolabeled ligands allowed the identification of binding proteins that were shown
to migrate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, providing an
important link between transcriptional regulation and physiology [4].
it is just over 20 years since the first steroid receptor
cdna was cloned [5], a development that led to the concept
of a family of ligand-activated phylogenetically related proteins, and presumably all derived from a common ancestral.
the cloning of nuclear receptors was an essential prerequisite for ultimately understanding the molecular basis of hormone signaling pathways, demonstrating that chemically
distinct ligands interact with receptors exhibiting extensive
sequence similarities.
classic members of the nuclear receptor superfamily include endocrine receptors that mediate the action of steroid
hormones, such as glucocorticoid (gr), mineralocorticoid
(mr), estrogen (er), androgen (ar) and progesterone (pr)
receptors, and a second group of endocrine receptors for
nonsteroidal compounds like thyroid hormones, retinoids,
and certain vitamins, among others. nevertheless, the search
for new members of the superfamily led to the isolation of
multiple cdnas encoding proteins with structural features
found in nuclear receptors, whose ligands, target genes and
physiological functions were unknown. these receptors were
aptly designated “orphan nuclear receptors”, since their cognate ligands had yet to be identified.
1.2. general structure
the superfamily of nuclear receptors provides multicellular organisms with a means to directly control patterns of
gene expression in response to a wide range of developmental, physiological, and environmental cues. in fact, the nuclear receptor superfamily is the largest known group of eukaryotic transcription factors, first recognized as the mediators of steroid hormone signaling. to date, 48 nuclear receptor genes have been identified in the human genome, and
unexpectedly, more than 270 in the nematode worm
caenorhabditis elegans. these proteins share a conserved
modular structure that includes a highly variable n-terminal
region containing at least one ligand-independent activation
function domain ( xxxg1143xxx   xxxg1865xxx ), involved in protein-protein interaction and transcriptional activation of target gene expression;
the central and highly conserved dna-binding domain
(dbd), which plays an important role in receptor dimerization and its binding to specific dna sequences; and the
moderately conserved c-terminal ligand-binding domain
(lbd) that, in addition to determining ligand specificity,
contains a ligand-inducible transactivation function domain
(af-2). indeed, the lbd is responsible not only for ligand
recognition, but also for cofactor interaction, thus ensuring

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3887

both specificity and selectivity of the physiologic response.
conformation of the lbd has also been shown to be altered
by a variety of post-translational modifications, which in turn
result in the ability of nsr to induce changes in gene expression. between the dbd and the lbd is a less conserved
region in both length and primary sequence that behaves as a
hinge between the two domains, and contains the nuclear
localization signal (nls). the hinge has to be very flexible
to allow dbd rotation, and receptor binding as dimers to
both direct and inverted hormone response elements (fig. 1),
[6].
1.3. physiologic role
nsr exert their physiological effects largely through the
modulation of gene expression. similar to other proteins,
nsr are synthesized in ribosomes, and reside outside the
nucleus. in the absence of their cognate ligands, nsr remain
transcriptionally inactive in the cytoplasm and associated
with a family of receptor-associated proteins [7]. these include chaperones (heat shock proteins; hsp90, hsp70, hsp40),
cochaperones, immunophilins and other proteins. these interactions are a requisite for proper protein folding and assembly of stable nsr-chaperone heterocomplexes that are
competent to bind ligands. in classical models of nsr activation, ligand binding induces a conformational change that
results in chaperone dissociation and receptor dimerization.
these dimers are then able to translocate to the nucleus, and
recruit coactivator complexes involved in gene expression
[8] (fig. 1). moreover, the import of nsr into the nucleus
always requires the nls signal, exposed only after ligand
binding-induced coupled protein dissociation. in fact, in the
presence of ligand, the most c-terminal -helix folds over
the ligand-binding hydrophobic pocket thereby creating
structural surfaces that bind the transcriptional apparatus and
recruit coactivators required for efficient transactivation.
within the nucleus, the activated receptors bind to hormone
response elements within the genome as homo- or heterodimers.
the most common models of nsr mode of action include ligand-dependent gene activation, ligand-independent
repression of transcription, and ligand-dependent derepression of transcription. indeed, the transcriptional activity of
nsr is mediated through a large number of coregulatory
proteins including coactivators, corepressors and other cofactors. both coactivators and corepressors affect transcription
by modifying the chromatin structure, via both histone acetylation and methylation. repression, for instance, involves the
recruitment of ligand-free nsr-associated proteins, or corepressors complexes, with histone deacetylase activity. on the
other hand, derepression occurs following ligand binding,
which dissociates the corepressor complex and recruits a first
coactivator with histone acetyltransferase (hat) activity,
resulting in chromatin decondensation. finally, the hat
complex dissociates and a second coactivator is assembled
and recruited to the promoter of target genes through proteinprotein interactions with the receptor. the interaction between the coactivator complex and the basal transcription
machinery results in transcriptional activation.
the most studied group of nuclear receptor coactivators
is the  xxxg1449xxx  family of steroid receptor coactivator (src)

3888 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

amaral et al.

fig. (1). cellular trafficking of nsr. nsr are modular proteins comprised of a non-conserved amino-terminal domain that contains a
ligand-independent transcriptional activation function, a central and highly conserved dna binding domain with two zinc finger motifs,
linked by the hinge domain to the carboxyl-terminal ligand binding domain which contains a second transcriptional activation domain that is
ligand dependent (inset). in the absence of their cognate ligands, nsr are transcriptionally inactive and typically bound to chaperones in the
cytoplasm. upon ligand binding, chaperones dissociate and dimerized receptors enter the nucleus to modulate gene expression. see text for
more complete description.  xxxg1143xxx   xxxg1865xxx , transcriptional activation domain 1; af-2, transcriptional activation domain 2; dbd, dna binding domain; hd, hinge domain; hsp90, heat shock protein 90; lbd, ligand binding domain; nls, nuclear localization signal; ntd, n-terminal
domain.

proteins, including  xxxg1510xxx   xxxg2198xxx ,  xxxg1511xxx , and  xxxg1512xxx . these coactivators interact with ligand-bound nsr to recruit histone acetyltransferases and methyltransferases to specific enhancer/promoter regions, which facilitates chromatin remodeling, assembly of general transcription factors, and transcrip-

tion of target genes [9]. curiously, in breast cancer cells,
each of the three src stimulates  xxxg730xxx  function
and modulates the transcription of estrogen response elements associated with cell proliferation and inhibition of
apoptosis [10, 11]. moreover,  xxxg1512xxx  has been recently shown

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

to inhibit apoptosis through a cytoplasmic action that involves enhanced nuclear factor b (nf-b) activity,
caspase-9 inhibition, and an increase in both akt and p38
kinase activities [12].
recent findings suggest additional levels of nsr action.
it should be noted that distinct responses to steroids have
been observed, which are too rapid to involve changes in
gene transcription and translation. these nongenomic or extranuclear responses were initially rejected as they compromised the classic genomic theory of steroid action. nevertheless, they are now being increasingly reconsidered, and there
are even several well-established examples of nongenomic
responses to steroids with significant physiologic implications [13]. examples of these effects include stress responses
to secreted gcs, rapid actions of thyroid hormones in the
heart, and acute uterine responses to injected estrogen [14].
importantly, nontranscriptional effects of nsr were found to
mediate tissue protection following trauma-hemorrhage,
myocardial infarction, and stroke through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (pi3k)/akt pathway [15-17]. a nongenomic
function of gr was also described, in which the nuclear receptor inhibits proinflammatory transcription factors, such as
nf-b and  xxxg810xxx   xxxg1222xxx   xxxg1223xxx   xxxg1224xxx  (ap-1) [18]. these types of
responses have increasingly been attributed to rapid signaling by steroid hormones, following engagment of binding
proteins localized primarily at the cell surface of target organs. there are recent reports suggesting that classical glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors mediate rapid
signaling by their respective ligands when localized to
plasma membrane rafts [19, 20]. nevertheless, the mechanism by which nsr traffic to the cell membrane has not
been established yet.
the importance of nuclear receptors in maintaining the
normal physiological state is well illustrated by the enormous pharmacopoeia that has been developed for disorders
with inappropriate nuclear receptor signaling. in fact, nsr
represent one of the most important drug targets for potential
therapeutic application [21]. the strategy of nsr drug discovery has evolved from designing of synthetic compounds
that mimic the full function of cognate ligands to developing
synthetic compounds that selectively modulate the functional
activity of nuclear receptors in a manner that is distinct from
the cognate ligands. in-depth knowledge on the regulation of
nsr mode of action revealed that transcriptional modulation
by nsr is extremely dependent on cofactors recruited in
response to ligand binding. although the nuclear receptor
itself might be common in different tissue types, the cofactors may be tissue-specific. therefore, it is possible to develop selective compounds that harbor tissue-specific properties, distinct from that of the cognate ligands. this approach may mitigate undesirable side effects that often accompany the therapeutic effects of drugs mimicking natural
ligands.
2. modulation of apoptosis
2.1. key mechanisms of apoptotic pathways
apoptotic cell death is a highly regulated mechanism,
which can be viewed as a program of cell suicide vital for a
wide variety of biological processes. apoptosis eliminates

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3889

superfluous, damaged, or mutated cells according to the rule
of “better death than wrong”. during apoptosis, cells undergo a number of distinct morphological and biochemical
events involving the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, chromatin condensation, dna fragmentation, membrane blebbing, and generation of small apoptotic vesicles
containing intact cytoplasmic organelles as well as nuclear
remnants.
apoptosis can be divided into at least three distinct
phases: initiation, integration/decision, and execution/degradation [22]. the initiation phase is highly heterogeneous and depends on the nature of the death-inducing
signal. the integration/decision phase involves the activation
of a complex network of apoptotic pathways. during this
phase, the “decision to die” is taken and the “point of no
return” is trespassed. finally, the execution/degradation
phase culminates in cell death, and is common to distinct
types of apoptosis. moreover, the apoptotic process may
occur by several molecular pathways. the best characterized
and most prominent, however, is the intrinsic pathway, involving mitochondria [23], and the extrinsic pathway, which
is activated by death receptors at the cellular membrane [24]
(fig. 2). although apparently independent, these two apoptotic pathways may interact through a delicate orchestration
of cross-talk involving key proteins that are common to both
pathways.
2.1.1. mitochondrial pathway
the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis is triggered by
several forms of intracellular stresses which converge on
mitochondria, leading to membrane permeabilization, release
of apoptogenic proteins, and activation of cysteine proteases,
namely caspases, which in turn induce substrate degradation
and cell death. mitochondrial membrane permeabilization
may occur by the opening of the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore, or through the formation of specific release
channels in the outer membrane, promoted by pro-apoptotic
members of the bcl-2 family.
bcl-2 family members may regulate the mitochondrial
pathway in both a positive and negative fashion [25]. bcl-2
family proteins can be categorized into three groups, according to the structure and function of its members. the antiapoptotic multidomain proteins (e.g. bcl-2,  xxxg251xxx ,  xxxg253xxx ,
 xxxg1388xxx ) share four conserved bcl-2 homology (bh) domains
(bh1-4); pro-apoptotic multidomain proteins (e.g. bax,
bak), which contain three bh domains (bh1-3); and proapoptotic bh3-only proteins (e.g. bid, bad) [26]. interestingly, bh domains have been shown to mediate protein interactions forming either homo- or hetero-complexes.
in normal unstressed cells, anti-apoptotic members of the
bcl-2 family are integral membrane proteins, usually localized in the outer mitochondrial membrane. on the other
hand, pro-apoptotic members of the bcl-2 family are usually
located in the cytosol as inert forms prior to induction of cell
death. following induction of apoptosis, bax and bak undergo conformational changes, oligomerize and translocate
from cytosol to the outer mitochondrial membrane, where
they directly or indirectly form specific pores for the release
of apoptogenic factors, such as  xxxg569xxx  and
smac/diablo. once in the cytosol,  xxxg569xxx  oli-

3890 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

amaral et al.

fig. (2). schematic overview of extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways. in the death receptor pathway, after interacting with their
ligands, the death receptors recruit adaptor proteins and activate  xxxg342xxx  and -10. these initiator caspases then cleave effector caspase-3, 6, and -7, which activate key downstream targets and execute the apoptotic process. in the mitochondrial pathway, death stimuli target mitochondria either directly or through transduction by pro-apoptotic bax and bak. mitochondria then release  xxxg569xxx , smac/diablo,
among other apoptogenic factors. smac/diablo inhits iaps, which in turn, bind and inhibit caspases.  xxxg569xxx  induces oligomerization of  xxxg169xxx  that recruits and activates procaspase-9. caspase-9 then activates effector caspases. the crosstalk between both pathways is
mediated by bid, which is truncated and activated by  xxxg342xxx . see text for more complete description. card, caspase activation and recruitment domain; ded, death effector domain; iap, inhibitor of apoptosis protein.

gomerizes with the apoptotic protease-activating factor-1
( xxxg169xxx ), recruiting procaspase-9 to form the so-called
“apoptosome”. this multimeric complex formation results in
cleavage and activation of initiator caspase-9, which in turn
cleaves and activates other caspases that function as downstream effectors of the apoptotic process [27]. curiously,
anti-apoptotic members of the bcl-2 family, such as bcl-2
and  xxxg251xxx  l, interact with bax, preventing pore formation
and release of apoptogenic proteins, thereby mitigating the
apoptosis process.
puma and  xxxg1783xxx  are two bh3-only proteins that are also
involved in the apoptotic process. together with bax, they
play an important role in apoptosis induced by the tumor
suppressor protein p53 [28, 29].

2.1.2. death receptor pathway
the triggering point in the classical death receptor pathway of apoptosis is the engagement of transmembrane proteins by their cognate ligands, followed by recruitment of
intracellular adaptor molecules, forming the death-inducing
signaling complex (disc) [30]. death receptors are type 1
transmembrane proteins, belonging to the tumor necrosis
factor (tnf) receptor superfamily [31], and include tnf
receptor (tnfr)1, fas, tnf-related apoptosis inducing
ligand (trail) receptors -1 and -2, death receptor (dr) 3
and dr6.  xxxg342xxx  is the dominant death receptor-activated
initiator caspase. in type i cells, the apoptotic cascade continues as  xxxg342xxx  directly activates downstream effector
caspases perpetuating the apoptotic process [32]. in type ii

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

signaling cells, such as hepatocytes, the progression of the
apoptotic cascade depends entirely on its amplification by
mitochondria [33]. in this case,  xxxg342xxx  cleaves inactive
cytoplasmic bid, a bh3-only member of the bcl-2 family,
exposing an active truncated fragment (tbid). once activated, tbid induces conformational changes in pro-apoptotic
bax and bak and subsequent translocation to mitochondria,
inducing the release of  xxxg569xxx , which ultimately results in caspase-3 activation and perpetuates the apoptotic
process [34] (fig. 2). this coordination between both pathways highlights the role of bh3-only proteins as prominent
messengers of death signals [35], and reinforces the critical
role of the mitochondrial organelle during programmed cell
death.
2.1.3. cell cycle and apoptosis
since tissue homeostasis is dependent on the precise balance between cell proliferation and cell death, some cell cycle regulators also modulate apoptosis. additional regulatory
controls that can initiate apoptosis include the  xxxg668xxx  transcription factor, a member of the e2f family that not only
regulates the expression of many genes necessary for normal
proliferation, in a cell cycle-specific manner, but has also
been implicated in induction of apoptosis [36].  xxxg668xxx  is
typically bound to the unphosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (prb). however, under certain stress conditions and
during cell cycle, inactivation of prb by phosphorylation,
releases  xxxg668xxx  to transactivate genes necessary for apoptosis. activation of p53 is one of the mechanisms involved in
 xxxg668xxx -induced apoptosis. in the absence of stress signals,
p53 is kept in check to allow normal cell proliferation and/or
maintenance of cell viability. the p53 protein is mainly
regulated at the posttranslational level by mdm-2, or in humans, hdm-2, which has been shown to inhibit p53 activity
by regulating its stability, cellular localization, and ability to
activate transcription [37]. interestingly,  xxxg668xxx  stabilizes
p53 by induction of arf, which directly binds to mdm-2 to
prevent p53 proteasomal degradation.
the link between cell cycle and apoptosis has also been
recognized in other proteins, such as c-myc, ras and cell
cycle regulators including p21, p27, cyclin-dependent
kinases and cyclins. in fact, some of these proteins are targets for cleavage by caspases, underscoring the absence of
cell cycle progression during apoptosis [38]. taken together,
induction of apoptosis depends on the cellular context where
conflicting signals for cell proliferation and cell cycle arrest
may result in cell death.

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3891

genes, including proinflammatory cytokines but also antiapoptotic bcl-2 elements. thus, activation of nf-b promotes either cell injury or protection.
the pi3k family of enzymes has also been implicated in
controlling cell survival in response to stimuli such as trophic factors and bile acids. downstream effectors of pi3k
signaling include  xxxg1377xxx  akt, which is a key
component in cell survival. in turn, akt targets several proteins to maintain cell survival, including apoptosis regulators
and transcription factors [40]. it is thought that activation of
akt induces phosphorylation of bad, which results in dissociation from and activation of anti-apoptotic  xxxg251xxx . in addition, akt phosphorylates and inactivates caspase-9, suppresses translocation of pro-apoptotic bax to mitochondria,
and activates transcription factors, camp-response elementbinding protein (creb), and nf-b, all of which are involved in regulating cell survival. phosphorylation of forkhead family members by akt negatively regulates deathpromoting signals, whereas phosphorylation of creb and
ib kinase (ikk) stimulate survival pathways. interestingly,
ikk phosphorylation by akt links the pi3k signaling cascade with the nf-b pathway.
finally, the mapk pathway is also important in survival
signaling. mapks are a superfamily of homologous enzymes that integrate and transduce intracellular and extracellular signals into the nucleus. the effect of the mapk pathway on survival is mediated, in part, by activation of pp90
ribosomal s6 kinase (rsk) family members. like akt,
rsks phosphorylate bad, and both kinases might act synergistically at inhibiting bad pro-apoptotic activity. rsks are
also potent activators of creb, which is known to activate
transcription of bcl-2, thereby stimulating cell survival directly [41].
thus, although a variety of survival pathways is triggered
by different signals, they all converge on the same set of
proteins to inhibit the apoptosis program. an additional
mechanism through which cells are believed to acquire resistance to apoptosis is by overexpression of inhibitor of apoptosis protein (iap) family members, which have the ability
to bind and inhibit caspases.
2.2. role of nuclear steroid receptors

several molecular pathways protect cells from pathologic
apoptosis. survival signaling pathways include the nf-b,
pi3k, and mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) pathways, among others.

during the past several years, it has been shown that
nsr regulate apoptosis in different cell systems [42, 43].
curiously, nsr play a heterogeneous function in apoptosis,
which is affected by tissue-specific parameters such as alternative initiation sites within nuclear receptor genes, as well
as the varying effects of co-modulators. however, the
mechanism by which nsr can differentially affect the expression of the same subset of genes for different cells is still
a matter of debate.

nf-b is a ubiquitous transcription factor that mediates a
variety of proinflammatory responses [39]. in unstimulated
cells, nf-b is tightly bound to inhibitory  xxxg165xxx b in the
cytoplasm, which prevents its translocation to the nucleus.
following cellular stresses, ib is phosphorylated by specific kinases, leading to its proteasomal degradation and subsequent dissociation from nf-b. in the nucleus, nf-b
binds to specific response elements in the promoter of target

gcs are a class of steroid hormones, which regulate a variety of essential biological functions. their antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive properties, combined
with their ability to mediate apoptosis, make gcs some of
the most commonly prescribed drugs. it is widely accepted
that they repress or activate gene transcription via interaction
with gr [44]. moreover, the transactivation and transrepression activity of gr, in cooperation with nongenomic effects

2.1.4. survival pathways

3892 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

exerted by gcs, are imperative for gc regulation of apoptosis [45]. the regulation of gr-mediated gene transcription
has been described to enhance apoptosis of myeloma cells,
osteoblasts, lymphoid cells and neuronal cells. indeed, gr
activation has been correlated with pathological conditions,
such as alzheimer’s and parkinson’s diseases [46, 47]. several attempts have been made to identify gc-induced genes
using advent microarray technologies. nevertheless, many of
the target genes whose transactivation or transrepression by
gr somehow modulates apoptosis remain uncertain.
interestingly, gr was shown to regulate apoptosis
through modulation of expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic
bcl-2 family members, and p53 [48]. in the nervous system,
gr-induced apoptosis was associated with increased p53 as
well as elevated ratios of pro-apoptotic bax relative to antiapoptotic bcl-2 and  xxxg251xxx  [49]. indeed, in rat hippocampus,
it was shown that bax is essential in gr-mediated cell deathsignaling cascade. gr upregulates other pro-apoptotic members of the bcl-2 family, such as bim and bad, thus facilitating bax mitochondrial translocation and subsequent  xxxg569xxx  release. it has also been shown that gc-induced
apoptosis in insulin-secreting cells is accompanied by downregulation of bcl-2 and subsequent dephosphorylation of
bad followed by mitochondrial depolarization [50]. interestingly, there is also a distinct correlation between the genomic
and nongenomic effects exerted by gr. beneath nuclear
translocation, gr has been shown to be located within the
mitochondria in some cell types, which appears to be a crucial step for triggering apoptosis. in fact, gr-induced apoptosis of a thymic epithelial cell line is dependent of gr translocation to mitochondria, but not to the nucleus, suggesting a
role for mitochondrial gr in eliciting apoptosis. furthermore, a gr variant exclusively expressed in mitochondria
elicits apoptosis of several cancer cell lines [51].
at odds with its pro-apoptotic effects in certain cell
types, gr also mediates pro-survival signals in others. it has
been reported that gr suppresses spontaneous apoptosis of
neutrophils and tnf--mediated apoptosis of mouse fibroblasts [52, 53]. in addition, gr inhibits apoptosis by transcriptionally activating  xxxg251xxx  in fibrosarcoma and c6
glioma cells [54, 55], while represses  xxxg668xxx  in osteosarcoma
cell lines [56]. strikingly, profound protective effects against
apoptosis have been continuously attributed to gr in several
liver derived cells [57, 58]. rat liver regeneration is also
thought to involve elevated expression of gr [59]. further, it
was recently shown that  xxxg251xxx  l mediates gc inhibition of
uv-c-induced apoptosis [60]. in human breast cancer cells,
the activation of survival pathways can be promoted by gr,
which was shown to mediate protection from apoptosis
through induction of serum and gc-regulated kinase-1 [61].
interestingly, gr was also found to physically interact with
the  xxxg2313xxx , and its dual role in inducing apoptosis or cell cycle arrest. the functional interactions between
gr and p53 in different physiological conditions may result
either in antagonism or complementation between both transcription factors. p53 and gr may repress each other’s function either at the transcriptional level or through grmediated cytoplasmic anchoring of p53. in contrast, synergy
between both transcription factors has also been described in
neuronal and rat hepatoma cells [62]. in fact, treatment with
dexamethasone, the classical agonist of gr, induced g1 cell

amaral et al.

cycle arrest in hippocampal cells mediated by an increase of
cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor p21 protein.
melatonin, in turn, prevented gr-inhibited cell proliferation
and reduced cell death caused by gcs when cells were
treated with dexamethasone in combination with neurotoxins
[63]. p53 also crosstalks with other nsr, including ar and
er. sex nuclear receptors also play a role during the apoptosis process. nevertheless, similar to other nsr, they may
have dual functions in regulating apoptosis.
it is well established that er, in general, prevents apoptosis. there are at least three, and possibly four, distinct receptors for estrogens: two ligand activated transcription factors, er and er, encoded by a unique gene differing in
the c-terminal lbd and the n-terminal transactivation domain; one  xxxg676xxx   xxxg1336xxx  also referred to as
gpr30; and a less well defined putative receptor, termed
er-x [64]. highly variable and even contrasting effects of
estrogens in different tissues may be, in part, explained by
different estrogen signaling pathways involving both er
and er. interestingly, these receptors have different biological functions, as indicated by their specific expression
patterns and distinct phenotypes observed in er and er
knockout mice. in addition, er and er appear to have
overlapping but also unique sets of downstream target genes,
as revealed by microarray analysis. the differential transcriptional activities of er and er, in certain ligand, celltype, and promoter contexts, may explain some of the major
differences in their tissue-specific biological actions [65]. in
the prostate, for instance, activation of er leads to aberrant
proliferation, inflammation, and development of premalignant lesions, while in contrast, the activation of er is critical to balance the proliferative action of androgens in the
prostatic epithelia [66]. further, it has been shown that estrogen prevents cells from undergoing apoptosis by upregulating transcription of anti-apoptotic/pro-survival bcl-2 protein
[67]. estrogen was also neuroprotective against a variety of
insults, including amyloid -peptide (); in the presence of
toxic levels of a, er-ligand binding stimulation results in
upregulation of anti-apoptotic  xxxg253xxx  and downregulation of
pro-apoptotic bim [68]. of interest, the pro-apoptotic microrna (mirna) gene let-7c is higher in er positive than
er negative human breast tumors [69]. much like let-7c,
anti-apoptotic mirna-182 increases more in er positive
than er negative human breast tumors [70].
ironically, some cell types such as those associated with
the immune system [71, 72] and certain classes of bonederived cells [73], behave entirely differently. for example,
at elevated blood levels seen in pregnancy, estradiol increases apoptosis in human osteoclasts [74, 75]. this clearly
demonstrates that estradiol effects must be dependent on
additional factors present in different cell types. further, in
the er-positive breast cancer cell line mcf-7, high doses of
estrogen resulted in regression of hormone-dependent breast
cancer by inducing apoptosis [76]. finally, estrogen was
shown to modulate human macrophage apoptosis via differential signaling through er and er, underscoring the importance of using selective  xxxg730xxx  modulators in
apoptosis-based therapies [77].
similar to gr, some of er cellular functions are elicited
by ers residing at or near the plasma membrane. in several

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

cell types, ers associate with caveolae and large protein
complexes, which is thought to promote efficient signaling.
signaling by membrane ers triggers a number of intracellular signaling pathways, including mapk, pi3k/akt; activation of ion channel fluxes; generation of gpr30-mediated
second messengers; and stimulation of growth factor receptors, unveiling additional integrated functions of this class of
nuclear receptors [78]. er-triggered extranuclear signaling
appears to be critical for the regulation of a wide range of
target proteins, including those implicated in the apoptosis
process [79]. the effects of er have been reported at the cell
membrane in breast cancer cells, where pi3k activation
causes the phosphorylation of bad, which in turn dissociates
from the anti-apoptotic proteins, bcl-2 and  xxxg251xxx , maintaining mitochondrial membrane integrity and preventing  xxxg569xxx  release and subsequent cell death [80, 81]. in contrast, estradiol is also able to exert a rapid apoptotic action in
anterior pituitary cells, through an extranuclear mechanism
triggered by ers [82], and it is potentially involved in anterior pituitary cell turnover.
recent findings have suggested a paradigm shift in that
nuclear receptors target mitochondria and modulate molecular mechanisms to mediate mitochondria-dependent cellular
events. in fact, it has been demonstrated that er is present in
mitochondria of cultured cells. for example, er is found in
mitochondrial lysates of rat cerebral vessels [83], er has
been localized to mitochondria in rat primary neurons, primary cardiomyocytes, and a hippocampal cell line [84],
whereas er and er have been localized to the mitochondria in human mcf-7 cells [85]. how these mitochondrial
hormone receptors regulate the transcription of the mitochondrial genome is still a matter of debate.
it has been proposed that mitochondrial ers may act
through different scenarios of mitochondrial transcription
pathways. mitochondrial ers may activate the transcription
of mitochondrial genes directly through binding to estrogen
responsive element-like sites in the promoter regions of mitochondrial genomes. further, mitochondrial ers may trigger other mitochondrial transcription factors in the mitochondrial matrix, such as creb, and crosstalk with different
intracellular signaling pathways [86]. estrogen could also act
by influencing nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes. indeed,
levels of nuclear respiratory factor-1, a key master regulator
of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes, increased after estrogen treatment [83], which does not rule out the direct effects of estrogen on the mitochondrial genome. furthermore,
specific er modulators may directly affect mitochondrial
membranes by modulating ca2+ fluxes. in neuronal tissues,
for instance, er inhibits apoptosis by increasing mitochondrial sequestration of ca2+ [87]. estrogen affects mitochondrial function through increasing oxidative phosphorylation,
while at the same time decreasing mitochondrial superoxide
production [83]. by decreasing mitochondrial production of
reactive oxygen species, even while sustaining robust oxidative phosphorylation, estrogen would decrease the rate of
accumulation of mitochondrial dna mutations over the
lifespan [88]. through this mechanism, estrogenic actions on
mitochondrial function would contribute to the ability of
estrogen to modulate a variety of age-related diseases.
ar acts as a master regulator of g1-s phase progression,
able to induce signals that promote g1 cdk activity, induce

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3893

phosphorylation/inactivation of the prb, and thereby govern
androgen-dependent proliferation [89]. prostatic adenocarcinomas are dependent on ar signaling for growth and progression, in part through the ability of ar to induce cell cycle progression. androgenic hormones have been shown to
regulate the expression of key cell cycle regulators, such as
 xxxg410xxx  and  xxxg411xxx , or the cell cycle inhibitor p27 [90]. thus,
dissecting the mechanisms by which ar governs cell cycle
progression is critical for the design of new strategies in
treating recurrent disease. the crosstalk between ar and the
downstream cell cycle machinery appears to serve as a critical role in modulating the androgen response. aberrations in
these processes can facilitate androgen-independent cellular
proliferation, and may contribute to the development of recurrent tumors. future investigations into the consequence of
ar-cell cycle crosstalk in prostate cancer are likely to lead
to new avenues of therapeutic intervention [89]. recent studies have challenged the utility of manipulating ar activity to
enhance cell death in response to cytotoxic chemotherapeutics [91]. indeed, ar gene amplification and point mutations
were reported in patients with metastatic disease. silencing
of ar expression has therefore been proposed as a novel
therapeutic strategy for prostate cancer [92, 93].
activation of the src/ras/erk (extracellular signalregulated kinase) signaling pathway has been described as an
important nongenomic mechanism by which sex hormones
attenuate apoptosis. this pathway is part of a complex signaling network including pi3k, akt, and pkc [94], and
requires only the lbd of the receptors. several mechanisms
of erk-induced protection against apoptosis have already
been elucidated; these include phosphorylation of proapoptotic bad and activation of creb-mediated transcription. interestingly, targeting the lbd to the plasma membrane fully reproduced the erk- and pi3k-mediated antiapoptotic function of the full-lenght er. in contrast, targeting this domain exclusively to the cell nucleus resulted in
complete loss of its anti-apoptotic activity [95], which reinforces the relevance of extranuclear functions of nuclear receptors. both estrogens and androgens increase the phosphorylation of erks. in fact, er, er, or ar can transmit
these signals with similar efficiency, irrespective of whether
the ligand is an estrogen or an androgen. stimulation of
src/erk pathway by sex steroids was already described in
bone- and human breast cancer–derived cells [96-98]. in
addition, several beneficial effects of these hormones on the
cardiovascular system could be explained by the protective
effects of erk activation in endothelial and smooth muscle
cells [99]. finally, estrogens also induce a rapid and sustained activation of erks in cerebral cortex explants, contributing for the role of estrogen at decreasing the risk of
neurodegenerative diseases and attenuating brain injury
[100].
src-dependent pathway is involved not only in estradiolmediated attenuation of cell apoptosis but also on estradiolmediated dna synthesis stimulation. under proliferative
conditions, estradiol activation of this network leads to increased expression of  xxxg366xxx , nuclear exclusion of the
cdk inhibitor p27, and stimulation of g1-s transition of
mcf-7 cells. the entire network is under the control of src
activity and er/ar/src association. in human prostate cancer–derived lncap cells that express er and ar, andro-

3894 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

gens trigger a similar process through er/ar/src association and subsequent src-dependent pathway activation [98].
other studies in prostate cancer lines have established a
clear role for membrane ar in the induction of apoptotic
responses [101, 102]. using testosterone-bsa, a membraneimpermeable form of testosterone, as a specific membrane
ar ligand, the authors showed that ar activation resulted in
almost complete downregulation of pi3k, akt and nf-b
activities in du145 prostate cancer cells. consistently, testosterone-bsa induced fasl expression, activated bad and
upregulated caspase-3 activity, indicating that membrane
ar-stimulation affects prominent pro-apoptotic regulators
[103, 104]. it is likely that several pathways that originate
from the plasma membrane er lead to the preservation of
target cells, and that it is the overall balance of pro- and antiapoptotic signals that determines cell fate. characterization
of the functional interplay between membrane and intracellular ar may contribute to the understanding of the apparent
discrepancy in the actions of androgens inducing both proliferation and death within a given cell [102].
the function of mr during apoptosis was thought to be
primarily protective in nature. mr inhibits the apoptotic
process in the majority of cell types, often preventing grinduced cell death [105]. in the brain, stress-induced gr
activation leads to an arrest of neurogenesis and increased
apoptosis, which in turn is inhibited by mr activation. in
addition, mr increases neuronal survival by decreasing p53
levels as well as the ratio of pro-apoptotic to anti-apoptotic
members of the bcl-2 family [49]. this was thought to result
from repression of gr by mr, as both receptors share considerable structure and functional homology. in fact, mr can
form heterodimers with gr, thus inhibiting its function via
the mr n-terminal domain [106]. on the other hand, the p53
repressor, mdm-2, is considered one of the mineralocorticoid-responsive genes that regulates cell proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells induced by mr-mediated aldosterone stimulation, possibly playing an important role in aldosterone-induced vascular structural remodeling [107].
nevertheless, mr has recently been shown to also elicit proapoptotic signals. in fact, mr antagonism protects from vascular apoptosis and structural injury via rescue of protein
kinase b activation, independent of blood pressure effects
[108]. in addition, it was recently shown that treatment with
the mr antagonist spironolactone markedly suppresses the
incidence of apoptosis in a mouse model of ischemic stroke
[109]. moreover, aldosterone appears to promote apoptosis
during the progression of renal injury. in proximal tubular
cells, mr activation enhances dephosphorylation of phospho-bad and accumulation of cytosolic  xxxg569xxx  [110].
nuclear receptors for progesterone, in turn, act in concert
with intracellular signaling pathways as “sensors” of multiple growth factors to hormonally regulate tissues, such as the
breast. they have been useful as prognostic indicators of
breast cancers that are likely to respond to er therapies
[111]. however, the precise role of pr in breast cancer development or progression remains controversial. indeed,
kinases are emerging as key mediators of pr action, where a
dysregulation of the cross-talk between pr and membraneinitiated signaling events appears to contribute to breast cancer biology.

amaral et al.

finally, the pattern of acetylation, as well as other posttranslational modifications on nsr, may represent a general
mechanism in regulating diverse hormone functions, including cellular growth and apoptosis. in fact, nsr are direct
substrates of histone acetylases, such as p300. mutations in
the acetylation motif of both ar and er promoted reduced
apoptosis and growth of prostate and breast cancer, respectively [112, 113]. advances in the characterization of the
molecular basis of cellular signaling of steroid receptors
helps to understand their role on human cells, and may in
future be relevant to clinical practice.
3. crosstalk between bile acids
nuclear steroid receptors

and

in humans and most animal species, bile acids are produced primarily from the cholesterol metabolic pathway.
indeed, the biosynthesis of bile acids from cholesterol is the
most significant pathway for the catabolism and removal of
cholesterol from the body. in addition, many natural ligands
of nsr are also products of the cholesterol biosynthetic
pathway. therefore, as cholesterol-derived molecules share
chemical and structural similarities to steroid hormones, bile
acids can potentially bind and modulate nsr activation. in
fact, they are now considered cognate ligands of certain nuclear receptors initially classified as orphan nuclear receptors
[114].
primary bile acids, such as cholic and chenodeoxycholic
acids, are synthesized in the liver, conjugated with the amino
acids glycine or taurine, and then secreted into bile and delivered in the intestinal lumen. the biliary bile acid pool also
includes secondary bile acids, such as deoxycholic (dca)
and lithocholic acids. these bile acids are not formed in the
liver, but rather result from the metabolism of primary bile
acids by intestinal bacteria. an important example of this
metabolism is the formation of  xxxd3479xxx 
( xxxd3479xxx ) by oxidation of chenodeoxycholic acid to 7oxolithocholic acid, followed by reduction yielding the 7isomer. once in the lumen of the small intestine, bile acids
act as detergent molecules that play crucial biological roles
in absorption, solubilization, transport, and secretion of lipids. although bile acids are always amphipatic molecules
with inherent toxicity, different bile acid species display
varying degrees of hydrophobicity, as determined by their
biochemical and physicochemical properties. in this regard,
intracellular accumulation of hydrophobic bile acids induces
cell proliferation and cancer development in the intestinal
tract, and/or cell death by necrosis and apoptosis of liver
cells during cholestasis [115]. hydrophilic bile acids, in contrast, may be cytoprotective. thus, bile acids are important
signaling molecules that may modulate both apoptosis and
survival transduction pathways.
the mechanisms by which bile acids induce apoptosis in
hepatocytes are still not entirely known. several studies have
shown that caspase activation, mitochondrial dysfunction,
and cellular distribution of bcl-2-related proteins determine
the fate of hepatocytes in models of cholestasis [116]. indeed, pathophysiological concentrations of bile acids induce
both ligand-dependent and -independent death receptor
pathways and modulate downstream signaling pathways, a
combination that strongly sensitizes cells to apoptosis. in

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

addition, activation of death receptors invariably signals the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis in hepatocytes. in fact,
dca induces significant levels of apoptosis in vivo and in
vitro as well as the mitochondrial permeability transition in
isolated mitochondria [117]. further, bile acid-induced apoptosis may also result from disruption of mitochondrial transmembrane potential, increased reactive oxygen species production, translocation of pro-apoptotic bax to the mitochondria, and release of  xxxg569xxx  [118]. finally, bile acid
signaling modulates survival transduction pathways, such as
the pi3k-akt and mapk pathways [119].
under normal conditions, accumulation of bile acids in
hepatocytes is avoided through a tight control of bile acid
biosynthesis, transport, and metabolism, mediated by a series
of feedback and feedforward autoregulatory processes. such
mechanisms are regulated by nuclear receptors and other
transcription factors, which ensure a steady supply of bile
acids to a highly demanding metabolic environment [120]. in
fact, bile acids are themselves signaling molecules that
modulate transcriptional control of gene expression through
specific nuclear receptors, including farnesoid x (fxr),
liver x (lxr), pregnane x ( xxxg1598xxx ) and vitamin d (vdr)
receptors. among the genes regulated by bile acids is cytochrome p450 enzyme, cholesterol 7-hydroxylase, or
cyp7a1, the rate-limiting enzyme in bile acid biosynthesis,
and the  xxxg755xxx  (ibabp), a cytosolic protein that serves as a component of the bile acid
transport system in the ileal enterocyte [121]. fxr was
originally identified as a receptor activated by  xxxd2085xxx , an
intermediate in cholesterol synthesis. subsequent studies
revealed a major role of fxr as a  xxxg1597xxx . it is a
general regulator of bile acid metabolism and acts in the liver
via suppression of cyp7a to reduce synthesis; and in the
intestine through activation of ibabp to increase recycling
of bile acids. interestingly, lxr positively regulates the
conversion of cholesterol to bile acids; and in rodents, it
stimulates transcription of cyp7a1. however, human
cyp7a1 is not regulated by lxr due to a mutation in the
binding element of the gene promoter. in addition to hepatic
regulation of bile acid synthesis, lxr modulates cholesterol
absorption in the intestine, playing an important role in cholesterol metabolism by regulating catabolism to bile acids,
excretion to bile, and intestinal absorption.  xxxg1598xxx  and vdr
respond to secondary bile acids and induce their catabolism,
exhibiting essential roles during detoxification of cholestatic
bile acids. a key target gene of these receptors is  xxxg590xxx ,
which converts lithocholic acid to the non-toxic hyodeoxycholic acid.
in contrast to the toxic effects of hydrophobic bile acids,
 xxxd3479xxx  is a hydrophilic bile acid that has been widely used as
a therapeutic drug for patients with cholestatic liver diseases
[122, 123]. despite its clinical efficacy, the precise mechanism by which  xxxd3479xxx  improves liver function is still not
entirely understood. experimental evidence has suggested
three major mechanisms of action, including protection of
cholangiocytes against cytotoxicity of hydrophobic bile acids, stimulation of impaired biliary secretion, and/or inhibition of hepatocyte apoptosis [124]. indeed, both  xxxd3479xxx  and
its taurine conjugated form, tauroursodeoxycholic acid
(tudca) exert crucial effects at the cellular, subcellular and
molecular levels. in fact, these molecules are cytoprotective

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3895

in hepatic and nonhepatic cells by regulating the immune
response, activating survival transduction signals, and modulating the classical mitochondrial apoptotic pathway [117,
119].  xxxd3479xxx  mitigates the apoptosis process by preventing
the release of  xxxg569xxx , caspase activation, poly(adp)ribose polimerase cleavage, and changes in transmembrane
potential [125].  xxxd3479xxx  also interferes with alternate and
upstream molecular targets such as the  xxxg668xxx /mdm-2/p53
apoptotic pathway [126, 127]. furthermore, tudca can
directly stabilize mitochondrial membranes, having a profound effect on bax channel formation [118].  xxxd3479xxx  was
also shown to partially prevent apoptosis via the death receptor pathway in primary mouse hepatocytes co-cultured with
fibroblasts expressing fasl [128]. although not fully understood, tudca may also regulate the endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated pathway, reducing calcium efflux and activation of caspase-12, which plays an important role in several
liver diseases [129]. importantly, it has been demonstrated
both in vitro and in vivo that tudca benefits certain acute
and chronic neurodegenerative disorders that are associated
with increased levels of apoptosis [130-133]. finally,
tudca has been described as a chemical chaperone that
reduces endoplasmic reticulum stress and restores glucose
homeostasis in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes [134].
in addition to modulating the apoptotic process,  xxxd3479xxx 
was also described as an important activator of survival
pathways and regulator of the immune response. the immunomodulatory effects of  xxxd3479xxx  in cholestatic liver diseases
show similarities with gc mediated immunomodulation.
therefore, the link between  xxxd3479xxx  and gr was primarily
correlated with anti-inflammatory properties of the bile acid.
interestingly, we have recently shown that gr is required for
 xxxd3479xxx  anti-apoptotic function, by demonstrating that endogenous silencing of gr abolishes the protective effect of
 xxxd3479xxx  against transforming growth factor 1 (tgf-1)induced apoptosis in primary rat hepatocytes [135]. during
tgf-1-induced apoptosis, significant degradation of gr
occurs in liver cells. however, pre-treatment of cells with
 xxxd3479xxx , not only markedly upregulated gr but also resulted
in increased receptor nuclear translocation, when compared
with tgf-1 alone. in addition, the  xxxg668xxx  was found to be a potent target for the  xxxd3479xxx -induced gr
activation. in fact, changes in  xxxg668xxx  protein levels induced
by tgf-1 were no longer prevented by  xxxd3479xxx  after transfection of hepatocytes with small interfering rna for gr.
furthermore, the subsequent increase in levels of the p53
repressor, mdm-2, and the decrease of p53 induced by
 xxxd3479xxx  were abrogated with gr silencing, thus supporting
the notion of  xxxg668xxx  modulation (fig. 3). curiously, other
authors have suggested that gr interferes with the expression of mitogenic factors, such as cyclins, cyclin-dependent
kinases, and  xxxg668xxx  [56]. moreover, rats fed a combination
diet containing dca and  xxxd3479xxx  showed complete inhibition
of the drastic increase in the steady-state levels of p53 and
cyclin transcript expression associated with dca alone
[136]. however, the precise link between nsr and udcaregulated  xxxg668xxx , mdm-2 and p53 remains to be determined.
more recently, new insights on how nsr are involved in
 xxxd3479xxx  anti-apoptotic role have been revealed. indeed, we
further investigated the involvement of gr during  xxxd3479xxx 
anti-apoptotic function and demonstrated that  xxxd3479xxx  pro-

3896 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

amaral et al.

fig. (3). proposed model for the role of nsr in the anti-apoptotic function of  xxxd3479xxx . the anti-apoptotic effects of  xxxd3479xxx  include stabilization of the mitochondrial membrane as well as modulation of apoptosis-related proteins.  xxxd3479xxx  interacts with a specific region of the
nsr ligand binding domain, leading to nsr/hsp90 dissociation and subsequent nuclear translocation of the receptors. further, the association between  xxxd3479xxx  and nsr results in nuclear trafficking of  xxxd3479xxx . once in the nucleus,  xxxd3479xxx  modulates the  xxxg668xxx /p53/bax apoptotic
pathway, thus preventing apoptosis.  xxxd3479xxx  may further inhibit the apoptotic cascade by regulating other apoptosis-related genes through
modulation of other transcription factors. see text for more complete description. hsp90, heat shock protein 90.

motes the dissociation between gr and its molecular chaperone, hsp90, thus inducing subsequent gr translocation
into the nucleus of hepatocytes [137]. however, when the cterminal region of gr was deleted,  xxxd3479xxx  no longer induced gr/hsp90 dissociation or gr nuclear translocation,
nor protected against apoptosis. this indicates that gr lbd
is at least one target domain required for the anti-apoptotic
function of  xxxd3479xxx . using a fluorescently labeled  xxxd3479xxx 
molecule, we clearly demonstrated that  xxxd3479xxx  reaches the
nucleus of primary rat hepatocytes in a gr-dependent
mechanism, resulting in inhibition of apoptosis-related
genes.
nuclear translocation of nsr by bile acids may not always result in transactivation or transrepression of nsr. in
fact, bile acids might only require nsr to reach the nucleus,
where they themselves regulate genes through modulation of
other transcription factors. increased levels of  xxxd3479xxx  were
also observed in nuclei during hepatocarcinogenesis [138].
in this regard, it has been shown that ligand-bound nsr are
not permanently localized in the nucleus. rather, they are
continuously and rapidly shuttling between the nucleus and
cytoplasm. indeed, although gcs are well-known inhibitors
of apoptotic cell death, we showed that the protective role of
 xxxd3479xxx  does not require gr transactivation in liver cells.
 xxxd3479xxx  increases the activation of gc-response elements in
hepatocytes that overexpress gr, but does not protect

against tgf-1-induced apoptosis by further increasing gr
transactivation. therefore, it is conceivable that  xxxd3479xxx  requires nsr for translocation to the cell nucleus as part of a
ligand-receptor complex, using a mechanism similar to that
of steroid hormones (fig. 3).
interestingly, other studies have demonstrated that
 xxxd3479xxx  interacts with gr in the absence of specific ligands,
and as a novel and selective gr modifier [139]. in addition,
it was reported that  xxxd3479xxx  promotes dna binding of gr
through interaction with its lbd, but without eliciting gr
transactivational function [140]. only under certain conditions,  xxxd3479xxx  may enhance gr-responsive gene expression.
for example, in the presence of dexamethasone,  xxxd3479xxx  increases gr-induced  xxxg2250xxx , a hepatocytespecific marker of gr [141]. although there is no structural
evidence for the direct binding of  xxxd3479xxx  to gr, it is thought
that  xxxd3479xxx  acts at a region of the lbd distinct from that of
dexamethasone.  xxxd3479xxx  then possibly modulates gr structure into a unique conformation that can translocate into the
nucleus and bind dna, but no longer interacts with coactivators to elicit transcriptional activation. these data may, in
part, explain the anti-inflammatory properties of  xxxd3479xxx . in
fact,  xxxd3479xxx  pretreatment was shown to suppress dna binding activity of ap-1 during dca incubation of human colon
cancer cells [142]. in addition,  xxxd3479xxx  repressed nf-bdependent transcription and subsequent cytokine expression

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis

via the interaction of gr with nf-b. it is assumed that
transrepression of such transcription factors is the primary
mechanism by which gcs mediate their anti-inflammatory
activity. moreover, different ligands induce various conformations of nsr leading to unique regulatory properties of
the receptors. it is therefore possible that  xxxd3479xxx  may regulate several apoptosis-related genes by functionally modulating gr. other mechanisms of gr activation by  xxxd3479xxx 
might be membrane related and involve an unidentified secondary signal that activates other signal transduction pathways.
although mr and gr share similar ligands and target the
same genes, they may also form heteromeric complexes in
which mr represses gr function. in fact, these heterodimers
are found in dynamic association with an ever growing number of chaperone proteins and other factors mediating their
actions. thus, although there is no evidence that mr and
 xxxd3479xxx  interact directly, it is conceivable that udcamediated modulation of gr may also affect mr. the antiapoptotic action of mr has been extensively described in
neuronal cells, but less is known about its role during hepatocyte apoptosis. interestingly, our results have suggested a
relevant mechanistic function for mr during hepatocyte
apoptosis. we demonstrated that much like gr, mr contributes to the protective effect of  xxxd3479xxx  against the  xxxg668xxx /mdm-2/p53 apoptotic pathway induced by tgf-1 in primary rat hepatocytes [135]. in addition,  xxxg668xxx , mdm-2 and
p53 were also found to be potent targets for  xxxd3479xxx -induced
mr activation in liver cells. however, in the presence of ,
tudca appears to differentially modulate mr and gr nuclear translocation in rat cortical neurons [143]. in fact,
tudca preferentially interacted with mr lbd, thus promoting mr dissociation from its cytosolic chaperones and
translocation to the nucleus. it is possible that specific comodulators in neuronal cells may somehow induce tudcamediated mr nuclear translocation, while reducing gr nuclear traffic. surprisingly, in contrast with hepatocytes, pretreatment of pc12 cells with tudca significantly modulated a-induced changes in mr and gr transactivation. in
fact, the transcriptional activity of mr was increased while
gr transactivation was reduced by tudca. thus, additional pathways exist for the anti-apoptotic function of
 xxxd3479xxx  and tudca involving nsr as key factors.
 xxxd3479xxx  has also been shown to regulate activity of other
nuclear receptors. in fact,  xxxd3479xxx  is a relatively strong  xxxg1598xxx 
agonist and a weaker fxr agonist. although  xxxd3479xxx  does
not itself bind fxr, it does inhibit receptor activation by
more hydrophobic bile acid species [144]. moreover, during
liver regeneration, increased levels of  xxxd3479xxx  were shown to
inhibit bile acid-fxr mediated repression of several genes
[145]. other studies have shown that  xxxd3479xxx  activates  xxxg1598xxx 
to induce cyp3a4.  xxxg1598xxx  is transcriptionally active in stellate
cells by inhibiting transformation and proliferation. it is possible then that the anti-fibrotic effects of  xxxd3479xxx  are also mediated via  xxxg1598xxx .
conclusions
the field of nsr has evolved rapidly in the last several
decades. although we have discovered many of the functions
for these receptors, their involvement in the modulation of

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

3897

apoptosis remains incomplete. the precise molecular
mechanisms underlying nsr regulation of the apoptosis
process, including the genes that are specifically modulated,
or the transcription-independent effects involved, are still
largely unknown.
a large number of studies have demonstrated that apoptosis plays a role in the etiology of many pathological conditions, affecting a wide range of tissues including liver, kidney, central nervous system, and heart, among others. insufficient apoptosis can result in cancer or autoimmunity,
whereas accelerated cell death is evident in degenerative
diseases, immunodeficiency and infertility. not surprisingly,
a huge endeavour aimed at unraveling this fundamental biological process has led to major advances in our understanding of the apoptotic process over the past several years. as
such, the field continues to be enormously active at both the
basic science and clinical levels.
known for their profound anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects, gcs remain among the most widely
prescribed drugs worldwide. moreover, gcs have the ability
to induce or suppress apoptosis depending on the cell type.
the knowledge of nsr-mediated cellular and molecular
mechanisms controlling cell death or survival may facilitate
a more efficient use of these molecules in preventing disorders associated with deregulated apoptosis. indeed, the wide
variety of natural or synthetic ligands that may bind nsr
underscores their potential application in drug discovery.
moreover, these small molecules can be easily modified by
drug design, further increasing the potential of nsr as
pharmacological targets.
another area of great interest is the ability of nuclear receptors to be activated by small lipophilic molecules, such as
bile acids. interestingly, the endogenous hydrophilic bile
acid  xxxd3479xxx  was shown to act as a potent repressor of apoptosis. the paradox of  xxxd3479xxx  as well as many other drugs
used worldwide such as glucocorticoids is that the strong
evidence of therapeutic efficacy is not supported by in-depth
knowledge of mechanisms of action. nevertheless, during
the last decade great progress has been made in characterizing the biochemical and molecular mechanisms underlying
 xxxd3479xxx . somewhat surprisingly, its anti-apoptotic function
was not tissue-dependent, thus highlighting  xxxd3479xxx  as a general therapeutic agent for apoptosis-associated injuries. in
this regard, nsr were shown to play an important role in the
anti-apoptotic function of  xxxd3479xxx . indeed, nsr appear to be
specifically required for the nuclear trafficking of bile acid
molecules. given its clinical safety,  xxxd3479xxx  and/or its conjugate derivatives may be potentially powerful therapeutic
agents in apoptosis-associated injuries. for example, the
taurine conjugate of  xxxd3479xxx  can be administered and delivered in pharmacologic doses to other tissues, including the
rat brain [146, 147]. nevertheless, its clinical application to
human diseases outside of liver has yet to be vigorously
tested.
the future will certainly focus on documenting new associations between apoptosis and disease and developing
new therapeutic strategies based on modulation of the apoptotic process. in this context, inflammatory diseases and others, such as cancer, may derive immediate benefit from nsr
function in apoptosis.

3898 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

acknowledgements
supported, in part, by grants ptdc/sau-fcf/67912/
2006 and ptdc/bia-bcm/67922/2006 (to c.m.p.r) and
postdoctoral fellowship bpd/47376/2008 (to j.d.a.) from
fundação para a ciência e a tecnologia, lisbon, portugal.
the authors thank all members of the laboratory for their
help during the course of these studies.
abbreviations

amaral et al.

tnf

=

 xxxg2296xxx 

tnfr

=

 xxxg2296xxx  receptor

trail =

tnf-related apoptosis inducing ligand

tudca =

tauroursodeoxycholic acid

 xxxd3479xxx 

=

 xxxd3479xxx 

vdr

=

 xxxg2412xxx 

references

a

=

amyloid  peptide

[1]

af

=

activation function domain

[2]

ap-1

=

 xxxg810xxx   xxxg1222xxx   xxxg1223xxx   xxxg1224xxx 

 xxxg169xxx 

=

apoptosis protease-activating factor 1

[3]

ar

=

 xxxg183xxx 

[4]

cdk

=

cyclin-dependent kinase

creb

=

camp-response element-binding protein

dbd

=

dna binding domain

dca

=

 xxxd1835xxx 

[6]

dr

=

death receptor

[7]

er

=

 xxxg730xxx 

erk

=

extracellular signal-regulated kinase

fxr

=

 xxxg1597xxx 

gc

=

glucocorticoid

gr

=

 xxxg1601xxx 

hat

=

histone acetyltransferase

iap

=

inhibitor of apoptosis protein

ib

=

nf-b inhibitory protein

ikk

=

ib kinase

lbd

=

ligand binding domain

lxr

=

liver x receptor

mapk

=

mitogen-activated protein kinase

mirna =

microrna

mr

=

 xxxg1602xxx 

nf-b

=

nuclear factor b

nls

=

nuclear localization signal

nsr

=

nuclear steroid receptor

pi3k

=

phosphatidylinositide 3’-oh kinase

pr

=

 xxxg1737xxx 

prb

=

retinoblastoma protein

 xxxg1598xxx 

=

 xxxg1598xxx 

rsk

=

ribosomal s6 kinase

tbid

=

truncated bid

src

=

steroid receptor coactivator

tgf-1 =

transforming growth factor 1

[5]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

mcewan, i.j. nuclear receptors: one big family. methods mol.
biol., 2009, 505, 3-18.
kucharova, s.; farkas, r. hormone nuclear receptors and their
ligands: role in programmed cell death (review). endocr. regul.,
2002, 36, 37-60.
reed, j.c. apoptosis-based therapies. nat. rev. drug discov.,
2002, 1, 111-121.
mangelsdorf, d.j.; thummel, c.; beato, m.; herrlich, p.; schütz,
g.; umesono, k.; blumberg, b.; kastner, p.; mark, m.; chambon, p.; evans, r.m. the nuclear receptor superfamily: the second
decade. cell, 1995, 83, 835-839.
green, s.; walter, p.; kumar, v.; krust, a.; bornert, j.m.; argos,
p.; chambon, p. human  xxxg730xxx  cdna: sequence, expression and homology to v-erb-a. nature, 1986, 320, 134-139.
robinson-rechavi, m.; escriva garcia, h.; laudet, v. the nuclear
receptor superfamily. j. cell sci., 2003, 116, 585-586.
prima, v.; depoix, c.; masselot, b.; formstecher, p.; lefebvre, p.
alteration of the  xxxg1601xxx  subcellular localization by
non steroidal compounds. j. steroid biochem. mol. biol., 2000, 72,
1-12.
lonard, d.m.; o'malley b, w. nuclear receptor coregulators:
judges, juries, and executioners of cellular regulation. mol. cell,
2007, 27, 691-700.
xu, j.; li, q. review of the in vivo functions of the  xxxg1449xxx  steroid
receptor coactivator family. mol. endocrinol., 2003, 17, 16811692.
planas-silva, m.d.; shang, y.; donaher, j.l.; brown, m.; weinberg, r.a.  xxxg1512xxx  enhances estrogen-dependent induction of cyclin
d1 expression. cancer res., 2001, 61, 3858-3862.
karmakar, s.; foster, e.a.; smith, c.l. unique roles of  xxxg1449xxx 
coactivators for regulation of breast cancer cell proliferation and
 xxxg730xxx -{} transcriptional activity. endocrinology,
2009, 150, 1588-1596.
colo, g.p.; rubio, m.f.; nojek, i.m.; werbajh, s.e.; echeverria,
p.c.; alvarado, c.v.; nahmod, v.e.; galigniana, m.d.; costas,
m.a. the  xxxg1449xxx  nuclear receptor co-activator  xxxg1512xxx  exerts an antiapoptotic role through a cytoplasmatic action. oncogene, 2008, 27,
2430-2444.
losel, r.m.; wehling, m. classic versus non-classic receptors for
nongenomic mineralocorticoid responses: emerging evidence.
front. neuroendocrinol., 2008, 29, 258-267.
levin, e.r. rapid signaling by steroid receptors. am. j. physiol.
regul. integr. comp. physiol., 2008, 295, r1425-1430.
limbourg, f.p.; huang, z.; plumier, j.c.; simoncini, t.; fujioka,
m.; tuckermann, j.; schutz, g.; moskowitz, m.a.; liao, j.k.
rapid nontranscriptional activation of  xxxg1577xxx   xxxg1579xxx  mediates increased cerebral blood flow and stroke protection
by corticosteroids. j. clin. invest., 2002, 110, 1729-1738.
hafezi-moghadam, a.; simoncini, t.; yang, e.; limbourg, f.p.;
plumier, j.c.; rebsamen, m.c.; hsieh, c.m.; chui, d.s.; thomas,
k.l.; prorock, a.j.; laubach, v.e.; moskowitz, m.a.; french,
b.a.; ley, k.; liao, j.k. acute cardiovascular protective effects of
corticosteroids are mediated by non-transcriptional activation of
 xxxg1577xxx   xxxg1579xxx . nat. med., 2002, 8, 473-479.
yu, h.p.; hsieh, y.c.; suzuki, t.; choudhry, m.a.; schwacha,
m.g.; bland, k.i.; chaudry, i.h. the pi3k/akt pathway mediates
the nongenomic cardioprotective effects of estrogen following
trauma-hemorrhage. ann. surg., 2007, 245, 971-977.
newton, r.; holden, n.s. separating transrepression and transactivation: a distressing divorce for the  xxxg1601xxx ? mol.
pharmacol., 2007, 72, 799-809.

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis
[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]
[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

grossmann, c.; freudinger, r.; mildenberger, s.; husse, b.; gekle,
m. ef domains are sufficient for nongenomic  xxxg1602xxx  actions. j. biol. chem., 2008, 283, 7109-7116.
matthews, l.; berry, a.; ohanian, v.; ohanian, j.; garside, h.;
ray, d. caveolin mediates rapid glucocorticoid effects and couples
glucocorticoid action to the antiproliferative program. mol. endocrinol., 2008, 22, 1320-1330.
landry, y.; gies, j.p. drugs and their molecular targets: an updated overview. fundam. clin. pharmacol., 2008, 22, 1-18.
kroemer, g.; galluzzi, l.; brenner, c. mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization in cell death. physiol. rev., 2007, 87, 99-163.
shi, y. mechanisms of caspase activation and inhibition during
apoptosis. mol. cell, 2002, 9, 459-470.
ashkenazi, a. targeting death and decoy receptors of the tumournecrosis factor superfamily. nat. rev. cancer, 2002, 2, 420-430.
youle, r.j.; strasser, a. the bcl-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate cell death. nat. rev. mol. cell biol., 2008, 9,
47-59.
cory, s.; huang, d.c.; adams, j.m. the bcl-2 family: roles in cell
survival and oncogenesis. oncogene, 2003, 22, 8590-8607.
zou, h.; li, y.; liu, x.; wang, x. an  xxxg169xxx . xxxg569xxx  multimeric complex is a functional apoptosome that activates procaspase-9. j. biol. chem., 1999, 274, 11549-11556.
miyashita, t.; reed, j.c.  xxxg2313xxx  is a direct transcriptional activator of the human bax gene. cell, 1995, 80, 293299.
michalak, e.m.; villunger, a.; adams, j.m.; strasser, a. in several
cell types tumour suppressor p53 induces apoptosis largely via
puma but  xxxg1783xxx  can contribute. cell death differ., 2008, 15, 10191029.
krammer, p.h.  xxxg764xxx ( xxxg764xxx /fas)-mediated apoptosis: live and let
die. adv. immunol., 1999, 71, 163-210.
locksley, r.m.; killeen, n.; lenardo, m.j. the tnf and tnf
receptor superfamilies: integrating mammalian biology. cell, 2001,
104, 487-501.
peter, m.e.; krammer, p.h. the  xxxg764xxx ( xxxg764xxx /fas) disc and
beyond. cell death differ., 2003, 10, 26-35.
li, s.; zhao, y.; he, x.; kim, t.h.; kuharsky, d.k.; rabinowich,
h.; chen, j.; du, c.; yin, x.m. relief of extrinsic pathway inhibition by the bid-dependent mitochondrial release of smac in fasmediated hepatocyte apoptosis. j. biol. chem., 2002, 277, 2691226920.
eskes, r.; desagher, s.; antonsson, b.; martinou, j.c. bid induces
the oligomerization and insertion of bax into the outer mitochondrial membrane. mol. cell biol., 2000, 20, 929-935.
luo, x.; budihardjo, i.; zou, h.; slaughter, c.; wang, x. bid, a
 xxxg250xxx  interacting protein, mediates  xxxg569xxx  release from mitochondria in response to activation of cell surface death receptors.
cell., 1998, 94, 481-490.
nevins, j.r. toward an understanding of the functional complexity
of the e2f and retinoblastoma families. cell growth differ. 1998,
9, 585-593.
michael, d.; oren, m. the p53-mdm2 module and the ubiquitin
system. semin. cancer biol. 2003, 13, 49-58.
jacotot, e.; ferri, k.f.; kroemer, g. apoptosis and cell cycle:
distinct checkpoints with overlapping upstream control. pathol.
biol. (paris), 2000, 48, 271-279.
ghosh, s.; karin, m. missing pieces in the nf-b puzzle. cell,
2002, 109 suppl, s81-96.
franke, t.f.; hornik, c.p.; segev, l.; shostak, g.a.; sugimoto, c.
pi3k/akt and apoptosis: size matters. oncogene, 2003, 22, 89838998.
bonni, a.; brunet, a.; west, a.e.; datta, s.r.; takasu, m.a.;
greenberg, m.e. cell survival promoted by the ras-mapk signaling pathway by transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. science, 1999, 286, 1358-1362.
almawi, w.y.; melemedjian, o.k.; jaoude, m.m. on the link
between bcl-2 family proteins and glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis. j. leukoc. biol., 2004, 76, 7-14.
herr, i.; gassler, n.; friess, h.; buchler, m.w. regulation of differential pro- and anti-apoptotic signaling by glucocorticoids.
apoptosis, 2007, 12, 271-291.

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29
[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

3899

kassel, o.; herrlich, p. crosstalk between the  xxxg1601xxx  and other transcription factors: molecular aspects. mol. cell
endocrinol., 2007, 275, 13-29.
sionov, r.v.; kfir, s.; zafrir, e.; cohen, o.; zilberman, y.; yefenof, e. glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis revisited: a novel role
for  xxxg1601xxx  translocation to the mitochondria. cell
cycle, 2006, 5, 1017-1026.
rasmuson, s.; andrew, r.; nasman, b.; seckl, j.r.; walker, b.r.;
olsson, t. increased glucocorticoid production and altered cortisol
metabolism in women with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease.
biol. psychiatry, 2001, 49, 547-552.
kim, s.; jeon, b.s.; heo, c.; im, p.s.; ahn, t.b.; seo, j.h.; kim,
h.s.; park, c.h.; choi, s.h.; cho, s.h.; lee, w.j.; suh, y.h. synuclein induces apoptosis by altered expression in human peripheral lymphocyte in parkinson's disease. faseb j., 2004, 18, 16151617.
sasson, r.; tajima, k.; amsterdam, a. glucocorticoids protect
against apoptosis induced by serum deprivation, cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate and p53 activation in immortalized human
granulosa cells: involvement of bcl-2. endocrinology, 2001, 142,
802-811.
almeida, o.f.; conde, g.l.; crochemore, c.; demeneix, b.a.;
fischer, d.; hassan, a.h.; meyer, m.; holsboer, f.; michaelidis,
t.m. subtle shifts in the ratio between pro- and antiapoptotic molecules after activation of corticosteroid receptors decide neuronal
fate. faseb j., 2000, 14, 779-790.
ranta, f.; avram, d.; berchtold, s.; dufer, m.; drews, g.; lang,
f.; ullrich, s. dexamethasone induces cell death in insulinsecreting cells, an effect reversed by  xxxd2076xxx . diabetes, 2006, 55,
1380-1390.
sionov, r.v.; cohen, o.; kfir, s.; zilberman, y.; yefenof, e. role
of mitochondrial  xxxg1601xxx  in glucocorticoid-induced
apoptosis. j. exp. med., 2006, 203, 189-201.
pagliacci, m.c.; migliorati, g.; smacchia, m.; grignani, f.; riccardi, c.; nicoletti, i. cellular stress and glucocorticoid hormones
protect l929 mouse fibroblasts from  xxxg2296xxx  
cytotoxicity. j. endocrinol. invest., 1993, 16, 591-599.
cox, g.; austin, r.c. dexamethasone-induced suppression of
apoptosis in human neutrophils requires continuous stimulation of
new protein synthesis. j. leukoc. biol., 1997, 61, 224-230.
gascoyne, d.m.; kypta, r.m.; vivanco, m.m. glucocorticoids
inhibit apoptosis during fibrosarcoma development by transcriptionally activating  xxxg251xxx . j. biol. chem., 2003, 278, 18022-18029.
ni chonghaile, t.; concannon, c.g.; szegezdi, e.; gorman, a.m.;
samali, a. dexamethasone inhibits apoptosis in c6 glioma cells
through increased expression of  xxxg251xxx . apoptosis, 2006, 11,
1247-1255.
rogatsky, i.; trowbridge, j.m.; garabedian, m.j. glucocorticoid
receptor-mediated cell cycle arrest is achieved through distinct cellspecific transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. mol. cell biol.,
1997, 17, 3181-3193.
yamamoto, m.; fukuda, k.; miura, n.; suzuki, r.; kido, t.; komatsu, y. inhibition by dexamethasone of transforming growth factor 1-induced apoptosis in rat hepatoma cells: a possible association with  xxxg251xxx  induction. hepatology, 1998, 27, 959-966.
bailly-maitre, b.; de sousa, g.; boulukos, k.; gugenheim, j.;
rahmani, r. dexamethasone inhibits spontaneous apoptosis in
primary cultures of human and rat hepatocytes via bcl-2 and bclxl induction. cell death differ., 2001, 8, 279-288.
karabelyos, c.; dobozy, o.; szalai, c.; klenjanszki, k.; varju, k.;
hadhazi, a.; kiss, a.; fulop, a.k.; madarasz, b.; falus, a. elevated hepatic  xxxg1601xxx  expression during liver regeneration in rats. pathol. oncol. res., 1999, 5, 107-109.
scoltock, a.b.; heimlich, g.; cidlowski, j.a. glucocorticoids
inhibit the apoptotic actions of uv-c but not  xxxd3135xxx  in hepatoma cells: direct evidence for a critical role of  xxxg251xxx (l). cell
death differ., 2007, 14, 840-850.
mikosz, c.a.; brickley, d.r.; sharkey, m.s.; moran, t.w.;
conzen, s.d.  xxxg1601xxx -mediated protection from
apoptosis is associated with induction of the serine/threonine survival kinase gene, sgk-1. j. biol. chem., 2001, 276, 16649-16654.
sengupta, s.; wasylyk, b. physiological and pathological consequences of the interactions of the  xxxg2313xxx  with the

3900 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

[63]

[64]

[65]
[66]
[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]

[83]

glucocorticoid, androgen, and estrogen receptors. ann. n. y. acad.
sci., 2004, 1024, 54-71.
quiros, i.; mayo, j.c.; garcia-suarez, o.; hevia, d.; martin, v.;
rodriguez, c.; sainz, r.m. melatonin prevents glucocorticoid inhibition of cell proliferation and toxicity in hippocampal cells by
reducing  xxxg1601xxx  nuclear translocation. j. steroid
biochem. mol. biol., 2008, 110, 116-124.
toran-allerand, c.d. minireview: a plethora of estrogen receptors
in the brain: where will it end? endocrinology, 2004, 145, 10691074.
zhao, c.; dahlman-wright, k.; gustafsson, j.a.  xxxg730xxx 
: an overview and update. nucl. recept. signal., 2008, 6, e003.
ellem, s.j.; risbridger, g.p. the dual, opposing roles of estrogen
in the prostate. ann. n. y. acad. sci., 2009, 1155, 174-186.
perillo, b.; sasso, a.; abbondanza, c.; palumbo, g. 17-estradiol
inhibits apoptosis in mcf-7 cells, inducing bcl-2 expression via
two estrogen-responsive elements present in the coding sequence.
mol. cell biol., 2000, 20, 2890-2901.
yao, m.; nguyen, t.v.; pike, c.j. estrogen regulates  xxxg253xxx  and
bim expression: role in protection against -amyloid peptideinduced neuronal death. j. neurosci., 2007, 27, 1422-1433.
blenkiron, c.; goldstein, l.d.; thorne, n.p.; spiteri, i.; chin, s.f.;
dunning, m.j.; barbosa-morais, n.l.; teschendorff, a.e.; green,
a.r.; ellis, i.o.; tavare, s.; caldas, c.; miska, e.a. microrna
expression profiling of human breast cancer identifies new markers
of tumor subtype. genome biol., 2007, 8, r214.
mattie, m.d.; benz, c.c.; bowers, j.; sensinger, k.; wong, l.;
scott, g.k.; fedele, v.; ginzinger, d.; getts, r.; haqq, c. optimized high-throughput microrna expression profiling provides
novel biomarker assessment of clinical prostate and breast cancer
biopsies. mol. cancer, 2006, 5, 24.
okasha, s.a.; ryu, s.; do, y.; mckallip, r.j.; nagarkatti, m.;
nagarkatti, p.s. evidence for estradiol-induced apoptosis and dysregulated t cell maturation in the thymus. toxicology, 2001, 163,
49-62.
zajchowski, s.; hoffman-goetz, l. supraphysiological level of
estrogen exposure in vivo increases lymphoid cell death in mice.
life sci., 2000, 66, 1451-1459.
kameda, t.; mano, h.; yuasa, t.; mori, y.; miyazawa, k.; shiokawa, m.; nakamaru, y.; hiroi, e.; hiura, k.; kameda, a.; yang,
n.n.; hakeda, y.; kumegawa, m. estrogen inhibits bone resorption by directly inducing apoptosis of the bone-resorbing osteoclasts. j. exp. med., 1997, 186, 489-495.
sunyer, t.; lewis, j.; collin-osdoby, p.; osdoby, p. estrogen's
bone-protective effects may involve differential il-1 receptor regulation in human osteoclast-like cells. j. clin. invest., 1999, 103,
1409-1418.
zecchi-orlandini, s.; formigli, l.; tani, a.; benvenuti, s.; fiorelli,
g.; papucci, l.; capaccioli, s.; orlandini, g.e.; brandi, m.l. 17estradiol induces apoptosis in the preosteoclastic flg 29.1 cell
line. biochem. biophys. res. commun., 1999, 255, 680-685.
altiok, n.; koyuturk, m.; altiok, s. jnk pathway regulates estradiol-induced apoptosis in hormone-dependent human breast cancer
cells. breast cancer res. treat., 2006, 105, 247-254.
subramanian, m.; shaha, c. estrogen modulates human macrophage apoptosis via differential signaling through  xxxg730xxx - and . j. cell mol. med., 2009, [epub ahead of print].
moriarty, k.; kim, k.h.; bender, j.r. minireview:  xxxg730xxx -mediated rapid signaling. endocrinology, 2006, 147, 55575563.
fu, x.d.; simoncini, t. extra-nuclear signaling of estrogen receptors. iubmb life, 2008, 60, 502-510.
levin, e.r. integration of the extranuclear and nuclear actions of
estrogen. mol. endocrinol., 2005, 19, 1951-1959.
song, r.x.; santen, r.j. membrane initiated estrogen signaling in
breast cancer. biol. reprod., 2006, 75, 9-16.
zarate, s.; jaita, g.; zaldivar, v.; radl, d.; eijo, g.; ferraris, j.;
pisera, d.; seilicovich, a. estrogens exert a rapid apoptotic action in anterior pituitary cells. am. j. physiol. endocrinol. metab.,
2009, 296, e664-e671.
stirone, c.; duckles, s.p.; krause, d.n.; procaccio, v. estrogen
increases mitochondrial efficiency and reduces oxidative stress in
cerebral blood vessels. mol. pharmacol., 2005, 68, 959-965.

amaral et al.
[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]
[89]
[90]
[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]
[101]

[102]

[103]

yang, s.h.; liu, r.; perez, e.j.; wen, y.; stevens, s.m., jr.; valencia, t.; brun-zinkernagel, a.m.; prokai, l.; will, y.; dykens,
j.; koulen, p.; simpkins, j.w. mitochondrial localization of  xxxg730xxx  . proc. natl. acad. sci. u.s.a., 2004, 101, 41304135.
chen, j.q.; eshete, m.; alworth, w.l.; yager, j.d. binding of
mcf-7 cell mitochondrial proteins and recombinant human estrogen receptors  and  to human mitochondrial dna estrogen response elements. j. cell biochem., 2004, 93, 358-373.
lee, j.; sharma, s.; kim, j.; ferrante, r.j.; ryu, h. mitochondrial
nuclear receptors and transcription factors: who's minding the cell?
j. neurosci. res., 2008, 86, 961-971.
nilsen, j.; brinton, r.d. mitochondria as therapeutic targets of
estrogen action in the central nervous system. curr. drug targets
cns  xxxd122xxx . disord., 2004, 3, 297-313.
miller, v.m.; duckles, s.p. vascular actions of estrogens: functional implications. pharmacol. rev., 2008, 60, 210-241.
balk, s.p.; knudsen, k.e. ar, the cell cycle, and prostate cancer.
nucl. recept. signal, 2008, 6, e001.
culig, z.; klocker, h.; bartsch, g.; hobisch, a. androgen receptors in prostate cancer. endocr. relat. cancer, 2002, 9, 155-170.
comstock, c.e.; knudsen, k.e. the complex role of ar signaling
after cytotoxic insult: implications for cell-cycle-based
chemotherapeutics. cell cycle, 2007, 6, 1307-1313.
liao, x.; tang, s.; thrasher, j.b.; griebling, t.l.; li, b. smallinterfering rna-induced  xxxg183xxx  silencing leads to
apoptotic cell death in prostate cancer. mol. cancer ther., 2005, 4,
505-515.
kageyama, y.; hyochi, n.; kihara, k.; sugiyama, h. the  xxxg183xxx  as putative therapeutic target in hormone-refractory
prostate cancer. recent pat. anticancer drug discov., 2007, 2,
203-211.
castoria, g.; migliaccio, a.; di domenico, m.; lombardi, m.; de
falco, a.; varricchio, l.; bilancio, a.; barone, m.v.; auricchio, f.
role of atypical protein kinase c in estradiol-triggered g1/s
progression of mcf-7 cells. mol. cell biol., 2004, 24, 7643-7653.
manolagas, s.c.; kousteni, s.; chen, j.r.; schuller, m.; plotkin,
l.; bellido, t. kinase-mediated transcription, activators of nongenotropic estrogen-like signaling (angels), and osteoporosis: a
different perspective on the hrt dilemma. kidney int. suppl.,
2004, s41-49.
kousteni, s.; bellido, t.; plotkin, l.i.; o'brien, c.a.; bodenner,
d.l.; han, l.; han, k.; digregorio, g.b.; katzenellenbogen, j.a.;
katzenellenbogen, b.s.; roberson, p.k.; weinstein, r.s.; jilka,
r.l.; manolagas, s.c. nongenotropic, sex-nonspecific signaling
through the estrogen or androgen receptors: dissociation from transcriptional activity. cell, 2001, 104, 719-730.
razandi, m.; pedram, a.; levin, e.r. plasma membrane estrogen
receptors signal to antiapoptosis in breast cancer. mol, endocrinol.,
2000, 14, 1434-1447.
migliaccio, a.; castoria, g.; di domenico, m.; de falco, a.; bilancio, a.; lombardi, m.; barone, m.v.; ametrano, d.; zannini,
m.s.; abbondanza, c.; auricchio, f. steroid-induced  xxxg183xxx - xxxd2037xxx  receptor -src complex triggers prostate cancer
cell proliferation. embo j., 2000, 19, 5406-5417.
mendelsohn, m.e.; karas, r.h. the protective effects of estrogen
on the cardiovascular system. n. engl. j. med., 1999, 340, 18011811.
mcewen, b.s.; alves, s.e. estrogen actions in the central nervous
system. endocr. rev., 1999, 20, 279-307.
papadopoulou, n.; charalampopoulos, i.; alevizopoulos, k.; gravanis, a.; stournaras, c. rho/rock/actin signaling regulates
membrane  xxxg183xxx  induced apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells. exp. cell res., 2008, 314, 3162-3174.
papadopoulou, n.; charalampopoulos, i.; anagnostopoulou, v.;
konstantinidis, g.; foller, m.; gravanis, a.; alevizopoulos, k.;
lang, f.; stournaras, c. membrane  xxxg183xxx  activation
triggers down-regulation of pi-3k/akt/nf-b activity and induces
apoptotic responses via bad, fasl and caspase-3 in du145 prostate
cancer cells. mol. cancer, 2008, 7, 88.
rokhlin, o.w.; bishop, g.a.; hostager, b.s.; waldschmidt, t.j.;
sidorenko, s.p.; pavloff, n.; kiefer, m.c.; umansky, s.r.; glover,
r.a.; cohen, m.b. fas-mediated apoptosis in human prostatic carcinoma cell lines. cancer res., 1997, 57, 1758-1768.

bile acids and nsr in apoptosis
[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]
[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]
[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]
[122]

caraglia, m.; marra, m.; leonetti, c.; meo, g.; d'alessandro,
a.m.; baldi, a.; santini, d.; tonini, g.; bertieri, r.; zupi, g.;
budillon, a.; abbruzzese, a.  xxxd3381xxx  ( xxxd3381xxx )/ xxxd3561xxx 
(zometa) cooperation on inhibition of prostate cancer proliferation
is paralleled by erk/akt inactivation and reduced bcl-2 and bad
phosphorylation. j. cell physiol., 2007, 211, 533-543.
hassan, a.h.; von rosenstiel, p.; patchev, v.k.; holsboer, f.;
almeida, o.f. exacerbation of apoptosis in the dentate gyrus of the
aged rat by dexamethasone and the protective role of corticosterone. exp.  xxxd122xxx ., 1996, 140, 43-52.
planey, s.l.; derfoul, a.; steplewski, a.; robertson, n.m.; litwack, g. inhibition of glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in 697 preb lymphocytes by the  xxxg1602xxx  n-terminal domain. j. biol. chem., 2002, 277, 42188-42196.
nakamura, y.; suzuki, s.; suzuki, t.; ono, k.; miura, i.; satoh, f.;
moriya, t.; saito, h.; yamada, s.; ito, s.; sasano, h. mdm2: a
novel mineralocorticoid-responsive gene involved in aldosteroneinduced human vascular structural remodeling. am. j. pathol.,
2006, 169, 362-371.
wei, y.; whaley-connell, a.t.; habibi, j.; rehmer, j.; rehmer,
n.; patel, k.; hayden, m.; demarco, v.; ferrario, c.m.; ibdah,
j.a.; sowers, j.r.  xxxg1602xxx  antagonism attenuates vascular apoptosis and injury via rescuing  xxxg118xxx   xxxg1890xxx  activation. hypertension, 2009, 53, 158-165.
oyamada, n.; sone, m.; miyashita, k.; park, k.; taura, d.; inuzuka, m.; sonoyama, t.; tsujimoto, h.; fukunaga, y.; tamura, n.;
itoh, h.; nakao, k. the role of  xxxg1602xxx  expression in brain remodeling after cerebral ischemia. endocrinology,
2008, 149, 3764-3777.
patni, h.; mathew, j.t.; luan, l.; franki, n.; chander, p.n.; singhal, p.c. aldosterone promotes proximal tubular cell apoptosis:
role of oxidative stress. am. j. physiol. renal. physiol., 2007, 293,
f1065-1071.
lange, c.a.; yee, d. progesterone and breast cancer. womens
health (lond engl), 2008, 4, 151-162.
fu, m.; rao, m.; wang, c.; sakamaki, t.; wang, j.; di vizio, d.;
zhang, x.; albanese, c.; balk, s.; chang, c.; fan, s.; rosen, e.;
palvimo, j.j.; janne, o.a.; muratoglu, s.; avantaggiati, m.l.;
pestell, r.g. acetylation of  xxxg183xxx  enhances coactivator
binding and promotes prostate cancer cell growth. mol. cell biol.,
2003, 23, 8563-8575.
fu, m.; wang, c.; zhang, x.; pestell, r.g. acetylation of nuclear
receptors in cellular growth and apoptosis. biochem. pharmacol.,
2004, 68, 1199-1208.
parks, d.j.; blanchard, s.g.; bledsoe, r.k.; chandra, g.; consler,
t.g.; kliewer, s.a.; stimmel, j.b.; willson, t.m.; zavacki, a.m.;
moore, d.d.; lehmann, j.m. bile acids: natural ligands for an orphan nuclear receptor. science, 1999, 284, 1365-1368.
hofmann, a.f. cholestatic liver disease: pathophysiology and
therapeutic options. liver, 2002, 22 suppl 2, 14-19.
maher, j.j. what doesn't kill you makes you stronger: how hepatocytes survive prolonged cholestasis. hepatology, 2004, 39, 11411143.
rodrigues, c.m.; fan, g.; ma, x.; kren, b.t.; steer, c.j. a novel
role for  xxxd3479xxx  in inhibiting apoptosis by modulating
mitochondrial membrane perturbation. j. clin. invest., 1998, 101,
2790-2799.
rodrigues, c.m.; solá, s.; sharpe, j.c.; moura, j.j.; steer, c.j.
tauroursodeoxycholic acid prevents bax-induced membrane perturbation and  xxxg569xxx  release in isolated mitochondria. biochemistry, 2003, 42, 3070-3080.
schoemaker, m.h.; conde de la rosa, l.; buist-homan, m.;
vrenken, t.e.; havinga, r.; poelstra, k.; haisma, h.j.; jansen,
p.l.; moshage, h. tauroursodeoxycholic acid protects rat hepatocytes from bile acid-induced apoptosis via activation of survival
pathways. hepatology, 2004, 39, 1563-1573.
trottier, j.; milkiewicz, p.; kaeding, j.; verreault, m.; barbier, o.
coordinate regulation of hepatic bile acid oxidation and conjugation by nuclear receptors. mol. pharm., 2006, 3, 212-222.
russell, d.w.; setchell, k.d. bile acid biosynthesis. biochemistry,
1992, 31, 4737-4749.
beuers, u.; boyer, j.l.; paumgartner, g.  xxxd3479xxx  in
cholestasis: potential mechanisms of action and therapeutic applications. hepatology, 1998, 28, 1449-1453.

current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29
[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

3901

lazaridis, k.n.; gores, g.j.; lindor, k.d.  xxxd3479xxx 
'mechanisms of action and clinical use in hepatobiliary disorders'.
j. hepatol., 2001, 35, 134-146.
paumgartner, g.; beuers, u.  xxxd3479xxx  in cholestatic
liver disease: mechanisms of action and therapeutic use revisited.
hepatology, 2002, 36, 525-531.
rodrigues, c.m.; ma, x.; linehan-stieers, c.; fan, g.; kren, b.t.;
steer, c.j.  xxxd3479xxx  prevents  xxxg569xxx  release in
apoptosis by inhibiting mitochondrial membrane depolarization and
channel formation. cell death differ., 1999, 6, 842-854.
solá, s.; ma, x.; castro, r.e.; kren, b.t.; steer, c.j.; rodrigues,
c.m.  xxxd3479xxx  modulates  xxxg668xxx  and p53 expression
through a caspase-independent mechanism in transforming growth
factor 1-induced apoptosis of rat hepatocytes. j. biol. chem.,
2003, 278, 48831-48838.
amaral, j.d.; castro, r.e.; solá, s.; steer, c.j.; rodrigues, c.m.
p53 is a key molecular target of  xxxd3479xxx  in regulating
apoptosis. j. biol. chem., 2007, 282, 34250-34259.
azzaroli, f.; mehal, w.; soroka, c.j.; wang, l.; lee, j.; crispe,
n.; boyer, j.l.  xxxd3479xxx  diminishes fas-ligandinduced apoptosis in mouse hepatocytes. hepatology, 2002, 36, 4954.
xie, q.; khaoustov, v.i.; chung, c.c.; sohn, j.; krishnan, b.;
lewis, d.e.; yoffe, b. effect of tauroursodeoxycholic acid on endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced caspase-12 activation. hepatology, 2002, 36, 592-601.
keene, c.d.; rodrigues, c.m.; eich, t.; chhabra, m.s.; steer, c.j.;
low, w.c. tauroursodeoxycholic acid, a bile acid, is neuroprotective in a transgenic animal model of huntington's disease. proc.
natl. acad. sci. u.s.a., 2002, 99, 10671-10676.
duan, w.m.; rodrigues, c.m.; zhao, l.r.; steer, c.j.; low, w.c.
tauroursodeoxycholic acid improves the survival and function of
nigral transplants in a rat model of parkinson's disease. cell transplant., 2002, 11, 195-205.
castro, r.; solá, s.; steer, c.; rodrigues, c. in hepatotoxicity:
from genomics to in-vitro and in-vivo models. sahu, s., ed.; jonh
wiley & sons, ltd: west sussex, uk, 2007, pp 391-420.
macedo, b.; batista, a.r.; ferreira, n.; almeida, m.r.; saraiva,
m.j. anti-apoptotic treatment reduces transthyretin deposition in a
transgenic mouse model of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy.
biochim. biophys. acta, 2008, 1782, 517-522.
ozcan, u.; yilmaz, e.; ozcan, l.; furuhashi, m.; vaillancourt, e.;
smith, r.o.; gorgun, c.z.; hotamisligil, g.s. chemical chaperones reduce er stress and restore glucose homeostasis in a mouse
model of type 2 diabetes. science, 2006, 313, 1137-1140.
solá, s.; castro, r.e.; kren, b.t.; steer, c.j.; rodrigues, c.m.
modulation of nuclear steroid receptors by  xxxd3479xxx 
inhibits tgf-1-induced  xxxg668xxx /p53-mediated apoptosis of rat hepatocytes. biochemistry, 2004, 43, 8429-8438.
kren, b.t.; rodrigues, c.m.; setchell, k.d.; steer, c.j. modulation of steady-state messenger rna levels in the regenerating rat
liver with bile acid feeding. liver transpl., 2001, 7, 321-334.
solá, s.; amaral, j.d.; castro, r.e.; ramalho, r.m.; borralho,
p.m.; kren, b.t.; tanaka, h.; steer, c.j.; rodrigues, c.m. nuclear
translocation of  xxxd3479xxx  by the  xxxg1601xxx  is required to
reduce tgf-1-induced apoptosis in rat hepatocytes. hepatology,
2005, 42, 925-934.
mendoza, m.e.; monte, m.j.; el-mir, m.y.; badia, m.d.; marin,
j.j. changes in the pattern of bile acids in the nuclei of rat liver
cells during hepatocarcinogenesis. clin. sci. (lond)., 2002, 102,
143-150.
tanaka, h.; makino, y.; miura, t.; hirano, f.; okamoto, k.; komura, k.; sato, y.; makino, i. ligand-independent activation of the
 xxxg1601xxx  by  xxxd3479xxx . repression of
 xxxg1141xxx -induced mhc class ii gene expression via a  xxxg1601xxx -dependent pathway. j. immunol., 1996, 156, 16011608.
miura, t.; ouchida, r.; yoshikawa, n.; okamoto, k.; makino, y.;
nakamura, t.; morimoto, c.; makino, i.; tanaka, h. functional
modulation of the  xxxg1601xxx  and suppression of nfb-dependent transcription by  xxxd3479xxx . j. biol.
chem., 2001, 276, 47371-47378.
mitsuyoshi, h.; nakashima, t.; inaba, k.; ishikawa, h.; nakajima,
y.; sakamoto, y.; matsumoto, m.; okanoue, t.; kashima, k. ur-

3902 current medicinal chemistry, 2009 vol. 16, no. 29

[142]

[143]

[144]

sodeoxycholic acid enhances glucocorticoid-induced tyrosine
aminotransferase-gene expression in cultured rat hepatocytes. biochem. biophys. res. commun., 1997, 240, 732-736.
im, e.; martinez, j.d.  xxxd3479xxx  ( xxxd3479xxx ) can inhibit
 xxxd1835xxx  (dca)-induced apoptosis via modulation of
egfr/ xxxg1924xxx /erk signaling in human colon cancer cells. j. nutr.,
2004, 134, 483-486.
solá, s.; amaral, j.d.; borralho, p.m.; ramalho, r.m.; castro,
r.e.; aranha, m.m.; steer, c.j.; rodrigues, c.m. functional
modulation of nuclear steroid receptors by tauroursodeoxycholic
acid reduces amyloid {}-peptide-induced apoptosis. mol. endocrinol., 2006, 20, 2292-2303.
howard, w.r.; pospisil, j.a.; njolito, e.; noonan, d.j. catabolites
of cholesterol synthesis pathways and  xxxd1742xxx  as activators of the

received: april 08, 2009

revised: july 28, 2009

accepted: july 29, 2009

amaral et al.

[145]

[146]

[147]

farnesoid x-activated nuclear receptor. toxicol. appl. pharmacol.,
2000, 163, 195-202.
chiang, j.y.; kimmel, r.; weinberger, c.; stroup, d. farnesoid x
receptor responds to bile acids and represses cholesterol 7hydroxylase gene (cyp7a1) transcription. j. biol. chem., 2000,
275, 10918-10924.
rodrigues, c.m.; solá, s.; brites, d. bilirubin induces apoptosis
via the mitochondrial pathway in developing rat brain neurons. hepatology, 2002, 35, 1186-1195.
keene, c.d.; rodrigues, c.m.; eich, t.; linehan-stieers, c.; abt,
a.; kren, b.t.; steer, c.j.; low, w.c. a bile acid protects against
motor and cognitive deficits and reduces striatal degeneration in the
3-nitropropionic acid model of huntington's disease. exp.  xxxd122xxx .,
2001, 171, 351-360.

