neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

contents lists available at sciencedirect

neurotoxicology

evidence for a separate mechanism of toxicity for the type i and the type ii
pyrethroid insecticides§
charles b. breckenridge a,*, larry holden b, nicholas sturgess c, myra weiner d,1, larry sheets e,
dana sargent e, david m. soderlund f, jin-sung choi g, steve symington h, j. marshall clark i,
steve burr j, david ray j
a

syngenta crop protection inc., p.o. box 18300, greensboro, nc 27419-8300, usa
sielken and associates consulting, inc., bryan, tx 77802, usa
c
syngenta ltd., jealott’s hill international research centre, bracknell, berks. rg42 7ey, uk
d
toxpertise, llc, 100 jackson avenue, princeton, nj 08540, usa
e
bayer crop science, lp. research triangle park, nc 27709, usa
f
dept. of entomology, new york state agricultural experiment station, cornell university, geneva, ny 14456, usa
g
dept. of neurology, yale school of medicine, new haven, ct 06510, usa
h
dept. of biology and biomedical sciences, salve regina university, ri 02840, usa
i
dept. of veterinary and animal science, univ. of massachusetts, amherst, ma 01003, usa
j
school of biomedical sciences, univ. of nottingham, nottingham ng7 2uh, uk
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

article history:
received 17 april 2009
accepted 4 september 2009
available online 18 september 2009

neurotoxicity and mechanistic data were collected for six a-cyano pyrethroids (b-cyﬂuthrin,
cypermethrin, deltamethrin, esfenvalerate, fenpropathrin and l-cyhalothrin) and up to six non-cyano
containing pyrethroids (bifenthrin, s-bioallethrin [or allethrin], permethrin, pyrethrins, resmethrin
[or its cis-isomer, cismethrin] and teﬂuthrin under standard conditions. factor analysis and
multivariate dissimilarity analysis were employed to evaluate four independent data sets comprised
of (1) ﬁfty-six behavioral and physiological parameters from an acute neurotoxicity functional
observatory battery (fob), (2) eight electrophysiological parameters from voltage clamp experiments
conducted on the  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel expressed in xenopus oocytes, (3) indices of efﬁcacy, potency
and binding calculated for calcium ion inﬂux across neuronal membranes, membrane depolarization
and glutamate released from rat brain synaptosomes and (4) changes in chloride channel open
state probability using a patch voltage clamp technique for membranes isolated from mouse
neuroblastoma cells.
the pyrethroids segregated into type i (t-syndrome—tremors) and type ii (cs syndrome—
choreoathetosis with salivation) groups based on fob data. of the a-cyano pyrethroids, deltamethrin, lcyhalothrin, cyﬂuthrin and cypermethrin arrayed themselves strongly in a dose-dependent manner
along two factors that characterize the cs syndrome. esfenvalerate and fenpropathrin displayed weaker
response proﬁles compared to the non-cyano pyrethroids. visual clustering on multidimensional scaling
(mds) maps based upon sodium ion channel and calcium inﬂux and glutamate release dissimilarities
gave similar groupings. the non-cyano containing pyrethroids were arrayed in a dose-dependent
manner along two different factors that characterize the t-syndrome. bifenthrin was an outlier when
mds maps of the non-cyano pyrethroids were based on sodium ion channel characteristics and
permethrin was an outlier when the mds maps were based on calcium inﬂux/glutamate release potency.
four of six a-cyano pyrethroids (l-cyﬂuthrin, cypermethrin, deltamethrin and fenpropathrin) reduced
open chloride channel probability. the r-isomers of l-l-cyhalothrin reduced open channel probability
whereas the s-isomers, antagonized the action of the r-isomers. none of the non-cyano pyrethroids
reduced open channel probability, except bioallethrin, which gave a weak response.

keywords:
type i
type ii
pyrethroid
common mechanism
principal components
factor analysis
clustering
fob
sodium ion
calcium ion
chloride ion channels

§
this research was sponsored by the pyrethroid working group, a trade association of manufacturers of commercial pyrethroid pesticides registered in the united states.
member companies include amvac, bayercropscience, cheminova, dupont, fmc corporation, syngenta, valent usa corporation. this work was presented in part at the 2006
society of toxicology meeting: breckenridge c., holden l., sheets l., creek m., mullen l., sargent d., sharp j., weiner m.l. principal components and factor analysis of the
functional observational battery of 12 pyrethroids. the toxicologist 2006;90(10):50.
* corresponding author. tel.: +1 336 632 7082; fax: +1 336 632 7581.
e-mail address: charles.breckenridge@syngenta.com (c.b. breckenridge).
1
formerly with fmc, princeton, nj, usa.

0161-813x/$ – see front matter ß 2009 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2009.09.002

s18

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

overall, based upon neurotoxicity data and the effect of pyrethroids on sodium, calcium and
chloride ion channels, it is proposed that bioallethrin, cismethrin, teﬂuthrin, bifenthrin and
permethrin belong to one common mechanism group and deltamethrin, l-cyhalothrin, cyﬂuthrin
and cypermethrin belong to a second. fenpropathrin and esfenvalerate occupy an intermediate
position between these two groups.
ß 2009 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.

1. introduction
historically, pyrethroids have been classiﬁed into two subclasses based on the induction of either the t (whole body tremor)
or cs (choreoathetosis with salivation) intoxication syndrome
following intravenous or oral administration to rats at near-lethal
dose levels (verschoyle and aldridge, 1980). the t-syndrome
consisted of aggressive sparring, sensitivity to external stimuli,
ﬁne tremor progressing to whole body tremor and prostration.
elevation in core body temperature was attributed to excessive
muscular activity associated with tremor. the cs syndrome was
comprised initially of pawing and burrowing behavior followed
by profuse salivation, coarse whole body tremor progressing to
sinuous writhing (choreoathetosis), increased startle response
and terminal clonic seizures. decreased core body temperature in
animals displaying the cs syndrome was attributed to excessive
salivation and wetting of the ventral body surface resulting in heat
loss. while salivation typically co-occurs with choreoathetosis, a
ts syndrome (tremor with salivation) was also observed in a few
cases. verschoyle and aldridge (1980) noted that cis-isomers
were generally more toxic than were the corresponding transisomers and that the cs syndrome was associated with
pyrethroids that possess the a-cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl alcohol
structure. lawrence and casida (1982) conﬁrmed these general
ﬁndings in 29 pyrethroids administered intracerebrally to mice.
these authors introduced the designation type i pyrethroid,
which corresponded to the t-syndrome and type ii, which
corresponded with the cs syndrome, in order to permit generalization to in vitro systems and insect models (gammon et al.,
1981; gammon, 1985).
there is evidence that voltage-sensitive sodium channels, the
sites of insecticidal action of pyrethroids, are important target sites
in mammals. mammals, unlike insects, have multiple sodium
channel isoforms that vary in their tissue distribution and their
biophysical and pharmacological properties, including their
sensitivity to some or all pyrethroids (goldin, 1999). therefore,
it is not appropriate to consider ‘‘the mammalian sodium channel’’
as a single, pharmacologically homogeneous target for pyrethroids
(soderlund et al., 2002).
although lawrence and casida (1982) suggested that there
could be distinct binding sites in the brain for the type i and
type ii pyrethroids, the identity of such sites remains elusive.
electrophysiological data from frog nerve (vijverberg and de
weille, 1985) and from rat muscle ﬁbers (wright et al., 1988)
indicate that the duration of prolongation of the sodium current
is a predictor of the nature of the symptoms observed. short
prolongation of the sodium current is associated with the tsyndrome whereas lengthy prolongation is associated with the
cs syndrome. the transition between the two syndromes
corresponds to a time constant of about 200 ms in the frog
and 10 ms in the rat. pyrethroids that produce time constants in
the transitional range tend to result in mixed-type clinical signs,
which may indicate the simultaneous occurrence of both the t
and cs syndromes, rather than a distinct third syndrome (wright
et al., 1988). research on the development of knockdown
resistance in insects (soderlund and knipple, 2003; tan et al.,
2005) and more recent work on modeling of the binding of

pyrethroids to the sodium channel (o’reilly et al., 2006), lend
support to the existence of unique binding sites for the type i
and type ii pyrethroids.
there is also evidence that the action of pyrethroids at sites
other than the sodium channel may contribute to their effects in
vivo. pyrethroids have been shown to act on isoforms of voltagesensitive calcium channels, thereby contributing to the release
of neurotransmitters and hence pyrethroid-induced toxicity
(hildebrand et al., 2004; symington and clark, 2005). the
blocking of voltage-sensitive chloride channels by some
pyrethroids is associated with the occurrence of salivation, a
hallmark of the cs intoxication syndrome, and may also
contribute to enhanced excitability in the central nervous
system. effects on peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptors
associated with the gabaa receptor are unlikely to be directly
responsible for pyrethroid toxicity, but may contribute to, or
enhance convulsions resulting from effects at other target sites
(ray, 2001). although other putative target sites for pyrethroid
action have been identiﬁed in vitro (e.g. nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors), these targets do not appear to play a major role in
pyrethroid toxicity (ray, 2001).
the purpose of this study was to determine if data from a group
of up to six a-cyano and six non-cyano pyrethroids collected in
four independent studies under standard conditions segregated
the pyrethroids into common mechanism groupings as suggested
by previous research. principal components-based factor analysis
and multivariate dissimilarity analyses were used to establish a
basis for the inclusion of pyrethroids into, or the exclusion from,
common mechanisms groups.

2. methods
2.1. data sets used for statistical evaluation
supplemental tables and ﬁgures can be found with the
electronic version of this article and are referred to in the text
as tables or ﬁgures with the ‘‘s’’ preﬁx.
a group of six a-cyano pyrethroids and six non-cyano
pyrethroids were studied in a variety of model systems (see
figure s1 and table s1 for chemical structures and composition). a
single lot of test material was sent by the appropriate pyrethroid
working group (pwg) manufacturer to each laboratory involved
in these investigations. the data derived from the following four
studies were evaluated using a combination of principal components analysis, factor analysis and multidimensional scaling: (1) an
acute neurotoxicity study that was based upon a functional
observatory battery (fob) evaluation in the rat (weiner et al.,
2009), (2) a study of the effect of the pyrethroids on sodium
channel current evaluated using electrophysiological techniques
for the rat  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel isoform expressed in xenopus
oocytes (choi and soderlund, 2006), (3) a study of the effect of the
pyrethroids on calcium ion inﬂux, membrane depolarization and
neurotransmitter release from rat brain synaptosomes (symington, 2005; symington et al., 2008) and (4) a study of the effect of
the pyrethroids on open chloride ion channel probability (burr and
ray, 2004).

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

2.2. acute neurotoxicity: functional observational battery
(fob) data in the rat
an acute neurotoxicity study was conducted on twelve
commercially important pyrethroid insecticides belonging to
either the a-cyano or the non-cyano structural class. fob
measurements were collected at the time of peak response using
optimum doses (table s2). detailed methods and results are
provided by weiner et al. (2009). the data from the functional
observational battery were divided into 56 numerical analysis
variables which were then averaged for each treatment and control
group (table s3). group means were used in the multivariate
analysis to evaluate correlations between factors at the group level.
this analysis focused on identifying factors that account for the
similarities and differences between groups rather than factors
that account for individual animal variability.
2.3. sodium channel isoforms: electrophysiological studies
in xenopus oocytes
choi and soderlund (2006) measured the electrophysiological
response to electrical stimulation (single pulse or pre-conditioning
with multiple pulses to assess use-dependency) for the rat  xxxg2018xxx 
(tetrodotoxin resistant, pyrethroid sensitive) sodium channel isoform expressed in xenopus oocytes (see table 1 for the data).
response characteristics were evaluated using voltage clamp
techniques in the absence or in the presence of a pyrethroid. the
11 pyrethroids evaluated for sodium channel characteristics
included all those examined in the acute neurotoxicity study except
for pyrethrins. the data from other sodium channels investigated by
choi and soderlund (2006) were not used in this assessment because
these isoforms did not respond to all pyrethroids and therefore the
results were not suitable for a comparative assessment.
percent channel modiﬁcation was calculated from the normalized conductance of the pyrethroid-induced sodium tail current
measured in the presence of the pyrethroid. percent channel
modiﬁcation was determined both following exposure to a
hyperpolarized membrane potential (resting modiﬁcation) and
following trains of varying numbers of short depolarizing pre-pulses
(use-dependent modiﬁcation). time constants for current activation
and for fast and slow decay of the tail current were determined in the
resting state. for each oocyte, the ﬁrst-order ﬁt of the rising and
falling phases of the net pyrethroid-modiﬁed current was obtained
by subtracting the control currents measured in the absence of the
pyrethroid from composite currents measured in the presence of the
pyrethroid. time constants for fast inactivation were obtained for
only 4 of the 11 pyrethroids. for the remaining 7 compounds, the
inactivation of pyrethroid-modiﬁed currents was too slow to be

s19

measured accurately during a standard depolarizing test pulse. since
the presence or absence of detectable inactivation is in itself a
distinguishing characteristic, it was included as a binary variable.
four of the 11 pyrethroids did not display ﬁrst-order tail current
decay (l-cyhalothrin, b-cyﬂuthrin, cypermethrin, deltamethrin). for
these compounds only the slow component of tail current decay was
included in the analysis since choi and soderlund (2006) reported
that this data was more ‘representative’ of tail current decay.
2.4. voltage-gated calcium channels: rat brain synaptosome studies
rat brain presynaptic terminals (synaptosomes) were isolated
by centrifugation and re-suspended in multi-well microplates to
assess the following three functional ﬂuorescence assays: (1)
calcium inﬂux, (2) membrane depolarization, and (3) neurotransmitter release (symington et al., 2008). calcium inﬂux into
synaptosomes was determined using the ﬂuorescent calcium
chelator, fura-2am. membrane potential depolarization across the
synaptosomal membrane was calculated based upon the tendency
of dibac4 (bis-1,3-dibutylbarbituric acid; pentamethine oxonol),
an anionic dye, to exhibit voltage-dependent partitioning between
the synaptosome membrane and the buffer. changes in the
magnitude of ﬂuorescence of this dye are proportional to
membrane potential, which can be calculated using the reduced
nernst equation. neurotransmitter (glutamate) released from
synaptosomes was determined by measuring changes in the
ﬂuorescence of a dye (resoruﬁn) that is stochiometrically formed
as a result of a glutamate concentration-dependent process
whereby an indicator molecule (amplex) is enzymatically
transformed into resoruﬁn. the dose-dependent effect of each of
the 11 pyrethroids on these parameters (figures s5 and s6) was
determined for each of the three functional assay endpoints
evaluated; the dose–response data was ﬁt by a four parameter
logistic regression equation (hill equation) as follows:
response ¼ 

bo þ ðbmax  bo þ
1 þ 10ððlog ec50 xþ

ðhillslopeþþ



where b0 = minimum efﬁcacy value; bmax = maximum efﬁcacy
value; log ec50 = potency value; hill slope = describes binding
characteristics; x = pyrethroid concentration.
table 2 provides the nine ﬁtted regression coefﬁcients for each
pyrethroid reported by symington (2005).
2.5. voltage-gated chloride channels: patch clamp studies in
neuroblastoma cells
burr and ray (2004) investigated the spontaneous change in ion
conductance through voltage-gated chloride channels in mouse

table 1
 xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel characteristics obtained for 11 pyrethroids (mean  sd).
pyrethroid

s-bioallethrin
bifenthrin
cismethrinb
l-cyhalothrin
b-cyﬂuthrin
cypermethrin
deltamethrin
fenpropathrin
esfenvalerate
permethrin
teﬂuthrin

percent channel modiﬁcation
resting state

use-dependence

22.4  3.7
14.3  1.6
27.5  5.0
7.4  1.4
8.0  2.1
19.4  4.3
13.8  2.3
43.5  8.5
24.8  6.4
9.9  3.9
29.1  4.4

28.6  7.1
18.9  4.6
36.1  8.3
25.4  4.3
26.6  5.4
46.3  7.9
31.5  7.3
56.6  10.6
37.6  8.2
14.6  6.5
40.2  5.3

no. of pre-pulses needed for maximal
use-dependent modiﬁcation

activation time
constant (ms)

inactivation time
constant (ms)a

tail current decay
time constants (ms)

20
60
45
300
300
300
200
9
10
70
30

3.9  0.08
3.9  0.5
3.3  0.1
22.3  4.3
23.6  6.2
12.6  1.2
15.7  2.1
10.8  1.4
10.7
2.5  0.5
3.8  0.2

21.8  1.1
nd
21.4  2.0
nd
nd
nd
nd
nd
nd
39.8  19.4
89.0  18.9

1.9  0.4
4.0  0.6
2.6  0.2
9.4  0.5;
7.1  0.5;
6.9  1.4;
5.3  1.7;
12.4  1.2
13.4  3.2
2.3  0.3
4.3  0.3

data derived from choi and soderlund (2006).
a
nd = no inactivation detected during standard depolarizing test pulse.
b
the cis-isomer of resmethrin.

84.7  1.3
95.9  7.2
55.8  7.9
52.1  11.0

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

s20

table 2
logistic (or hill) curve parameters determined by non-linear regression on pyrethroid concentration (ec50, bmax = maximum response, hill slope = logistic slope).
pyrethroid

b-cyﬂuthrin
cypermethrin
deltamethrin
esfenvalerate
fenpropathrin
l-cyhalothrin
bifenthrin
s-bioallethrin
permethrin
cismethrin
teﬂuthrin

calcium inﬂux

membrane depolarization

neurotransmitter release

log ec50

bmax

hillslope

log ec50

bmax

hillslope

log ec50

bmax

hillslope

8.86
9.97
10.53
8.37
0
10.56
5.89
0
9.51
5.26
0

89.9
113.1
49.9
137
0
45.75
45.5
0
98.9
207.7
0

0.24
0.2
0.31
0.34
0
0.46
0.83
0
0.27
0.74
0

12.27
10.51
10.76
9.22
9.65
10.29
9.62
7.76
10.20
8.81
6.27

23.3
28.0
31.6
33.4
30.3
24.3
35.2
36.1
29.2
39.5
44.3

0.26
0.35
0.17
0.22
0.14
0.25
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.22
0.17

9.71
8.86
11.19
9.598
7.19
9.74
5.70
6.29
9.14
0
8.37

420.9
155.7
143.2
123.3
503.3
364.0
292.4
305.7
263.7
0
181.6

0.20
0.20
0.39
0.20
0.19
0.36
0.14
0.14
0.37
0
0.14

reproduced from symington (2005).

neuroblastoma cells (n1e-115), which express a maxi-chloride
channel with high conductance values, using an inside-out patch
clamp technique. current ﬂux was measured at a pre-determined
optimum membrane holding potential either in the absence or in
the presence of a pyrethroid. open channel probability, which was
calculated as the proportion of time that current attributed to
chloride ion ﬂux across a single ion channel, was observed during
the control and pyrethroid exposure periods. dimethylsulfoxide
(dmso) was used as the vehicle control. each of the 14 pyrethroids
studied by burr and ray (2004) was introduced into the media in a
single experiment (one patch clamp preparation) at a concentration of 10 mm. a supplementary study was conducted on gcyhalothrin, the active r-isomer pair in l-cyhalothrin.
for each patch clamp experiment, the average open chloride
channel probability was determined ﬁrst in the absence and then
in the presence of the pyrethroid. the number of these replicate
pairs ranged from n = 5 to n = 11 for each pyrethroid and n = 14 for
experiments with dmso only. the mean difference in open
chloride channel probability observed pre-dose compared to posttreatment was calculated over all replicates for each pyrethroid
and the difference was evaluated for statistical signiﬁcance by
calculating the p-value (table s6). the level of uncertainty in
pyrethroid-induced changes in open chloride channel probability
was estimated by calculating the 95% conﬁdence interval.
2.6. principal components-based factor analysis of the fob data
a modiﬁcation of factor analysis was used to describe the
multivariate pattern of dose–response variation contained in the
fob group means. the factor procedure in release 9.1 of sas (sas,
2004) was used to conduct this multivariate analysis on the control
and treatment group means for the 56 fob variables. the initial
factor extraction method (principal components) identiﬁed four
independent factors from the 56-variable pair-wise correlation
matrix. these four uncorrelated factors were then transformed or
‘rotated’ to four new factors that tended to have either zero or large
correlations with the original variables making these factors easier
to characterize. the number of factors extracted from the data was
limited to four because, following promax rotation (sas, 2004), all
four factors demonstrated a clear dose–response relationship for at
least one of the pyrethroids. when more than four factors were
extracted, such clear dose–response relationships were not evident
for every pyrethroid.
after the initial extraction of four factors, a minimum
communality criterion was used to exclude any of the original
56 fob variables that did not substantially contribute to the four
factors. the communality is that fraction of variation in an original
fob variable that can be ‘explained’ by the complete set of four
factors. thus, the communality is analogous to the r2 statistic in a
regression analysis.

first, all fob variables with communalities less than 0.5 with
the 56-variable, four-factor pattern were excluded. then four
factors were re-extracted from the reduced-variable correlation
matrix and rotated to give a new factor analysis solution. these
variable removal and re-extraction operations were repeated until
all retained variables had communalties of 0.5 or greater. this
‘ﬁne-tuning’ process permitted the removal of 12 of the original 56
variables (table s3) leaving 44 fob measures in the ﬁnal analysis
set. the ﬁnal four factors accounted for 81.4% of the total betweentreatment variability contained in these 44 fob variables.
2.7. pyrethroid dissimilarity and multidimensional scaling
the sodium (table 1) and calcium channel (table 2) data were
reduced to between-pyrethroid dissimilarities (tables s4 and s5,
respectively). for the  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel characteristics, the
gower’s index of dissimilarity was calculated for each pair of
pyrethroids (cox and cox, 1994). the data were normalized so that
all values were between 0 and 1. the absolute numerical difference
for each of the 7  xxxg2018xxx  characteristics was determined and the
average for all 7 characteristics was calculated for each pair.
whenever both pyrethroids had detectable fast inactivation, this
characteristic was also used in computing the average gower
dissimilarity. this process was repeated for all pairs of pyrethroids
resulting in a matrix of differences (dissimilarities). in essence, the
gower dissimilarity for any two pyrethroids is the average
absolute difference over all measured characteristics.
a manhattan index of dissimilarity (cox and cox, 1994) was
calculated on the basis of three parameters (efﬁcacy, potency and
the hill slope) that describe the ﬁtted calcium channel dose–
response data for each of three synaptosomal characteristics,
hereafter identiﬁed as calcium channel characteristics (calcium
inﬂux, membrane depolarization, or glutamate release). each of
the nine coefﬁcients was scaled by its maximum observed value
prior to the calculation of dissimilarity. the manhattan index
was computed for all pairs of pyrethroids giving a matrix of
dissimilarities.
multidimensional scaling (mds) was used to represent these
dissimilarities on a two-dimensional ‘map’. the distance and the
mds procedures in release 9.1 of sas (sas, 2004) were used to
calculate dissimilarity measures and to construct the dissimilarity
maps, respectively. thus, mds was used to convert the dissimilarities between the pairs of pyrethroids into a two-dimensional
conﬁguration or ‘map’ for all 11 pyrethroids. each pyrethroid was
shown as a point on this map and the distance between two points
was a two-dimensional approximation of the actual pyrethroid
dissimilarities. therefore, pyrethroids that are closer together on
an mds map are more similar. only the distances between
pyrethroids are informative in an mds map. the axes themselves
have no intuitive meaning.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

3. results
3.1. factors underlying between-group variation in the fob data
there were four primary patterns of variation (i.e. factors) in the
fob data that were attributed to between-group differences
resulting from pyrethroid treatment (figure s2). factor 1 (csb:
writhing, neuromuscular weakness and abnormal posture) and
factor 2 (csa: non-reactivity to sensory stimulation and lacrimation) were moderately correlated (r = 0.39). factor 3 (ta: exaggerated response to sensory stimuli and difﬁculty in handling the
animal) was moderately correlated (r = 0.32) with factor 4 (tb:
head-ﬂicking, jerking movements, prominent bulging eyes). the
dose–response relationships of the 12 pyrethroids with the two cs
factors and the two t factors are shown in figures s3 and s4,
respectively. of the a-cyano pyrethroids, deltamethrin, l-cyhalothrin, cyﬂuthrin and cypermethrin arrayed themselves strongly in
a dose-dependent manner along two factors that deﬁne the cs
(choreoathetosis–salivation) syndrome. esfenvalerate and fenpro-

s21

pathrin displayed weaker response proﬁles compared to other acyano pyrethroids. the non-cyano containing pyrethroids, likewise
arrayed themselves in a dose-dependent manner along two factors
that characterize the t (tremor) syndrome.
one composite factor (cs factor) was derived from the
maximum of either factor 1 or 2 and was characterized by
animals in treatment groups that displayed a lower body
temperature, excessive salivation and impaired mobility. a second
composite factor (t factor) was derived from the maximum of
either factor 3 or 4 and was associated with elevated body
temperature, tremors and myoclonus (fig. 1).
when the pyrethroid treatment groups were compared based
on the maximum factor 1 or 2 (cs) and factors 3 and 4 (t)
composite scores (fig. 2), with few exceptions, every pyrethroid
displayed a strong dose–response on one or more of the fob
factors. consistent with previous studies, the non-cyano pyrethroids tended to have high loading on the t-factors whereas
pyrethroids with an a-cyano group tended to have high loading on
the cs factors. the a-cyano pyrethroids with the strongest cs

fig. 1. behavioral proﬁle of two composite factors each derived from the maxima of two primary fob factors. each bar represents the correlation of the factor with the
indicated fob measure.

s22

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

fig. 2. treatment groups compared on the 2 composite factors cs and t. chemical
names are abbreviated as follows: bifen = bifenthrin, bio = s-bioallethrin, cyf = bcyﬂuthrin,
cyh = l-cyhalothrin,
cyp = cypermethrin,
delta = deltamethrin,
esfen = esfenvalerate, fenpro = fenpropathrin, perm = permethrin, teﬂ = teﬂuthrin.

responses were l-cyhalothrin (csa) and deltamethrin (csb);
whereas the non-cyano pyrethroids with the strongest tsyndrome loading were resmethrin (on ta) and bifenthrin (on
tb). fenpropathrin and pyrethrins had only weak t or cs
responses; whereas deltamethrin gave a strong csb response
but it also showed a weaker, but noticeable effect on ta.
esfenvalerate on the other hand, affected t behaviors and at the
high dose, weakly induces cs behaviors as well. animals in the
control groups were arrayed around the null value for both the t
and cs dimensions. pyrethroid-treated low dose groups that
appeared in the same region were, thus, considered comparable to
the control groups.
3.2. pyrethroid-induced sodium channel modiﬁcation
gower dissimilarity indices (table s4) calculated between each
pair of pyrethroids based upon the seven  xxxg2018xxx  sodium ion
channel characteristics (table 1) are shown in a mds map provided
in fig. 3. because the mds map provides a scaled graphical
representation of the summed differences between pyrethroids,
vectors (directional arrows) corresponding to higher or lower of
amount of sodium channel modiﬁcation, the number of pre-pulses
needed for maximum modiﬁcation, and the rate of channel
activation and deactivation are provided.
the a-cyano and non-cyano pyrethroids were separated into
two groups based upon sodium channel characteristics. the acyano pyrethroids form an elongated cluster in the bottom right
hand quadrant of the mds map corresponding to slower
activation/deactivation. the non-cyano pyrethroids cluster in
the upper left quadrant and were associated with faster activation/deactivation kinetics. the magnitude of dissimilarities among
pyrethroids within the same structural subclass was sometimes
larger than that observed between classes. these differences
appear correlated with the degree of channel modiﬁcation and the
number of pre-pulses needed to achieve maximum channel
modiﬁcation. for example, the a-cyano pyrethroid esfenvalerate

fig. 3. multidimensional scaling (mds) map for 11 pyrethroids based on their
sodium ion channel dissimilarities. the distance between points is the best
approximation of the gower’s dissimilarity index.

was more similar to teﬂuthrin (a non-cyano pyrethroid) than it was
to b-cyﬂuthrin (another a-cyano pyrethroid). with respect to
 xxxg2018xxx  characteristics, b-cyﬂuthrin and l-cyhalothrin were quite
similar to each other as were cismethrin and s-bioallethrin.
3.3. sodium channel modiﬁcation compared to fob principal
components/factors
the relationship between the  xxxg2018xxx  channel mds map and the
maximum composite factor score (i.e. cs and t) derived for each
pyrethroid from the fob behavioral data (table 3) is shown in
fig. 4a and b for cs and t, respectively. the factor scores for
resmethrin were used as a surrogate for the isomeric subclass
cismethrin. for visual emphasis, pyrethroids with a maximum
factor scores greater than 1 are covered with a grey circle. a score
of 1 was selected because values less than 1 generally indicate that
only slight loading on the factor (table 3).
in fig. 4 it is clear that the cs syndrome was associated with acyano pyrethroids that have slower sodium ion channel kinetics
whereas the t-syndrome was more characteristic of the non-cyano
pyrethroids that have faster sodium ion channel kinetics.
pyrethroids with sodium ion channel properties intermediate
between the two extremes on the sodium channel map (e.g. the acyano pyrethroid deltamethrin and the non-cyano pyrethroid
bifenthrin) tended to show both t-syndrome and cs syndrome
behaviors.
3.4. effects on calcium inﬂux, membrane potential and
glutamate release
dissimilarities obtained between all pairs of 11 pyrethroids
based upon their dose–response parameters (table 2) were
calculated (table s5) and a mds map was plotted (fig. 5). for
the most part, this conﬁguration was driven by pyrethroid-induced
changes in the ec50 levels for calcium inﬂux and glutamate release.
differences in membrane depolarization had only a minor impact.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

s23

table 3
raw and normalized maximum-dose fob factor scores obtained for the 11 pyrethroidsa.
normalized maximum scoresa

chemical

structural class

raw fob factor scores at highest tested dose
csa factor 2

csb factor 1

ta factor 3

tb factor 4

cs

t

b-cyﬂuthrin
cypermethrin
deltamethrin
esfenvalerate
fenpropathrin
l-cyhalothrin

cyano
cyano
cyano
cyano
cyano
cyano

2.4
1.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
4.6

0.3
1.0
5.1
0.2
0.4
1.4

0.8
0.5
0.7
0.0
0.4
0.7

0.0
0.0
0.1
1.1
0.0
0.3

2.9
1.7
5.6
0.7
0.3
5.1

0.6
0.6
1.3
1.6
0.6
0.3

bifenthrin
s-bioallethrin
cismethrinb
permethrin
teﬂuthrin

non-cyano
non-cyano
non-cyano
non-cyano
non-cyano

0.3
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.2

0.7
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.1

1.3
1.3
2.0
2.4
0.1

4.8
0.9
0.1
0.6
0.6

1.2
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.4

5.3
1.8
2.6
3.0
1.2

a
raw ‘cs’ scores are the maximum of the csa and csb factor scores. raw ‘t’ scores are the maximum of ta and tb. these raw scores were then normalized by subtracting the
respective mean maximum score of the vehicle control group (control means: cs = 0.5, t = 0.6). for each pyrethroid, the normalized maximum score cs scores are the
largest of the csa and csb; the normalized maximum t scores are the largest of the ta and tb scores.
b
fob behavioral factor scores for resmethrin were used.

the ‘relative potency’ trends, which were determined by multiple
regressions of the ec50 potencies, are shown in fig. 5 as directional
arrows. these data indicate that the ec50 values for calcium inﬂux
decrease (i.e. become more potent) along an approximately left-toright gradient (i.e. from teﬂuthrin towards deltamethrin). the
glutamate release potencies increase from the upper left (from
cismethrin) to the lower right (towards b-cyﬂuthrin) of the map.
a moderately tight cluster of 6 pyrethroids (b-cyﬂuthrin, lcyhalothrin, cypermethrin, permethrin, deltamethrin, and esfenvalerate) had both strong calcium inﬂux and glutamate releasing
properties. a second cluster containing teﬂuthrin, s-bioallethrin,
and fenpropathrin have potent glutamate releasing characteristics,
but with no detectable calcium inﬂux response. two outliers,
bifenthrin and cismethrin, gave a modest calcium inﬂux response,
but only at the greatest pyrethroid concentration. in addition,
cismethrin, unlike all other pyrethroids, yielded no glutamate
release response over the concentration range tested. bifenthrin

had a weak glutamate response and, hence, appears in an
intermediate position.
based upon this analysis of the three hill function regression
parameters (efﬁcacy, potency and slope) for each of three
functional characteristics (calcium inﬂux, membrane depolarization, and glutamate release), the 11 pyrethroids fell into two rather
compact clusters distinguished largely by the strength of the
calcium inﬂux response. bifenthrin and especially cismethrin had
very weak glutamate release patterns and belong to neither of the
two main clusters. bifenthrin and cismethrin could be considered a
very loose third cluster.
3.5. calcium channel data compared to fob data
the relationship between the differences in pyrethroid-induced
changes in calcium inﬂux, membrane depolarization and glutamate release and the maximum composite factor score (i.e. cs and

fig. 4. cs or t composite factor scores superimposed on the  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel.

s24

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

values and also had the largest cs scores based upon the fob data.
bifenthrin, which also had a large cs score (cs score = 1.2), was
some distance from this cluster.
permethrin, which strongly displayed the ta symptoms
(t score = 3.0) in the fob, unlike the a-cyano pyrethroids which
displayed a cs pattern, was similar to the four a-cyano
pyrethroids based upon the hill ec50 values. esfenvalerate and
deltamethrin, both a-cyano pyrethroids that had relatively high
loading on the t-factor (t-factor scores = 1.6 and 1.3, respectively), were similar to permethrin based upon the hill ec50
values.
the non-cyano pyrethroids that had high t-factor scores
(cismethrin, bifenthrin, bioallethrin and teﬂuthrin) were leftshifted relative to the main cluster of cyano pyrethroids in the mds
map. however, these non-cyano pyrethroids did not form a tight
cluster except for teﬂuthrin and bioallethrin which tended to be
similar. the a-cyano pyrethroid, fenpropathrin, although it had a
low t-factor score, was similar to teﬂuthrin and bioallethrin based
on the hill ec50 values.
3.6. effects on open chloride channel probability

fig. 5. multidimensional scaling (mds) conﬁguration for 11 pyrethroids based on
logistic (or hill) dose–response equation dissimilarities for calcium inﬂux,
glutamate release and membrane depolarization.

t) derived for each pyrethroid from the fob behavioral data was
evaluated by superimposing the two composite fob behavioral/
toxicity patterns (cs and t) onto the calcium channel mds map
(fig. 6). four pyrethroids (deltamethrin, cypermethrin, cyﬂuthrin,
l-cyhalothrin) clustered closely together based upon hill ec50

the observed changes in open channel probabilities reported by
burr and ray (2004) for 11 pyrethroids are plotted in fig. 7. the
conﬁdence intervals of ﬁve pyrethroids do not cross the zerodifference line and are statistically signiﬁcantly different from the
baseline period at the 5% level. two pyrethroids did not conform to
expectation; bioallethrin, a non-cyano pyrethroid caused a slight
change in open chloride channel probability and l-cyhalothrin, an
a-cyano pyrethroid, did not affect open chloride channel probability (fig. 7). l-cyhalothrin, which is comprised of a 50:50
mixture of active (r-isomer) and inactive (s-isomer) pairs of
enantiomers, did not affect open chloride channel probability
(fig. 8a). however, the active isomer pair (g-cyhalothrin) did
reduce open chloride channel probability (fig. 8b) whereas the sisomer pair of enantiomers did not (fig. 8b). interestingly, the

fig. 6. the maximum cs (csa or csb; fig. 6a) or t (ta or tb, fig. 6b) scores for the 11 pyrethroids from the fob study superimposed on the logistic (or hill) coefﬁcient mds
conﬁguration from the study on syanp.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

s25

fig. 7. changes in open chloride ion channel probabilities following pyrethroid
treatment relative to the pre-treatment control period (mean  95%ci).

effect of g-cyhalothrin did not add to the effect of deltamethrin
(fig. 8c).
3.7. chloride channel data compared to fob data
the change in open chloride channel probability for a-cyano
and non-cyano pyrethroids is compared to the maximum t and cs
scores observed in the fob study in fig. 9a and b, respectively. the
results indicate that a-cyano pyrethroids, which have the highest
cs scores (e.g. deltamethrin, cyﬂuthrin) are the pyrethroids which
have the largest reductions in open chloride channel probability;
(l-cyhalothrin is the exception). fenpropathrin, an a-cyano
pyrethroid with a both low cs and t score, caused a moderate
reduction in open chloride channel probability whereas esfenvalerate, an a-cyano pyrethroid with a low cs score and a moderate t
score, had no effect on open chloride channel probability. the noncyano pyrethroids, which tend to have low cs scores and moderate
to high t scores, did not cause a reduction in open chloride channel
probability.
4. discussion
the results of these analyses support the hypothesis that
pyrethroids exert their toxicological effect through at least two
distinct modes of action. the pyrethroids segregated themselves
into the classical type i (t-syndrome), and type ii (cs syndrome).
of the a-cyano pyrethroids, deltamethrin, l-cyhalothrin, cyﬂuthrin and cypermethrin arrayed themselves strongly in a dose–
response manner along the combined cs factor that deﬁnes the cs
syndrome. esfenvalerate and fenpropathrin were weaker. a similar
pattern was observed when cluster analysis using dissimilarity
analysis was performed using the sodium and the calcium data
(table 4).
the non-cyano pyrethroids (s-bioallethrin, cismethrin,
resmethrin, bifenthrin and permethrin) likewise arrayed themselves in a dose-responsive manner along the combined factors
that deﬁne the t-syndrome. bifenthrin was an outlier when
clustering of the non-cyano pyrethroids was based on sodium
ion channel characteristics and permethrin was an outlier
when clustering was based on calcium ion channel measurements.

fig. 8. (a) effect of deltamethrin or l-cyhalothrin on the chloride channel open
probability. data from burr and ray (2004). (b) effect of the l-cyhalothrin’s, sisomer (inactive) or r-isomer (active—g-cyhalothrin) pairs on the chloride channel
open probability. (c) lack of an additive effect of g cyhalothrin and deltamethrin on
the chloride channel open probability.

because of limited data on the chloride channel (one response
measure), a comprehensive analysis was not possible. however,
four of six a-cyano pyrethroids (l-cyﬂuthrin, cypermethrin,
deltamethrin and fenpropathrin) clearly reduced open chloride
channel probability, whereas none of the non-cyano containing
pyrethroids did except for bioallethrin which gave a weak
response. studies on the active and inactive isomer pairs of
cyhalothrin suggest that the ‘‘inactive pair or isomers’’ may block
or otherwise attenuate the effect of the active isomer pair.
furthermore, effects addition was not observed when deltamethrin was added to g-cyhalothrin. a broader range of concentrations would need to be tested in this model before great
signiﬁcance could be ascribed to this failure to show effects
addition.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

s26

4.1. fob data
the results from the fob data analysis conﬁrm earlier reports of
the differences in behavioral response patterns to type i and type
ii pyrethroids ﬁrst described by verschoyle and aldridge (1980)
and further discussed by casida et al. (1983), ray (2001) and
soderlund et al. (2002). although it has been suggested that
insecticidal activity and mammalian toxicity of the type i and type
ii pyrethroids is conveyed principally by 1r-cis-isomer conﬁguration at the c3 cyclopropanecarboxylate ester (casida et al., 1983), it
has also been suggested that the presence of an a-cyano
substitution in the s-conﬁguration in the 3-phenoxybenzyl alcohol
moiety also greatly enhances the acute neurotoxicity of the type ii
pyrethroid (soderlund et al., 2002). this was borne out by the
observation that lowest effective dose for the type ii pyrethroids,
which in some cases could be considered to be no observed effect
levels (see cyﬂuthrin-1, deltamethrin-1, cypermethrin-1, esfenvalerate-1 and fenpropathrin-1) clustered near the eight control
groups marked with a ^ in fig. 2. the highest dose tested, which in
most cases approximated the maximum tolerated dose, was
generally lower for type ii, cyano pyrethroids than for type i, noncyano pyrethroids (fig. 10). the most acutely toxic non-cyano
pyrethroids, teﬂuthrin and bifenthrin, were intermediate between
the least toxic a-cyano pyrethroids (cypermethrin and esfenvalerate). in the case where an intermediate dose group was included
in the fob study for the non-cyano (s-bioallethrin, and resmethrin)
and the a-cyano (b-cyﬂuthrin, cypermethrin, deltamethrin, and
esfenvalerate), pyrethroids, these groups were intermediate
between the high and low dose group on their respective t or
cs axis.
4.2. sodium channel data

fig. 9. (a) mean change in open chloride channel probability (post-dose minus predose) compared with the maximum ta or tb scores from the fob study normalized
to the control. (b) mean change in open chloride channel probability (post-dose
minus pre-dose) compared with the maximum csa or csb scores from the fob
study normalized to the control.

table 4
classiﬁcation of pyrethroids into pure type i, pure type ii and mixed type based
upon fob, na+, ca2+, and cl channel data.
pyrethroid

fob

na+ channel

ca2+ channel

cl channel

pure type i
s-bioallethrin
cismethrin
resmethrin
teﬂuthrin
bifenthrin
permethrin

i
ne
i
i
i
i

i
i
ne
i
i/ii
i

i
i
ne
i
i
ii

ia
i
ne
i
i
i

mixed type i and type ii
esfenvalerate
i/ii
fenpropathrin
i/ii

i/ii
i/ii

ii
i

i
ii

pure type ii
b-cyﬂuthrin
cypermethrin
l-cyhalothrin
deltamethrin

ii
ii
ii
ii

ii
ii
ii
ii

ii
ii
iib
ii

ii
ii
ii
iic

ne = not evaluated.
a
slight increase in open channel probability not considered signiﬁcant.
b
based on the evaluation of g-cyhalothrin.
c
ignores a slight increase in ta (factor 3) at the high dose (table 3, figure s4).

the available sodium channel data was restricted to a sodium
channel isoform ( xxxg2018xxx ), which is considered to be particularly
sensitive to pyrethroids (choi and soderlund, 2006). although all
pyrethroids induced changes in sodium channel kinetics, sodium
channel activation and inactivation for type i pyrethroids was
more rapid than for type ii pyrethroids. the time constant of
sodium channel activation was highly correlated with the
duration of tail current decay for all compounds (choi and
soderlund, 2006). these differences in the kinetics of sodium
channel activation, inactivation and deactivation (tail current
decay) coupled with differences in the number of pre-pulses
needed to achieve maximum use-dependent channel modiﬁcation were important contributors to the dissimilarity score.
notably, fenpropathrin and esfenvalerate showed greater similarity to the non-cyano pyrethroids than to the a-cyano
pyrethroids with respect to sodium channel kinetics and the
number of pulses needed to obtain maximum use-dependent
modiﬁcation (fig. 11).
the  xxxg2018xxx  channel is expressed exclusively in the peripheral
nervous system, most notably in the sensory neurons, the
trigeminal nerve and ganglia and is thought to mediate pain
reception (goldin et al., 2000). it is possible that the  xxxg2018xxx  channel
may mediate paresthesia that has been reported following
pyrethroid contact with skin. while it is likely that paresthesia
occurs following dermal contact to both type i and type ii
pyrethroids, anecdotally it has been reported to occur more
intensely, at lower doses and to last longer for type ii pyrethroids
than for type i pyrethroids. animal models have been developed to
proﬁle the irritation effect of pyrethroids following inhalation
(pauluhn and machemer, 1998) or dermal administration (cagen
et al., 1984; mckillop et al., 1987). data from such animal models
could be compared to more limited results from human studies
(flannigan et al., 1985).

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

fig. 10. comparison of the lowest dose and the highest dose tested of the type i to
the type ii pyrethroids in the fob study.

of the other sodium channel isoforms investigated in unpublished studies by choi and soderlund (soderlund, 2006),  xxxg2028xxx , 1.6
and 1.4 exhibited moderate to low level effects of pyrethroids on
sodium channel kinetics in some but not all of the type i and type ii

fig. 11. number of pre-pulses to obtain maximum use-dependent sodium channel
modiﬁcation.

s27

pyrethroids. these channel isoforms are found in cardiac muscle,
skeletal muscle and in the cns/pns, respectively (goldin et al.,
2000). these data were not analyzed here because the lack of
response prevented quantitative dissimilarity analysis. the other
notable feature of sodium channel data (soderlund, 2006) was that
teﬂuthrin, which is the most potent of the non-cyano pyrethroids
investigated, modiﬁed channel kinetics in all the sodium channel
isoforms suggesting that teﬂuthrin may belong in a class by itself.
the molecular basis for the promiscuous ability of teﬂuthrin to
modify sodium channel activation and inactivation kinetics in all
sodium isoforms is not understood. it may be a reﬂection of a
combination of greater potency and greater bioavailability (i.e.
increased solubility) in this in vitro model.
as reported by choi and soderlund (2006) type i pyrethroids (sbioallethrin, resmethrin, teﬂuthrin, bifenthrin, and permethrin)
required signiﬁcantly fewer number of pre-pulses to obtain
maximum sodium channel modiﬁcation than did the type ii
pyrethroids (deltamethrin, l-cyhalothrin, b-cyﬂuthrin and cypermethrin). paradoxically, fenpropathrin and esfenvalerate, both
type ii pyrethroid, required the least number of pre-pulses needed
to obtain maximum sodium modiﬁcation of all the pyrethroids
investigated. this could be because type ii pyrethroids have
greater difﬁculty reaching the intracellular sodium channel gating
mechanisms through the lipid membrane or once they bind to the
sodium channel, stay in the vicinity of the target for a longer
duration of time.
vais et al. (2000) suggested that the relationship observed
between the percentage of the sodium channels modiﬁed by
deltamethrin (i.e. greater number of pyrethroid molecules binding
to the sodium channel) and the duration of time needed for
deactivation (i.e. tail current decay attributed to pyrethroid
molecules diffusing away from the sodium channel binding site)
creates a positive feedback loop for type ii pyrethroids. thus
binding of type ii pyrethroids near the intracellular sodium
channel gating mechanism causes the sodium channel to remain
open which causes further sodium inﬂux and nerve discharge
resulting in another round of increased accessibility of the
pyrethroid to open channels. initially, an increased number of
action potentials are triggered in neurons and axons which lead to
hyper-excitability and convulsions. tabarean and narahashi
(2001), however, have argued that the long tail currents seen
with type ii pyrethroids do not reﬂect a slower dissociation of the
type ii pyrethroid from its binding site than for type i pyrethroids.
they suggest that there is a slowed return of the activation gate to a
closed status when type ii pyrethroids are bound to the channel.
after prolonged exposure to pyrethroids, nerve conduction
block results because the neurons/axons do not repolarize. nerve
conduction failure leads eventually to paralysis or impairment of
other nerve-mediated processes and death. this is the response
pattern that was described by gammon (1979) in the ambulatory
cockroaches that had been poisoned for differing durations of time
with the type i pyrethroid, allethrin. type ii pyrethroids
(cypermethrin, deltamethrin and fenvalerate), on the other hand,
did not induce repetitive ﬁring either in vitro (cercal sensory and
motor nerves of the cockroach) or in vivo (gammon et al., 1981). as
more becomes known about processes involved in sodium channel
inactivation (goldin, 2003), it may be possible to distinguish
experimentally potential differential action of type i and type ii
pyrethroids on sodium channel kinetics; although there is a clear
consensus in the literature that both type i and type ii pyrethroids
bind to the sodium channel (narahashi, 1992, 2000; trainer et al.,
1997). the molecular basis underpinning the differences in the
binding characteristics between type i and type ii pyrethroids at
the sodium channel binding site(s) remains to be determined.
progress has been made in identifying the putative pyrethroid
binding sites within the insect sodium channel (tan et al., 2005)

s28

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

and in modeling the binding of pyrethroids to the sodium channel
(o’reilly et al., 2006) based upon expected homology of the crystal
structure of the sodium channel to that of the kv 1.2 potassium
channel, which has been described (long et al., 2005a,b). the asubunit of the nav ion channel is comprised of a single polypeptide
chain that consists of four homologous domains (i–iv) each having
six trans-membrane helices (s1–s6). the four domains assemble to
create a central pore lined by s5, s6 and s5–s6 linker loops of
amino acids (p-loops). the voltage sensing element is thought to be
located in the trans-membrane s4 helix which is comprised of
positively charged amino acid located at every third position (yu
and cattrell, 2003). an imf motif, which is postulated to be an
intracellular loop of three amino acids between domains iii and iv,
opens upon membrane depolarization and then rapidly closes
(sodium channel inactivation) leading to repolarization. the imf
motif is comprised of three critical amino acids (imf motif;
isoleucine [il488, phenylalanine [fi489] and methionine [mi490]).
in the model proposed by o’reilly et al. (2006), pyrethroids bind
preferentially to the inner pore region of the sodium channel in the
open conﬁguration, modify the conﬁrmation of the sodium
channel protein, and prolong the open state of the channel. the
relatively greater effect of pyrethroids such as deltamethrin on
sodium channel kinetics after use, compared to resting state, is
taken as evidence to support the existence of preferential binding
to the open state of the channel. however, data obtained using the
rat  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channel isoform (choi and soderlund, 2006)
provide evidence for signiﬁcant modiﬁcation by all 11 pyrethroids
in the closed state (without conditioning pre-pulses) and identify
only four compounds (cyﬂuthrin, l-cyhalothrin, cypermethrin and
deltamethrin) for which use-dependent enhancement of modiﬁcation was signiﬁcant.
o’reilly et al. (2006) postulated that the presence of the acyano moiety in type ii pyrethroids is critical in causing the
sustained delay of sodium channel inactivation noted for type ii
pyrethroids compared to type i pyrethroids. they suggested that
the a-cyano pyrethroids have the potential to form a hydrogen
bonding network between the alpha carbon proton, the ester
carbonyl group and the side chain hydroxyl group of amino acid
residue t 929i (isoleucine). they also postulate ‘‘the positioning
of the a-proton is also key for the interaction of the 3pyenoxybenzyl alcohol pyrethroids, in that it provides an
additional contact point between the pyrethroid and the sodium
channel only in the presence of an aromatic ring substitution in
the meta position. it is further proposed that it is this additional
interaction that distinguishes type i and type ii pyrethroids’’
(o’reilly et al., 2006).
site directed mutagenesis studies have identiﬁed speciﬁc gene
mutations that result in the substitution of critical amino acids in
the houseﬂy voltage-gated sodium channel that are responsible for
the development of knockdown resistance ( xxxg1274xxx  mutations) to
pyrethroids (soderlund and knipple, 2003). the development of
cross-resistance between pyrethroids and ddt has been described
in insects (soderlund and knipple, 1999), which according to
o’reilly et al. (2006) is accounted for by the homology between the
ring structure of ddt and the acidic moiety of the pyrethroids.
o’reilly et al. (2006) also suggest that their model of the pyrethroid
binding pocket accounts for the stereo-speciﬁc activity of 1r-cisisomers in comparison to the lack of activity of 1-r-trans-isomers.
furthermore, insect selectivity may be explained in part by the lack
of conservation of key amino acids near the proposed binding
pocket of the sodium channel of arthropods compared to
mammals. other factors that contribute to selectivity include a
differential opportunity for metabolism, relative doses achieve due
to differences in body mass, and an inverse relationship between
temperature and insecticidal efﬁcacy noted in insects (gammon,
1979; song and narahashi, 1996).

4.3. effects on calcium inﬂux and glutamate release
in the dissimilarity analysis of data collected from synaptosomes, a moderately tight cluster of six pyrethroids (b-cyﬂuthrin,
l-cyhalothrin, cypermethrin, permethrin, deltamethrin, and
esfenvalerate) had both strong calcium inﬂux and glutamate
releasing properties as indicated by smaller ec50 values. a second
cluster containing teﬂuthrin, s-bioallethrin, and fenpropathrin had
potent glutamate releasing characteristics, but with no detectable
calcium inﬂux response. two outliers, bifenthrin and cismethrin,
gave a modest calcium inﬂux response, but only at very large
pyrethroid concentrations. in addition, cismethrin, unlike all other
pyrethroids, yielded no glutamate release response in the
concentration range tested. bifenthrin had a weak glutamate
response.
the calcium inﬂux and glutamate release data distinguished the
a-cyano pyrethroids from the non-cyano pyrethroids indicating
that the a-cyano pyrethroids elicit a unique functional proﬁle at rat
presynaptic nerve terminals compared to the non-cyano pyrethroids. grouping the pyrethroid based upon the mds map showed
a remarkable degree of concordance with groupings based upon
factor analysis of the fob data. the pyrethroids differentiated into
at least two and possibly three groups based upon the type i (tsyndrome) and type ii (cs syndrome) classiﬁcation system. mds
mapping indicated that type i (t-syndrome) pyrethroids in general
were less potent (larger ec50s) than the type ii pyrethroids with
respect to ca2+ inﬂux and glutamate release. permethrin and
fenpropathrin were exceptions because permethrin clustered with
the type ii pyrethroids and the fenpropathrin clustered with the
type i pyrethroids.
fig. 12 illustrates how modulation of calcium ion ﬂux across
the membrane of the synaptosome could result in neurotransmitter release at the synaptic junction due to a direct agonistic
effect of deltamethrin on selective calcium ion channels.
symington et al. (2007b) showed that deltamethrin appears to
act as selective voltage-sensitive calcium channel agonist by
directly opening  xxxg303xxx  channels. increased local calcium levels
trigger neurotransmitter release from the synaptic bouton,
resulting in a neuroexcitatory effect if the neuron is in an
excitatory circuit. clark and symington (2007, 2008) showed that
the deltamethrin-induced calcium inﬂux and neurotransmitter
release was virtually eliminated by v-conotoxin gvia, a known
blocker of the calcium channel  xxxg303xxx  (catterall et al., 2005).
previous electrophysiological examination of wild-type  xxxg303xxx  in
xenopus oocytes showed that deltamethrin targeted the  xxxg303xxx 
channel and caused a reduction of peak current, a response that is
inconsistent with deltamethrin-enhanced neurotransmitter
release found in synaptosomes (symington and clark, 2005)
and in vivo (aldridge et al., 1978; hossain et al., 2004). this
paradox could possibly be explained by post-translational
modiﬁcations of cav 2.2. symington et al. (2007a) have shown
that phosphorylation of a key regulatory threonine (t422) in the
di–dii region of cav 2.2 alters the effect of deltamethrin on this
channel, resulting in an increase of the overall peak current. these
studies suggest that regulatory proteins may also be involved in
the mechanism of action of deltamethrin, and possibly other
pyrethroids, and may contribute to the observed differences
between results obtained from in vivo approaches and isolated,
but intact synaptosomal preparations, versus non-neuronal
heterologous expression systems.
cismethrin, on the other hand, is proposed to trigger sodium
inﬂux by binding agonistically to sodium channels. intra-terminal
sodium is exchanged for external calcium, which is detected as
non-calcium channel-dependent calcium inﬂux. calcium inﬂux
triggered by cismethrin failed to evoke strong neurotransmitter
release because it is not localized in an active release zones.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

s29

fig. 12. proposed effect of type i and type ii pyrethroids on calcium ﬂux based on an indirect effect on the sodium channel (type i) or direct effect on the calcium channel
(type ii).

symington et al. (2007b) showed that v-conotoxin gvia had no
effect on cismethrin-induced calcium inﬂux. tetrodotoxin, a
sodium channel antagonist, blocked calcium inﬂux and the
neurotransmitter release induced by cismethrin, but had no effect
on deltamethrin. collectively these studies show that calcium
channels are molecular targets of the pyrethroids and that the acyano pyrethroids may have a mechanism of action that is distinct
from the non-cyano pyrethroids.

throids is mediated through effects on voltage-gated chloride
channels. overall, type i pyrethroids appear to be less effective in
modulating voltage-gated chloride channels, just as overall they
appear less effective in modulating voltage-gated sodium channels. the molecular targets of type ii pyrethroids on the chloride
channels remain to be elucidated.

4.4. effects on the voltage-gated chloride channels

neurophysiological, structural and functional studies on
pyrethroids extending over a period of 25 years have identiﬁed
clear biological targets including voltage-gated sodium, calcium,
chloride channels and perhaps the  xxxg1232xxx  as well as
the ligand-mediated chloride channel ionophore. any or all of
these potential sites of action could constitute a biological basis for
a common mechanism of action for the pyrethroids. in spite of a
commonality of action of ‘‘pyrethroids’’, both natural and
synthetic, the predominating conclusion is that type i, non-cyano
pyrethroids, have quantitatively and qualitatively different effects
than the type ii, a-cyano pyrethroids at all levels of organization,
including at the level of the ion channel (sodium, calcium,
chloride), at macroscopic levels of organization within electrically
conductive tissue (nerve-muscle, spinal cord, hippocampus and
cortical neurons) and ﬁnally at the level of the whole animal where
toxicologically signiﬁcant responses and no observed adverse
effect levels can be characterized.
the strength of the results presented herein is derived from the
fact that a non-biased statistical procedure was applied to data
from four independent studies conducted at different levels of
organization in the nervous system. the principal components/
factor and dissimilarity analyses provide evidence for separate
mechanisms of toxicity for the non-cyano pyrethroids (sbioallethrin, cismethrin, resmethrin, bifenthrin and permethrin),
compared to the a-cyano pyrethroids, deltamethrin, l-cyhalothrin, cyﬂuthrin and cypermethrin. esfenvalerate and fenpropathrin displayed a mixed-type response pattern, suggesting that
perhaps they should be grouped with both the a-cyano and the
non-cyano and pyrethroids. the fact that these groups are based
upon overt signs of poisoning in an acute neurotoxicity study and
the results from in vitro studies on sodium, calcium and chloride
channels suggests that a fundamental difference exists between
the effects of a-cyano compared to the effects of non-cyano
pyrethroids at both a molecular and a functional level. this
difference appears to be preserved in both in vitro and in vivo

forshaw and ray (1990) showed that deltamethrin, a type ii
pyrethroid, but not cismethrin, a type i pyrethroid, increased
membrane resistance in muscle ﬁbers and non-myelinated nerves
both in vitro and in vivo. these ﬁndings suggest that type ii
pyrethroids may directly block voltage-dependent chloride
channels. forshaw, lester and ray (1993), using an inside-out
patch clamp technique in mouse neuroblastoma cells, showed
that 2 mm deltamethrin signiﬁcantly reduced the chloride
channel open probability by approximately 50%. ray et al.
(1997) investigated the relationship between the actual or free
concentration of deltamethrin in solution, its nominal concentration and the reduction in open channel probability. the results
illustrate the problem of working with highly lipophilic substances. while nominal concentrations as low as 1012 m affected
open channel probability; consistently reliable, statistically
signiﬁcant reductions were only observed in concentrations
ranges from 106 to 104 m and even in those ranges, the response
was not monotonic.
cypermethin, another type ii pyrethroid also signiﬁcantly
reduced open channel probability at a concentration of
5  106 m, whereas cismethrin, a type i pyrethroid produced a
modest reduction in open channel probability that was insufﬁcient to counter the increase in the absolute open channel
probability caused by the solvent alone. burr and ray (2004),
whose data was included in this report, extended the analysis to a
total of 11 type i and type ii pyrethroids. after taking into account
the active versus the inactive form of l-cyhalothrin, the only type
i that reduced open channel probability was the borderline
signiﬁcant reduction noted for bioallethrin and esfenvalerate, a
type ii pyrethroid failed to affect open channel probability in this
study.
taken together, these data suggest that at least a part of the
toxicity observed following the administration of type ii pyre-

5. conclusions

s30

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 

models. the limitations of multivariate analysis, such as have been
used in this paper, are that they are hypothesis generating rather
than hypothesis testing because they rely on correlations between
observations.
in the long term, understanding the molecular basis for these
differences is approachable through the use of tools such as patch
clamp techniques to infer the nature of pyrethroid binding to
molecular target within the ion channel, site-speciﬁc mutagenesis
to modify speciﬁc amino acids in the ‘‘binding pocket’’ of the ion
channel and determine the effect on binding efﬁcacy and the use
of crystallography to model low energy state binding to these sites
within ion channels. however, even these somewhat static
methods fail to adequately characterize the kinetics of delivery
of the pyrethroid to the target site, the dynamic/kinetic
ﬂuctuation of binding to the molecular target(s), the response
dynamics in animal models and the extrapolated of these results
to humans.
conﬂict of interest
charles breckenridge is employed by syngenta, a basic
manufacturer of l-cyhalothrin, cypermethrin, permethrin, teﬂuthrin. these chemicals were evaluated in this study. all work on
this paper by sielken and associates with the pyrethroid
working group, wilmington, de, usa. myra weiner is a former
employee of fmc corporation, a pyrethroid manufacturer and
member of the pyrethroid working group during the conduct of
the study. larry sheets is employed by bayer cropscience, a
company that manufactures and sells some of the pyrethroids
that were evaluated in this study. dana sargent is employed by
bayer cropscience, a company that is a pyrethroid manufacturer
and member of the pyrethroid working group. john clark
received funding for research from the pyrethroid working
group and carried out at the university of massachusetts,
amherst.

appendix a. supplementary data
supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2009.09.002.
references
aldridge wn, clothier b, froshaw p, johnson mk, parker vh, price rj, et al. the effect of
ddt and the pyrethroids cismethrin and decamethrin on the acetyl choline and
cyclic nucleotide content of rat brain. biochem pharmacol 1978;27(12):1703–6.
burr sa, ray de. structure-activity and interaction effects of 14 different pyrethroids on
voltage-gated chloride ion channels. toxicol sci 2004;77:341–6.
cagen sz, malley la, parker cm, gardniner th, van gelder ga, jud va. pyrethroidmediated skin sensory stimulation characterized by a new behavioral paradigm.
toxicol appl pharmacol 1984;76:270–9.
casida je, gammon dw, glickman ah, lawrence lj. mechanism of selective action of
pyrethroid insecticides. annu rev pharmacol toxicol 1983;23:413–38.
catterall wa, perez-reyes e, snutch tp, striessnig j. international union of pharmacology. xlviii. nomenclature and structure-function relationships of voltage gated
calcium channels. pharmacol rev 2005;57:411–25.
choi j-s, soderlund dm. structure-activity relationships for the action of 11 pyrethroid
insecticides on rat  xxxg2018xxx  sodium channels expressed in xenopus oocytes. toxicol
appl pharmacol 2006;211:233–44.
clark jm, symington sb. pyrethroid action on calcium channels: neurotoxicological
implications. invert neurosci 2007;7:3–16.
clark jm, symington sb. neurotoxic implications of the agonistic action of cs-syndrome pyrethroids on the n-type  xxxg303xxx  calcium channel. pest manag sci
2008;64:628–38.
cox tf, cox maa. multidimensional scaling. london: chapman and hill; 1994.
flannigan sa, tucker sb, key mm, ross ce, fairchild ej ii, grimes ba, et al. synthetic
pyrethroid insecticides: a dermatological evaluation. brit j ind med 1985;42:
363–72.
forshaw pj, lester t, ray de. inhibition of a neuronal voltage-dependent chloride
channel by the type ii pyrethroid, deltamethrin. neuropharmacology 1993;32(2):
105–11.

forshaw pj, ray de. a novel action of deltamethrin on membrane resistance in
mammalian skeletal muscle and non-myelinated nerve ﬁbers. neuropharmacology 1990;29:75–81.
gammon dw. an analysis of the temperature-dependence of the toxicity of allethrin to
the cockroach. in: narahashi t, editor. neurtoxicology of insecticides and pheromones. new york: plenum press; 197997–117.
gammon dw. correlations between in vitro and in vivo mechanisms of pyrethroid
insecticide action. fundam appl toxicol 1985;5:9–23.
gammon dw, brown ma, casida je. two classes of pyrethroid action in the cockroach.
pestic biochem physiol 1981;15:181–91.
goldin a. diversity of mammalian voltage-gated sodium channels. ann ny acad sci
1999;88:38–50.
goldin a. mechanism of sodium channel inactivation. curr opin neurobiol
2003;13:284–90.
goldin a, barchi rl, caldwell jh, hofmann f, howe jr, hunter jc, et al. nomenclature of
voltage-gated sodium channels. neuron 2000;28:365–8.
hildebrand me, mcrory je, snutch tp, stea a. mammalian voltage-gated calcium
channels are potently blocked by the pyrethroid insecticide allethrin. j pharmacol
exp ther 2004;308(3):805.
hossain mm, suzuki t, sato i, takewaki t, suzuki k, kobayashi h. the modulatory effect
of pyrethroids on acetylcholine release in the hippocampus of freely moving rats.
neurotoxicology 2004;25(5):825–31.
lawrence lj, casida je. pyrethroid toxicology. mouse intracerebral structure-toxicity
relationship. pestic biochem physiol 1982;18:9–14.
long sb, campbell eb, mackinnon r. crystal structure of a mammalian voltagedependent shaker family k+ channel. science 2005a;309:897–903.
long sb, campbell eb, mackinnon r. voltage sensor of  xxxg1231xxx : structural basis of
electromechanical coupling. science 2005b;309:903–8.
mckillop cm, brock jac, oliver gja, rhodes c. a quantitative assessment of pyrethroid-induced paresthesia in the guinea-pig ﬂank model. toxicol lett
1987;36:1–7.
narahashi t. nerve membrane na+ channels as targets of insecticides. trends pharmacol sci 1992;13:236–41.
narahashi t. neuroreceptors and ion channels as the basis for drug action: past, present
and future. j pharm exp ther 2000;294(1):1–26.
o’reilly ao, khambay bps, williamson ms, field lm, wallace ba, davies tge. modelling insecticide binding sites at the voltage gated sodium channel. biochem j
2006;396:255–63.
pauluhn j, machemer lh. assessment of pyrethroid-induced paraethesias: comparison
of animal model and human data. toxicol lett 1998;96–97:361–8.
ray de. pyrethroid insecticides: mechanisms of toxicity, systemic poisoning syndrome,
paresthesia and therapy. 2nd ed. in: kreiger r, editor. handbook of pesticide
toxicology, vol. 2. san diego, ca: academic press; 2001. p. 1289–303.
ray de, sutharasan s, forshaw pj. action of pyrethroid insecticides on voltagegated chloride channels in neuroblastoma cells. neurotoxicology 1997;18(3):
755–60.
sas institute inc.. sas/stat1 9.1 user’s guide. cary, nc: sas institute inc.; 2004.
soderlund dm. action of on mammalian sodium channel isoforms expressed in
xenopus oocytes. in: pyrethroid working group technical report. 2006 pwgtox-2006-03.
soderlund dm, clark jm, sheets lp, mullin ls, piccirillo vj, sargent d, et al. mechanisms
of pyrethroid neurotoxicity: implications for cumulative risk. toxicology
2002;171:3–59.
soderlund dm, knipple dc. knockdown resistance to ddt and pyrethroids in the house
ﬂy (diptera: muscidae): from genetic trait to molecular mechanism. ann entomol
soc am 1999;92:909–15.
soderlund dm, knipple dc. the molecular biology of knockdown resistance to pyrethroid insecticides. insect biochem mol biol 2003;33:53–577.
song jh, narahashi t. modulation of sodium channels of rat cerebellar purkinje
neurons by the pyrethroid tetramethrin. j pharmacol exp ther 1996;277:
445–53.
symington, s. the action of t- and cs-syndrome pyrethroids on voltage-sensitive
calcium channels in rat brain. ph.d. dissertation, 2005. university of massachusetts, amherst, ma.
symington sb, clark jm. action of deltamethrin on n-type ( xxxg303xxx ) voltage sensitive
calcium channels in rat brain. pestic biochem physiol 2005;82(1):1–15.
symington sb, frisbie rk, kim hj, clark jm. mutation of threonine 422 to glutamatic
acid mimics the phosphorylation state and alters the action of deltamethrin on
 xxxg303xxx . pestic biochem physiol 2007a;88:312–20.
symington sb, frisbie rk, lu kd, clark jm. action of cismethrin and deltramethrin on
functional attributes of isolated presynaptic nerve terminals from rat brain. pestic
biochem physiol 2007b;87:172–81.
symington sb, frisbie rk, clark jm. characterization of 11 commercial pyrethroids on
the functional attributes of rat brain synaptosomes. pestic biochem physiol
2008;92:61–9.
tabarean iv, narahashi t. kinetics of modulation of tetrodotoxin-sensitive and tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channels by tetramethrin and deltamethrin. j pharmacol
exp ther 2001;299:988–97.
tan j, liu z, wang r, huang zy, chen ac, gurevitz m, et al. identiﬁcation of amino acid
residues in the insect sodium channel critical for pyrethroid binding. mol pharmacol 2005;67:513–22.
trainer vl, mcpee jc, boutelet-bochan j, baker c, scheuer t, babin d, et al. high afﬁnity
binding of pyrethroids to the  xxxg220xxx  of brain sodium channel. mol pharmacol
1997;51:651–7.
vais h, williamson ms, goodson sj, devonshire al, warmke jw, usherwood pnr, et al.
activation of drosophila sodium channels promotes modiﬁcation by deltamethrin.

c.b. breckenridge et al. / neurotoxicology 30s (2009) s17– xxxg1111xxx 
reduction in afﬁnity caused by knock-down resistant mutations. j gen physiol
2000;115:305–18.
verschoyle rd, aldridge wn. structure–activity relationships of some pyrethroids in
rats. arch toxicol 1980;45:325–9.
vijverberg hpm, de weille je. the interaction of pyrethroids with voltage-dependent
na channels. neurotoxicology 1985;6:23–34.
weiner, ml, nemec, m, sheets, l, sargent, d and breckenridge, c. comparative functional observational battery study of twelve commercial pyrethroid insecticides in

 xxxg1111xxx 

rats following acute oral exposure. neurotoxicology; 2009, doi:10.1016/j.neuro.
2009.08.014.
wright cdp, forshaw pj, ray de. classiﬁcation of the actions of ten pyrethroid
insecticides in the rat using the trigeminal reﬂex and skeletal muscle as the test
system. pestic biochem physiol 1988;30:79–86.
yu fh, cattrell wa. overview of the voltage-gated sodium channel family. genome biol
2003;4:207.

