mechanism of right precordial st-segment elevation in structural
heart disease: excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch
mark g. hoogendijk, md,* mark potse, phd,*‡¶§ andré c. linnenbank, phd,*§ arie o. verkerk, phd,*
hester m. den ruijter, phd,* shirley c. m. van amersfoorth, msc,* eva c. klaver, mb,*
leander beekman, bsc,* connie r. bezzina, phd,* pieter g. postema, md,* hanno l. tan, md, phd,*
annette g. reimer, md, phd,储 allard c. van der wal, md, phd,† arend d. j. ten harkel, md, phd,**††
michiel dalinghaus, md, phd,** alain vinet, phd,‡¶ arthur a. m. wilde, md, phd,*
jacques m. t. de bakker, phd,*§ ruben coronel, md, phd*
from the *heart failure research center and †department of cardiovascular pathology, academic medical center,
university of amsterdam, amsterdam, the netherlands, ‡research center, sacré-coeur hospital and ¶institute of biomedical
engineering, université de montréal, montreal, quebec, canada, §interuniversity cardiology institute of the netherlands,
utrecht, the netherlands, 储children’s heart center, university medical center st. radboud, nijmegen, the netherlands,
**department of pediatric cardiology, thoraxcenter and sophia children’s hospital, erasmus medical center, rotterdam,
the netherlands, and ††department of pediatric cardiology, leiden university medical center, leiden, the netherlands.
background the brugada sign has been associated with mutations
in  xxxg2028xxx  and with right ventricular structural abnormalities. their role in
the brugada sign and the associated ventricular arrhythmias is unknown.
objective the purpose of this study was to delineate the role of
structural abnormalities and sodium channel dysfunction in the
brugada sign.
methods activation and repolarization characteristics of the explanted heart of a patient with a loss-of-function mutation in  xxxg2028xxx 
(g752r) and dilated cardiomyopathy were determined after induction
of right-sided st-segment elevation by  xxxd96xxx . in addition, right ventricular structural discontinuities and sodium channel dysfunction were
simulated in a computer model encompassing the heart and thorax.
results in the explanted heart, disappearance of local activation in unipolar electrograms at the basal right ventricular epicardium was followed by monophasic st-segment elevation. the local
origin of this phenomenon was confirmed by coaxial electrograms.
neither early repolarization nor late activation correlated with
st-segment elevation. at sites of local st-segment elevation, the
subepicardium was interspersed with adipose tissue and contained
more fibrous tissue than either the left ventricle or control hearts.
in computer simulations entailing right ventricular structural dis-

continuities, reduction of sodium channel conductance or size of
the gaps between introduced barriers resulted in subepicardial
excitation failure or delayed activation by current-to-load mismatch and in the brugada sign on the ecg.
conclusion right ventricular excitation failure and activation delay by current-to-load mismatch in the subepicardium
can cause the brugada sign. therefore, current-to-load mismatch may underlie the ventricular arrhythmias in patients
with the brugada sign.
keywords arrhythmia; electrocardiography; excitation; structure; st-segment elevation
abbreviations apd90 ⫽ action potential duration at 90% of
repolarization; arvc ⫽ arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy;
dsc2 ⫽ desmocollin-2;
dsg2 ⫽ desmoglein-2;
dsp ⫽  xxxg661xxx ; dv/dtmax ⫽ maximal action potential upstroke velocity; gna ⫽ sodium channel conductivity; ina ⫽
sodium current; jup ⫽ junction-plakoglobin; lv ⫽ left ventricle;
pkp2 ⫽ plakophilin-2; rv ⫽ right ventricle
(heart rhythm 2010;7:238 –248) © 2010 heart rhythm society. all
rights reserved.

introduction
the first two authors contributed equally to this work. this study was
supported by the netherlands heart foundation grant 2005t024 to dr.
bezzina, grant 2003t302 to dr. wilde, grant 2005b092 to drs. de bakker
and linnenbank, and grant 2008b062 to dr. coronel; the interuniversity
cardiology institute of the netherlands; the royal netherlands academy
of arts and sciences to dr. tan; the netherlands organisation for scientific
research grant zonmw-vici 918.86.616 to dr. tan; and the réseau
québécois de calcul de haute performance (rqchp). address reprint
requests and correspondence: dr. mark g. hoogendijk, heart failure
research center, academic medical center, meibergdreef 9, 1105 az,
amsterdam, the netherlands. e-mail address: m.g.hoogendijk@amc.
uva.nl. (received june 2, 2009; accepted october 5, 2009.)

the brugada sign of right precordial st-segment elevation
followed by a negative t-wave is associated with ventricular tachyarrhythmias and sudden cardiac death.1 in the
brugada syndrome, the sign occurs in the absence of gross
structural abnormalities.1 however, the brugada sign is not
limited to structurally normal hearts. right ventricular (rv)
structural abnormalities have been demonstrated in a significant portion of patients with the brugada sign.2–5 in addition, sodium channel blockers can provoke the brugada sign
in patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (arvc)6 and chagas disease,7 conditions charac-

1547-5271/$ -see front matter © 2010 heart rhythm society. all rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2009.10.007

hoogendijk et al

st-segment elevation in structural heart disease

terized by severe structural derangements. the role of structural derangements in the mechanism of the brugada sign
and the associated arrhythmias is unknown.
to date, two mechanisms of st-segment elevation have
been proposed for the brugada sign: (1) early repolarization8 and (2) late activation2 in the rv wall. sodium channel function is important in both mechanisms because sodium channel blockers can provoke the brugada sign,9 and
loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the cardiac
sodium channel ( xxxg2028xxx ) can be identified in approximately
20% of patients with brugada syndrome.1 neither hypothesis has been confirmed in patients.10
structural abnormalities cause geometric variation in
myocardial organization. sites where structural abnormalities lead to sudden expansion of myocardium are
susceptible to conduction block by current-to-load mismatch, especially when the available sodium current (ina)
is reduced.11–14 if excitation fails at these sites, the potential gradient between the unexcited myocardium and
the myocardium proximal to the site of conduction block
will cause st-segment elevation. therefore, we hypothesized that rv excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch can cause the brugada sign in patients with structural abnormalities, especially when ina is reduced by
loss-of-function mutations in  xxxg2028xxx  or sodium channel
blockade. to test this hypothesis, we determined the
activation and repolarization characteristics of the explanted heart of a patient with a loss-of-function mutation
in  xxxg2028xxx  and structural discontinuities in the setting of
dilated cardiomyopathy, before and after induction of
st-segment elevation by sodium channel blockade. furthermore, we simulated the effect of ina reduction and
structural discontinuities on ecg in a computer model
encompassing the heart and thorax.

methods
the study was performed in accordance with the declaration of helsinki. written informed consent was obtained
from the patient’s guardians. cardiac transplantation was
performed in may 2007 at the erasmus medical center,
rotterdam, the netherlands. the explanted heart was submerged in ice-cold modified tyrode’s solution2 and transported (within 1 hour) to the laboratory of experimental
cardiology (academic medical center, amsterdam, the
netherlands).

genetic study
genomic dna was extracted from lymphocytes using standard protocols. the entire coding regions of  xxxg2028xxx  and
lmna were screened for mutations by denaturing highperformance liquid chromatography followed by sequencing of amplicons displaying an aberrant elution profile.
screening of genes associated with arvc [plakophilin-2
(pkp2), junction-plakoglobin (jup), desmoglein-2 (dsg2), desmocollin-2 (dsc2),  xxxg661xxx  (dsp)] was performed by
direct sequencing of the entire coding region.

239

experimental setup
the right and left coronary arteries were cannulated, and the
heart was connected to a perfusion setup. the heart was
perfused with a mixture of washed erythrocytes (800 ml)
and modified tyrode’s solution.2 the potassium concentration was 4.0 mmol/l. coronary flow was set to 300 ml/min.
the heart was suspended in a cylindrical container (diameter 20 cm, height 14 cm) filled with perfusion fluid. myocardial temperature was 37.0°–37.5°c throughout the experiment. the ph of the oxygenated perfusate was 7.34.

electrophysiologic studies
mapping experiment
seven electrode strips (14 electrodes per strip in two
rows, interelectrode distance 1.5 cm, distance between
strips ⬇2 cm) were equally distributed over and attached
to the ventricular epicardium. an inflatable balloon (64
electrodes, interelectrode distance ⬇1.5 cm) was inserted
through the mitral orifice into the left ventricle (lv), and
an inflatable balloon (32 electrodes, interelectrode distance ⬇1.5 cm) was inserted through the tricuspid orifice
into the rv. three electrodes at the side of the container
were used to record a pseudo-ecg. one electrode was
positioned at the bottom below the apex of the heart, one
faced the lateral lv, and one faced the lateral rv. a
reference electrode was placed at the bottom of the container. electrode positions were documented with digital
photography.
the heart was stimulated from the basal rv septum at
twice diastolic threshold (steady-state pacing at cycle length
2,000 –1,500 –1,000 – 800 ms). the stimulation protocol
was repeated after addition of  xxxd96xxx  2.4 ␮mol/l (solvay
pharmaceuticals gmbh, hannover, germany), a rate-dependent blocker of the cardiac sodium channel.15
data acquisition and analysis
simultaneous recordings (sampling rate 2 khz) were made
from all electrodes during selected episodes. signals were
analyzed using a custom-made analysis program16 based on
matlab r2006b (the mathworks, inc., natick, ma,
usa). the instant of maximal negative dv/dt in the qrs
complex and the instant of maximal positive dv/dt in the t
wave of the unipolar electrogram were used as local activation and repolarization time, repectively.17 the local contribution to unipolar electrograms was determined by calculation of coaxial electrogram by subtracting the mean of
values of neighboring electrodes from a central electrogram
at each sample.

cellular electrophysiology
after the mapping procedure, lv myocytes were isolated
as previously described.18 ina and action potentials were
recorded using an axopatch 200b amplifier (molecular
devices corp., sunnyvale, ca, usa). voltage control,
data acquisition, and analysis were accomplished using
custom software. signals for ina were low-pass filtered
with a cutoff frequency of 5 khz and digitized at 20 khz.

240
action potentials were filtered and digitized  xxxd1891xxx  and 40
khz, respectively. cell capacitance and series resistance
were compensated for by at least 80%. potentials were
compensated for the calculated liquid junction potential.
ina was recorded at room temperature (20°c) in the
ruptured whole-cell configuration of the patch-clamp technique. the bath solution contained the following (in mmol/
l): 7.0 nacl, 133 cscl, 1.8 cacl2, 1.2 mgcl2, 11.0 glucose,
5.0 hepes, and 0.005 nifedipine; ph 7.4 (csoh). patch
pipettes (1.5–2.0 m⍀) were filled with the following (in
mmol/l): 3.0 nacl, 133 cscl, 2.0 mgcl2, 2.0 na2atp, 2.0
teacl, 10 egta, and 5.0 hepes; ph 7.3 (csoh). ina
amplitude and (in)activation properties were measured using a double-pulse protocol (see figure 2a). voltage dependence of (in)activation was determined by fitting a boltzmann function to the individual curves. current density was
calculated by dividing whole-cell current amplitude by the
cell capacitance.
action potentials were recorded at 36°c ⫾ 0.2°c with
the  xxxd164xxx  perforated patch-clamp technique.
action potentials were elicited at 1 hz by 3-ms, 1.5⫻
threshold current pulses through the patch pipette. the
bath solution contained the following (in mmol/l): 140
nacl, 5.4 kcl, 1.8 cacl2, 1 mgcl2, 5.5 glucose, and 5
hepes; ph 7.4 (naoh). the pipette solution contained
the following (in mmol/l): 125 k-gluc, 20 kcl, 5 nacl,
0.22  xxxd164xxx , and 10 hepes; ph 7.2 (koh). we
analyzed resting membrane potential, action potential
duration at 90% repolarization (apd90), and maximal
action potential upstroke velocity (dv/dtmax), a measure
of ina availability. values from 10 consecutive action
potentials were averaged.

histology
after the electrophysiologic studies, the remainder of the
heart was fixed in 4% buffered formalin. transmural tissue
samples from the rv outflow tract, basal rv free wall, and
basal lv free wall were routinely processed and embedded
in paraffin. sections 7-␮m thick were stained with picrosirius red f3a for visualization of collagens in fibrous
tissue. the content of adipose and fibrous tissue in the
subepicardial rim of myocardium (outer 1 mm) was quantified by computerized morphometry on 10⫻ objective
fields of each section (mean 11.4 fields per section). red
(fibrous tissue) and white (adipose tissue) areas were expressed as a percentage of the total area using image-pro 6.2
(media cybernetics, inc., bethesda, md, usa). the epicardial fat and large areas of perivascular adipose tissue
were excluded from measurements. transmural sections of
six structurally normal hearts sampled from the same sites
and obtained at autopsy from patients without a history of
cardiac disease served as control samples.

computer simulations
propagating action potentials were simulated with a wholeheart reaction-diffusion model containing 90 million nodes,
each represented by a membrane model of the human ven-

heart rhythm, vol 7, no 2, february 2010
tricular myocyte.19 transmural fiber rotation was represented in the model. membrane ionic currents were computed with a human membrane model that included the
differential characteristics of subendocardial, midmyocardial, and subepicardial myocytes.20 the ecg was computed
using a bidomain model of the human heart and torso,
including lungs and intracavitary blood volumes. structural
discontinuities were simulated by the introduction of barriers (thickness 0.4 mm) in the outer 50% of the rv wall. in
these barriers, no intercellular coupling was present, but the
interstitium was unaffected. the barriers contained gaps of
0.2 mm width in which intercellular coupling was present.
intercellular coupling in the gaps was reduced in steps from
100% to 8% of normal to simulate smaller gaps. sodium
channel conductivity (gna) was reduced in steps from 100%
to 20% of normal in the entire heart. single cardiac cycles
were simulated in 12 hours on 128 processors of an sgi
altix 4700 supercomputer.

statistical analysis
values are given as mean ⫾ sd. unpaired, two-tailed,
student’s t-tests were used for statistical comparison of
normally distributed data. p ⬍.05 was considered significant.

results
patient data
the female patient (age 13 years) presented for medical
attention after experiencing syncope during exercise in
2004. she had a low exercise tolerance and reported two
episodes of syncope over the last year, one of which
occurred at rest. her ecg showed atrial flutter with a
flutter rate of 258/min and ventricular rate of 43/min, left
axis with qrs duration of 150 ms, poor r-wave progression in the precordial leads, and negative t waves in
leads i, avl and v2–v6 (figure 1). echocardiography
revealed lv fractional shortening was reduced (21%) and
lv end-diastolic diameter was increased (53 mm, ⬎95th
percentile). no rv abnormalities were reported. a dualchamber pacemaker was implanted. two weeks after
discharge, the patient was readmitted due to fatigue, loss
of ventricular capture of the pacemaker, and pericardial
effusion. pericardiocentesis was performed, and the ventricular lead was repositioned. over the next year, the
patient developed episodes of exercise intolerance during
paroxysms of atrial flutter. a trial radiofrequency ablation to terminate the atrial flutter was performed. however, the symptoms progressed, and cardiac transplantation was conducted 2.5 years after initial presentation for
end-stage heart failure in dilated cardiomyopathy. no
sodium channel provocation test was performed, no spontaneous brugada sign was observed, and the patient was
not diagnosed with the brugada syndrome. the patient
did not receive antiarrhythmic drugs prior to transplantation.

hoogendijk et al

st-segment elevation in structural heart disease

figure 1

241

ecg recorded at initial presentation in 2004.

family history and genetic data
the patient had a heterozygous mutation in  xxxg2028xxx 
(c.2254g⬎a; numbering according to nm_198056.2)
with substitution of glycine by arginine at position 752
(p.gly752arg) located in the second transmembrane segment of channel domain ii. this mutation previously has
been shown to reduce cardiac sodium channel function and

was associated with the brugada syndrome in a french
family.21 no mutation was found in lmna or in the arvc–
associated genes pkp2, jup, dsg2, dsc2, and dsp. the
patient’s mother and grandmother also carried the g752r
mutation in  xxxg2028xxx . the family history revealed that a greatuncle and a great-aunt (brother and sister of the grandfather on
the mother’s side of the family) had died suddenly at the age of

figure 2 sodium channel characteristics and action potential upstrokes of isolated left ventricular myocytes. typical whole cell-current recordings (a) and
corresponding current–voltage relations (mean ⫾ sem) (b) show a normal voltage dependency of the sodium current. c: typical action potential upstrokes
and dv/dt show significantly reduced upstroke velocities compared to myocytes of a previously reported control patient. insets illustrate the voltage and
stimulus protocols.

242

heart rhythm, vol 7, no 2, february 2010

35 years and ⬃45 years, respectively. the mother’s ecg did
not show any abnormalities, but the brugada sign was induced
by  xxxd2113xxx .

cellular electrophysiologic studies
figure 2a shows typical examples of ina in an isolated
ventricular myocyte. v1/2 of activation and inactivation was
⫺40.0 ⫾ 4.4 mv and ⫺85.2 ⫾ 8.3 mv, respectively (n ⫽
6, figure 2b). figure 2c shows representative action potential upstrokes. the dv/dtmax is compared to that of single
lv myocytes from a patient with a heterozygous mutation
(g1935s) in  xxxg2028xxx  with unaltered sodium channel characteristics except for enhanced slow inactivation as previously reported.2 the average dv/dtmax in g752r ventricular
myocytes was 165 ⫾ 101 v/s versus 337 ⫾ 74 v/s of those
in g1935s ventricular myocytes (n ⫽ 3 and n ⫽ 7, respectively, p ⬍.05). resting membrane potential was ⫺79.0 ⫾
6.3 mv, and apd90 was 502 ⫾ 124 ms.

isolated heart
at baseline, st segments of the pseudo-ecg were isoelectric during stimulation at any cycle length. at a cycle length
of 800 ms, qrs and qt duration were 150 and 710 ms,
respectively. after  xxxd96xxx , the st segment in pseudo-avr
was elevated by 0.3 mv at a cycle length of 800 ms,
whereas qrs and qt duration increased to 180 and 750 ms,
respectively (figure 3).
activation and repolarization mapping
figure 4 shows the activation (panel a) and repolarization
(panel b) times projected on pseudo-avr and a three-dimensional reconstruction of the activation and repolarization pattern after  xxxd96xxx . reference times were earliest activation or
repolarization, respectively. st-segment elevation was present
after the moment of latest activation and before the moment of
earliest repolarization. latest recorded activation coincided
with the j point, and earliest repolarization occurred at the start
of the t wave, 250 ms after the j point. a three-dimensional
reconstruction shows the spread of activation from the rv
septum over both ventricles. latest activation was recorded at
the rv free wall and lv free wall, and crowding of isochrones
was most pronounced at the endocardium of the rv. earliest
repolarization occurred at the basal endocardium of the rv and
lv. of note, epicardial repolarization was later than endocardial repolarization at the rv (mean 128 ms and 84 ms, respectively).
st-segment elevation in unipolar electrograms
st-segment elevation after  xxxd96xxx  in pseudo-avr coincided
with st-segment elevation in unipolar electrograms (figure
5a, site indicated by asterisk in figure 5b). a voltage map of
epicardial unipolar electrograms 100 ms after the j point in
pseudo-avr illustrates that st-segment elevation in unipolar
electrograms was limited to the basal epicardial rv (figure
5b, time indicated by arrow in figure 5a).
calculated coaxial electrograms confirmed that the local
st-segment elevation was not the result of far-field effects,
contrary to the initial deflection in the unipolar electrogram.

figure 3
pseudo-ecg of the isolated heart before (black) and after (red)
sodium channel blockade (stimulation from right ventricular septum at
basic cycle length ⫽ 800 ms). note st-segment elevation in pseudo-avr
after sodium channel blockade. bars ⫽ 200 ms, 1 mv.

st-segment elevation increased with stimulation frequency.
note that the local activation signal in the unipolar and
coaxial electrogram virtually disappeared when st-segment
elevation was observed (figure 5a).

pathology of the heart
macroscopically, the heart showed hypertrophy and dilation
of both ventricles. pronounced endocardial fibroelastosis
was seen, particularly in the lv. a thick layer of epicardial
fat covered the rv. the coronary arteries, including coronary
ostia, and all heart valves were normal. microscopically, the
myocardium showed cytonuclear features of hypertrophy and
multizonal distinct cytoplasmatic vacuolization of myocytes.
the subepicardial myocardium of the rv outflow tract and
basal rv free wall, but not of the basal lv free wall, was

hoogendijk et al

st-segment elevation in structural heart disease

243

figure 4
activation and repolarization after sodium channel blockade (right ventricular septal stimulation at cycle length of 800 ms). activation (a) and
repolarization (b) times are depicted on the corresponding complex in pseudo-avr and on a three-dimensional reconstruction of the heart. anterior view of
the heart is depicted on the left; posterior view is depicted on the right. the epicardium is viewed as transparent. no sign of activation or repolarization was
found throughout the st segment. lines are 20-ms isochrones.

locally interspersed with adipose tissue. the fatty infiltration focally reached the subendocardium but was not transmural at any site (figures 6a, 6b, and 6c). both ventricles
showed focal increase of lymphocytes, including sparse
clusters, indicating borderline myocarditis. morphometric
analysis showed that the subepicardium of the rv outflow
tract, rv free wall, and lv free wall of the patient (red)
contained more fibrous tissue than did any of the controls.
the adipose tissue content of the rv outflow tract and rv
free wall was greater than of the lv free wall in both the
patient and the controls (figures 6d and 6e).

computer simulations
the ecg derived from the simulated heart without structural abnormalities had qrs duration of 80 ms and isoelectric st segments (figure 7a, black ecg). reduction of gna
in the normal heart to 30% of normal caused global activation delay, and qrs duration increased to 130 ms but did
not lead to st-segment elevation (figure 7a, red ecg).
the introduction of structural discontinuities with 30% of
normal coupling in the gaps at normal gna resulted in qrs
prolongation to 100 ms and negative t waves in the right
precordial leads but not in st-segment elevation (figure
7b, black ecg). the negative t wave was caused by
activation delay of the rv subepicardium (figure 7c).
reduction of gna after introduction of these structural discontinuities caused excitation failure at the anterior rv
subepicardium (figure 7d, black sites). the current received from and given to surrounding elements and corre-

sponding action potentials at five neighboring sites in and
immediately distal to the gaps are shown in the left and right
graph, respectively. subepicardial excitation failure occurred when insufficient depolarizing current was received
distal of the introduced structural discontinuities to reach
threshold potential. the potential gradient between the excited and unexcited myocardium caused st-segment elevation in the right precordial leads. activation at other rv
subepicardial sites was delayed, leading to a negative t
wave in the right precordial leads (figure 7b, red ecg).
in the presence of structural discontinuities with 30% of
normal coupling in the gaps, the percentage of elements that
were not excited throughout the cardiac cycle depended on
gna and correlated well with cumulative st-segment elevation
in leads v1 and v2 of the third and fourth intercostal spaces.
both increased markedly when gna was reduced below 50%
of normal (figure 8a). likewise, a decrease of the size of the
gaps in the barriers at normal sodium conductance resulted in
a reduction in excited elements. the amplitude of st-segment
elevation by excitation failure after reduction of the size of the
gaps was limited by the increased resistance between the excited and unexcited myocardium (figure 8b).

discussion
this study shows for the first time the activation and repolarization characteristics of the complete heart of a carrier of
a loss-of-function mutation in  xxxg2028xxx  after provocation of
right-sided st-segment elevation by sodium channel blockade. st-segment elevation coincided with the local disap-

244

heart rhythm, vol 7, no 2, february 2010

figure 5 regional st-segment elevation in unipolar electrograms after sodium channel blockade. a: pseudo-avr (top row), unipolar electrogram (middle
row), and calculated coaxial electrogram (bottom row) from the epicardial basal right ventricle (site indicated by asterisk in panel b) during stimulation from
the right ventricular septum at increasing frequencies (cycle length indicated at top). st-segment elevation in pseudo-avr increased with higher stimulation
frequencies and coincided with disappearance of the main activation signal followed by monophasic st-segment elevation in the unipolar electrogram. the
local origin of st-segment elevation was confirmed using coaxial electrograms. b: three-dimensional reconstruction of st-segment amplitude on unipolar
epicardial electrograms 100 ms after the j point in pseudo-avr (moment indicated by arrows in panel a) at cycle length of 800 ms. st-segment elevation
was limited to the basal epicardial right ventricle. right ventricular view is shown on the left; left ventricular view is shown on the right. color scale is given
in millivolts. lv ⫽ left ventricle; rv ⫽ right ventricle.

pearance of the initial activation and the appearance of
monophasic st-segment elevation in unipolar electrograms
at the basal epicardial rv. at these sites, fibrosis and fatty
infiltration caused discontinuities in the subepicardium. in a
computer model encompassing the heart and thorax, structural discontinuities were simulated by the introduction of
nonconducting barriers containing gaps in the rv subepicardium. successful conduction through these gaps depended on their simulated size and was modulated by the
available cardiac sodium current. excitation failure and
activation delay of the rv subepicardium resulted in stsegment elevation and a negative t wave in the right precordial leads of the ecg, respectively. therefore, currentto-load mismatch may underlie the brugada sign in patients
with rv structural discontinuities.
in the isolated heart, we found no support for either of
the preexisting hypotheses of st-segment elevation in
the brugada sign.2,8 latest activation coincided with the
end of the qrs complex and earliest repolarization with

the start of the t wave on pseudo-ecg, leaving 250 ms
of st-segment elevation that could not be explained by
either late activation or early repolarization. other causes
of st-segment elevation that were not assessed directly
in this heart are regional differences in resting membrane
potential or in plateau potential amplitude.22 a regional
difference in resting membrane potential generates tqsegment depression that cannot be distinguished from
true st-segment elevation by ac electrograms. however, the resting membrane potentials in isolated myocytes were similar to those previously found in dilated
and ischemic cardiomyopathy,18 and ina reduction has no
direct effect on the resting membrane potential. likewise, regional differences in plateau potential amplitude
likely did not play a role as local st-segment elevation
was accompanied by the virtual disappearance of the
qrs complex in unipolar electrograms.
the computer model is based on a membrane model of
human ventricular myocytes that incorporates transmural

hoogendijk et al

st-segment elevation in structural heart disease

245

figure 6 subepicardial histologic sections and quantification of subepicardial fibrous and adipose tissue. a–c: subepicardial sections from the right
ventricular outflow tract (rvot; a), basal right ventricular free wall (rvfw; b), and basal left ventricular free wall (lvfw, c). low-magnification images
show fatty infiltration (white) in the subepicardial myocardium of the rvot and rvfw and interstitial-type fibrosis (red) at all locations. picrosirius red
staining; bar ⫽ 500 ␮m. note that the epicardial rim of collagen seen in panel c was excluded from measurements. d, e: morphometric analysis of fibrous
(d) and adipose (e) tissue content as percent of total measured myocardial area in the heart of the patient (red dots) and in the hearts of controls (black dots).
analysis reveals that the heart of the patient contained more fibrous tissue at any location than did any of the control hearts, and that the adipose tissue content
of the rvot and rvfw was greater than in the lvfw. however, no difference in adipose tissue content was found between the patient and the control
hearts. bars in panel d indicate mean ⫾ sd of controls.

differences in the density of the transient outward current.19
reduction of ina alone did not cause either early repolarization or a reduced plateau potential amplitude at the rv
subepicardium and did not result in st-segment elevation.
however, reduction of ina did result in the brugada sign
after the introduction of discontinuous barriers in the rv
subepicardium. the cause was the combination of excitation
failure (st-segment elevation) and activation delay (negative
t-wave) of the subepicardium by current-to-load mismatch.
the plateau potential amplitude was reduced proximal to the
site of excitation failure. however, this was caused by electrotonic interaction with the unexcited myocardium.
whether current-to-load mismatch can also cause the
brugada sign in patients with the brugada syndrome is
unclear because its diagnosis requires exclusion of structural heart disease.1 several histologic and imaging studies
recently demonstrated that a variety of myocardial changes,
not recognized during standard clinical investigation, are
present in many patients with brugada syndrome.2,4,5,23 in
addition, late potentials on signal-averaged ecgs, usually
associated with structural heart disease, are a common finding in the brugada syndrome.24 therefore, lack of sensitivity of standard imaging modalities may render structural
abnormalities at the rv subepicardium undetected. thus,
excitation failure in discontinuous myocardium can be the
mechanism of the brugada sign in the brugada syndrome as
well.

the heart of our patient showed the gross pathology of
an end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy. histologically, we
found structural abnormalities that have been described as
occurring in biopsy samples from patients with brugada
syndrome and proven  xxxg2028xxx  mutations (fibrosis, cardiomyopathic cellular changes);2,4,5 however, these pathologic
changes also have been reported in patients with brugada
syndrome but no such a mutation, particularly lymphocytic
myocarditis.4 therefore, whether the current-to-load mismatch in the rv subepicardium relates to structural pathology resulting from the  xxxg2028xxx  mutation, other coincidental
inflammatory pathology, or both remains unsettled.
an argument against the involvement of excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch in the brugada syndrome is
the observation that st-segment amplitude and risk of ventricular arrhythmias appear largest during slow heart
rhythms (at night or at rest).25,26 in our study, st-segment
elevation increased with stimulation frequency. this can be
explained in part by the use of  xxxd96xxx , which has a
rate-dependent capacity to block sodium channels.15 another explanation is the absence of autonomic innervation in
the isolated heart. when the safety factor for conduction is
reduced, the depolarizing current of the l-type calcium
channel can be crucial for conduction success.27,28 the
l-type calcium current decreases during increased vagal
and decreased sympathetic activity. therefore, the autonomic nervous system may modulate the success of con-

246

heart rhythm, vol 7, no 2, february 2010

figure 7 simulated subepicardial discontinuities and sodium channel dysfunction. a, b: ecgs of the heart without (a) and with structural discontinuities
in the right ventricular subepicardium (b) at baseline (black) and after (red) reduction of sodium channel conductivity (gna) to 30% of normal. bars ⫽ 200
ms, 1 mv. c, d: basal short-axis view of the heart with structural discontinuities at the right ventricular subepicardium before (c) and after (d) reduction
of gna to 30% of normal. colors indicate activation time; sites that failed to excite throughout the cardiac cycle are depicted in black. the current received
from and given to surrounding elements and the corresponding action potentials at five neighboring sites are depicted in the left and right graphs,
respectively. the locations of these elements were 0.2 mm (black) and 0.4 mm in (brown) and 0.2 mm (red), 0.4 mm (orange), and 1.0 mm (yellow) behind
the gaps in the barriers. after reduction of gna, insufficient current was received by many elements behind the introduced structural discontinuities to reach
threshold potential. this resulted in excitation failure and activation delay of the right ventricular subepicardium and in st-segment elevation followed by
a negative t wave in the right precordial leads. lv ⫽ left ventricle; rv ⫽ right ventricle.

duction in current-to-load mismatch and st-segment elevation by excitation failure. in addition, the decrease of stsegment elevation in the brugada syndrome by betaadrenergic stimulation and the increase by acetylcholine can
be explained by the effect of the l-type calcium current on
conduction.9

the rapid variability of the brugada sign over time likely
is not related to structural changes. besides modulation by
pharmacologic agents and the autonomic nervous system,
other factors may influence the brugada sign by excitation
failure. fish oil reduces the cardiac sodium current after
acute administration and reduces the l-type calcium current

hoogendijk et al

st-segment elevation in structural heart disease

247

figure 8
simulated ecgs in structurally abnormal heart during reduction of sodium conductance (a) or of simulated size of the gaps in introduced barriers
by reduction of coupling in the gaps (b) and corresponding graphs relating excited elements with st-segment elevation in the right precordial leads.
reduction of sodium channel conductance (gna) below 50% of normal resulted in a rapid reduction in excited elements and st-segment elevation on the
ecg. a reduction in the size of the gaps in the barriers at normal sodium conductance also resulted in a reduction in excited elements and st-segment
elevation on the ecg. however, the increased resistance between the excited and unexcited elements limited the st-segment amplitude.

both after acute administration and in feeding experiments.29 therefore, intake of fish oil may reduce the success
of conduction in current-to-load mismatch and may augment the brugada sign by this mechanism. furthermore, the
load at sites of sudden myocardial expansion depends on the
intercellular resistance with the surrounding myocardium
and is modulated by electrical coupling via connexin43. the
half-life of connexin43 is short (⬃1.3 hours).30 changes in
the turnover of connexin43 can have a rapid effect on
excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch and on the
brugada sign by this mechanism.
excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch provides
a unifying hypothesis for the st-segment elevation and
predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias seen in patients
with the brugada sign. previous studies have demonstrated
that unexcited tissue shortens the action potential duration
and effective refractory period of myocardium proximal to
the site of block by electrotonic interaction.11–13 this combination of unidirectional block and a local decrease in
refractoriness can initiate reentry even without the need for
a premature beat.11 it also explains why the duration of
st-segment elevation in unipolar electrograms observed in
this study was shorter than the activation-recovery interval,
which is a measure of action potential duration, before
sodium channel blockade.

study limitations
no sodium channel provocation protocol was performed
prior to cardiac explantation, which hinders extrapolation of
the pseudo-ecg to the patient’s ecg. however, the concentration of  xxxd96xxx  used in our study was similar to those

used clinically to provoke the brugada sign, and our simulations confirm that subepicardial excitation failure and activation delay at the rv shows as the brugada sign in the right
precordial leads. therefore, the mechanisms described in our
study likely would have occurred in the patient as well.

conclusion
structural discontinuities at the rv subepicardium can
cause excitation failure and activation delay by current-toload mismatch, especially when the available cardiac sodium current is reduced. excitation failure and activation
delay at the rv subepicardium show as the brugada sign on
ecg. therefore, current-to-load mismatch may underlie
ventricular arrhythmias in patients with the brugada sign
and rv structural discontinuities.

acknowledgments
we thank wim ter smitte, charly belterman, m.e. campian, antonius baartscheer, and carlo marcelis for invaluable assistance.

references
1. antzelevitch c, brugada p, borggrefe m, et al. brugada syndrome: report of the
second consensus conference: endorsed by the heart rhythm society and the
european heart rhythm association. circulation 2005;111:659 – 670.
2. coronel r, casini s, koopmann tt, et al. right ventricular fibrosis and conduction delay in a patient with clinical signs of brugada syndrome: a combined
electrophysiological, genetic, histopathologic, and computational study. circulation 2005;112:2769 –2777.
3. corrado d, basso c, buja g, nava a, rossi l, thiene g. right bundle branch
block, right precordial st-segment elevation, and sudden death in young people.
circulation 2001;103:710 –717.
4. frustaci a, priori sg, pieroni m, et al. cardiac histological substrate in patients

248

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

heart rhythm, vol 7, no 2, february 2010
with clinical phenotype of brugada syndrome. circulation 2005;112:
3680 –3687.
zumhagen s, spieker t, rolinck j, et al. absence of pathognomonic or inflammatory patterns in cardiac biopsies from patients with brugada syndrome. circ
arrhythm electrophysiol 2009;2:16 –23.
peters s, trümmel m, denecke s, koehler b. results of  xxxd96xxx  testing in
patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia-cardiomyopathy. int
j cardiol 2004;95:207–210.
chiale pa, przybylski j, laino ra, et al. electrocardiographic changes evoked
by  xxxd96xxx  in chronic chagas’ disease without manifest myocarditis. am j
cardiol 1982;49:14 –20.
yan gx, antzelevitch c. cellular basis for the brugada syndrome and other
mechanisms of arrhythmogenesis associated with st-segment elevation. circulation 1999;100:1660 –1666.
miyazaki t, mitamura h, miyoshi s, soejima k, ogawa s, aizawa y. autonomic and antiarrhythmic drug modulation of st segment elevation in patients
with brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 1996;27:1061–1070.
meregalli pg, wilde aam, tan hl. pathophysiological mechanisms of brugada syndrome: depolarization disorder, repolarization disorder, or more? cardiovasc res 2005;67:367–378.
sasyniuk bi, mendez c. a mechanism for reentry in canine ventricular tissue.
circ res 1971;28:3–15.
rohr s, salzberg bm. characterization of impulse propagation at the microscopic level across geometrically defined expansions of excitable tissue: multiple site optical recording of transmembrane voltage (msortv) in patterned
growth heart cell cultures. j gen physiol 1994;104:287–309.
mendez c, mueller wj, merideth j, moe gk. interaction of transmembrane
potentials in canine purkinje fibers and at purkinje fiber-muscle junctions. circ
res 1969;24:361–372.
fast vg, kléber ag. cardiac tissue geometry as a determinant of unidirectional
conduction block: assessment of microscopic excitation spread by optical mapping in patterned cell cultures and in a computer model. cardiovasc res
1995;29:697–707.
heistracher p. mechanism of action of antifibrillatory drugs. naunyn schmiedeberg arch pharmacol 1971;269:199 –212.
potse m, linnenbank ac, grimbergen ca. software design for analysis of
multichannel intracardial and body surface electrocardiograms. comp methods
programs biomed 2002;69:225–236.
coronel r, de bakker jmt, wilms-schopman fjg, et al. monophasic action
potentials and activation recovery intervals as measures of ventricular action

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

potential duration: experimental evidence to resolve some controversies. heart
rhythm 2006;3:1043–1050.
den ruijter hm, berecki g, verkerk ao, et al. acute administration of fish oil
inhibits triggered activity in isolated myocytes from rabbits and patients with
heart failure. circulation 2008;117:536 –544.
potse m, dubé b, richer j, vinet a, gulrajani rm. a comparison of monodomain and bidomain reaction-diffusion models for action potential propagation in
the human heart. ieee trans biomed eng 2006;53:2425–2435.
ten tusscher khwj, noble d, noble pj, panfilov av. a model for human
ventricular tissue. am j physiol heart circ physiol 2004;286:h1573–h1589.
potet f, mabo p, le coq g, et al. novel brugada  xxxg2028xxx  mutation leading to
st segment elevation in the inferior or the right precordial leads. j cardiovasc
electrophysiol 2003;14:200 –203.
holland rp, brooks h. precordial and epicardial surface potentials during
myocardial ischemia in the pig. a theoretical and experimental analysis of the
tq and st segments. circ res 1975;37:471– 480.
papavassiliu t, wolpert c, flüchter s, et al. magnetic resonance imaging
findings in patients with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2004;
15:1133–1138.
ikeda t, sakurada h, sakabe k, et al. assessment of noninvasive markers in
identifying patients at risk in the brugada syndrome: insight into risk stratification. j am coll cardiol 2001;37:1628 –1634.
mizumaki k, fujiki a, tsuneda t, et al. vagal activity modulates spontaneous
augmentation of st elevation in the daily life of patients with brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 2004;15:667– 673.
matsuo k, kurita t, inagaki m, et al. the circadian pattern of the development
of ventricular fibrillation in patients with brugada syndrome. eur heart j
1999;20:465– 470.
shaw rm, rudy y. ionic mechanisms of propagation in cardiac tissue: roles of
the sodium and l-type calcium currents during reduced excitability and decreased gap junction coupling. circ res 1997;81:727–741.
rohr s, kucera jp. involvement of the calcium inward current in cardiac
impulse propagation: induction of unidirectional conduction block by nifedipine
and reversal by bay k 8644. biophys j 1997;72:754 –766.
den ruijter hm, berecki g, opthof t, verkerk ao, zock pl, coronel r. proand antiarrhythmic properties of a diet rich in fish oil. cardiovasc res 2007;73:
316 –325.
beardslee ma, laing jg, beyer ec, saffitz je. rapid turnover of connexin43
in the adult rat heart. circ res 1998;83:629 – 635.

