radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma: bexxar and zevalin
stanley j. goldsmith, md
radioimmunotherapy is a form of targeted radionuclide therapy that uses a monoclonal
antibody to deliver localized radiation. it is most appropriate for treatment of multiple tumor
sites that cannot be readily excised surgically or irradiated using external beam radiation or
brachytherapy. at present, 2 products, bexxar (131i- xxxd3405xxx  and unlabeled  xxxd3405xxx , glaxosmithkline, triangle park, nc) and zevalin (90y- xxxd2312xxx  and
unlabeled rituximab, spectrum pharmaceuticals, irvine, ca and cell therapeutics, seattle,
wa) are approved for treatment of non-hodgkin’s lymphoma in certain clinical situations in
the united states and canada. zevalin is available also in europe, and there are plans to
make both agents more widely available. the therapeutic dose to be used depends upon a
number of patient-specific variables. both regimen achieve a complete response or partial
response in approximately 3 of 4 patients, with a duration of remission lasting many years
in some cases. this article reviews the basis for dose selection, the nuclear medicine
procedures involved, the results obtained to date, and issues related to patient and staff
safety.
semin nucl med 40:122-135 © 2010 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.

l

ymphoma is a generic term describing a malignant tumor
originating in lymphoid tissue. there are a multitude of
sub-classifications beginning with the division between nonhodgkin’s lymphoma (nhl) and hodgkin’s disease, a distinction that is made on the basis of gross histopathologic
differences. subsequently, both nhl and hodgkin’s disease
were further classified on the basis of identification of cell
types and microarchitecture of involved lymph nodes. in
time, additional histopathologic detail and immunophenotypic cell surface markers were identified. the more detailed
classifications have utility because they are somewhat predictive of the clinical course and likely response to various therapies.

b cells and b-cell lymphoma
non-hodgkin’s lymphomas are also broadly classified as either b-cell lymphomas or t-cell lymphomas, based on their
lineage. b cells arise from reticuloendothelial elements in the
prenatal liver and spleen, whereas t cells arise from the thymus. because b cells evolve from the stem cell to mature
lymphocytes and plasma cells, they express a variety of spe-

division of nuclear medicine, new york-presbyterian hospital, weill cornell college of medicine, new york, ny.
address reprint requests to stanley j. goldsmith, md, division of nuclear
medicine, weill cornell medical center, new york-presbyterian hospital, 525 e 68th st, new york, ny 10065. e-mail: sjg2002@med.cornell.
edu.

122

0001-2998/10/$-see front matter © 2010 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2009.11.002

cific antigens that are characteristic of specific cell types. the
expression of these epitopes varies as the cell matures and
takes on different functions. the cd20 epitope serves as a
relatively specific marker for b cells from the mature b cell
before release from the bone marrow through its life in the
circulation or one of the storage sites such as the spleen. b
cells are nonsecretory but contain genetic encoding to produce and secrete antibodies. as the lymphocyte matures into
the plasma cell, this genotype is expressed, and the plasma
cell can produce and secrete immunoglobulins upon appropriate stimulation.
approximately 85% of lymphomas that occur in the
united states and western europe are derived from b cells
and are hence known as b-cell lymphomas. several clinical
patterns of disease have been defined: indolent and aggressive lymphomas. almost half of the b-cell lymphomas are
indolent or low-grade lymphomas. these low-grade lymphomas may be discovered by chance or after evaluation of palpable lymphadenopathy; the patient may or may not be
symptomatic. symptoms may be vague such as fatigue which
may be associated with mild anemia or simply discomfort
because of mass effect with compression of organs or blood
vessels. abnormal laboratory values such as elevated lactic
dehydrogenase are frequent indicators of disease activity. because traditional chemotherapy is not without its own morbidity, the hematologist– oncologist must exercise judgment
about when it is appropriate to intervene, on the baisis of
progression of symptoms or other findings such as increasing
tumor size or activity on 18f-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma
emission tomography/computed tomography (18f-fdg-pet/
ct). there seems to be no advantage to intervening before it
becomes clinically necessary. although most patients will
respond to the traditional chemotherapeutic regimens, the
duration of remission is variable, and 50% of the patients
with low-grade lymphoma will relapse within 10 years. traditionally, relapsed patients are retreated with one of the
standard chemotherapeutic approaches. although remission
may be achieved again, the duration of remission after relapse
is shorter than the initial response. with each subsequent
relapse, the duration of remission becomes shorter. after the
third relapse, the remission may only be for a few months.
despite improvements in chemotherapeutic options and
management of complications, there was no improvement in
the survival of patients with low-grade b-cell lymphoma during the period 1960-1996. in 1996, an anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody, rituximab, became available.1 it was used initially in relapsed patients and subsequently as a supplemental
component of conventional chemotherapeutic regimen, and
occasionally as a primary therapeutic particularly in the
elderly patients. it had a beneficial effect on the overall
response rate (orr) and the duration of remissions in
low-grade follicular b-cell lymphomas expressing the
cd20 epitope.

123

figure 1 schematic showing structural similarities and differences
between immunoglobulin g of human and murine origin and composition of altered chimeric and “humanized” molecules. all generic
names for monoclonal antibodies end with the suffix “mab.” mouse
monoclonal antibodies are “momabs;” the chimeric molecules are
“ximabs,” and the humanized molecules are “zumabs.” antibodies
directed against tumor antigens often include the syllable “tu;”
hence “tumomab,” a murine monoclonal antibody to a tumor antigen; “tuximab,” a chimeric monoclonal antibody to a tumor antigen;
and “tuzumab,” a humanized monoclonal antibody.

ucts or others that evolve from the early favorable experience
will be more widely available to physicians and their patients.

radioimmunotherapy
of b-cell lymphoma

development of
bexxar and zevalin

this review deals with the basic issues involved in the development, the practical nuclear medicine aspects, and the clinical efficacy of 2 radiolabeled immunotherapeutic products,
bexxar and zevalin, for the treatment of low-grade follicular
b-cell lymphomas that are refractory or relapsed after treatment with the current best practice. these products are the
first radiolabeled antibody regimen approved in the united
states for the treatment of tumors. when specific issues are
addressed, they will be presented in alphabetical order:
bexxar followed by zevalin. both products are actually regimen involving infusions of both unlabeled or “cold” antibody
and a radiolabeled antibody: bexxar consists of  xxxd3405xxx 
and 131i- xxxd3405xxx  administered sequentially; zevalin
consists of rituximab, followed by 90y-ibritumomab tiuxitan.
in both instances, this sequential infusion is preceded 1 week
earlier by an infusion of the “cold” antibody. accordingly, in
referencing 1 or the other therapeutic regimen, the “commercial” names, bexxar or zevalin, will be used for purpose of
brevity because both regimen involve the combination of 2
unlabeled antibody infusions followed by a labeled antibody
infusion. bexxar includes the 131i-labeled anti-cd20 antibody  xxxd3405xxx , and zevalin includes the 90y-labeled  xxxd3132xxx  antibody ibritumomab.
recently, the zevalin regimen has become available also in
europe. at the present time, bexxar is available only in the
united states and canada. practical matters such as limited
production facilities and transportation have interfered with
wider distribution of both bexxar and zevalin. hopefully,
these matters will be resolved in the future, and these prod-

b-cell antigens
cd20 is one of many epitopes expressed on the mature b cell.
because it is so frequently expressed, it was selected early as
a target for the development of monoclonal antibody therapy.
epitopes are protein components of cells that usually have a
defined function and a distinct molecular configuration. for
example, cd20 functions as a transmembrane calcium channel and is frequently expressed on both b cells and b-cell
tumors. as stated earlier, cd20 appears as the b cell is maturing within the bone marrow before release into the circulation. cd20 continues to be expressed until the b cell differentiates into a plasma cell. this provides an excellent
specific target of opportunity as the b cell precursors, and
subsequently differentiated plasma cells are not be targeted
by anti-cd20 antibodies. although both  xxxd3405xxx  and
ibritumomab are anti-cd20 antibodies (ie,, they recognize
the same epitope), they have slightly different binding characteristics.

antibodies and immunotherapy
antibodies are immunoglobulins. the most abundant circulating immunoglobulin is igg. this protein has a molecular
weight of approximately 160 kda and is usually diagrammed
as the letter “y,” with a double sequence of amino acids on the
“arms” of the “y” representing the so-called “light chains.”
(fig. 1) the light chains are bound to the heavy chains, and
the heavy chains are bound to each other by disulfide linkages. the immunorecognition portion of the igg is located at
the extreme end of the “arms.” other antibody characteristics

s.j. goldsmith

124
such as recruitment of effector (natural killer) and other cells
depend on sequences elsewhere in the molecule.
the enormous development in immunology over the last
quarter of the 20th century is a consequence of the development of monoclonal antibodies. in the 1970s, kohler and
milstein2 fused a mouse lymphocyte with a mouse malignant
plasma (myeloma) cell to create a so-called “hybridoma” that
produced large amounts of the specific immunoglobulin for
which the lymphocyte had been encoded by earlier immunization. thus, a procedure to produce large quantities of antibodies from a single clone was developed. each monoclonal
antibody could be evaluated, and the clones with the optimal
specificity and affinity were selected for production in larger
quantity.
it is a convenient and common practice to produce monoclonal antibodies in murine cells. when a murine immunoglobulin is injected into a species other than a mouse, however, there is the potential to produce antimurine antibodies.
in human beings, human antimurine antibody (hama) will
alter the pharmacokinetics of subsequent antibody infusions,
rendering the antibody ineffective or unavailable. to minimize the potential for the development of hama, it is possible to retain the immunospecific portion of the antibody that
has been encoded as a mouse (murine) protein, whereas replacing a large portion of the remainder of the murine igg
molecule with a  xxxd2207xxx  sequence. these mixed sequence
antibodies are known as chimeric (70%-90% replacement)
or humanized (approximately 98% replacement).
a standard nomenclature has been developed. all generic
names for monoclonal antibodies end with the suffix “mab.”
mouse monoclonal antibodies are “momabs;” the chimeric
molecules are “ximabs,” and the humanized molecules are
“zumabs.” antibodies directed against tumor antigens often
include the syllable “tu”; hence “tumomab,” a murine monoclonal antibody to a tumor antigen; “tuximab,” a chimeric
monoclonal antibody to a tumor antigen; and “tuzumab,” a
humanized monoclonal antibody (fig. 1).
after preliminary work with several antibodies, 2 murine
monoclonal antibodies to cd20 were selected for further
evaluation:  xxxd3405xxx  and ibritumomab. because nhl
patients are somewhat immunosuppressed, and chemotherapy invariably further suppresses the immune response,
hama formation occurs infrequently in this patient population. accordingly,  xxxd3405xxx  and ibritumomab were radiolabeled and evaluated as potential radioimmunotherapeutics and currently, they are the radiolabeled immunoglobulin
components of bexxar and zevalin, respectively.as stated
previously, rituximab (rituxan), a chimeric anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody derived from ibritumomab became available
in the late 1990s.1 rituximab has had an enormous beneficial
effect on the clinical course of patients with low-grade lymphomas. since approval, it has been used as a sole agent and
in combinations with many chemotherapy protocols. it has
improved the quality of life for lymphoma patients in many
ways— by relief of symptoms, prolonging the symptom-free
period, and reduction of side effects associated with chemotherapy. nevertheless, there are patients who are either refractory to rituximab infusions, ie, obtain no or only minimal

relief of symptoms and disease progression, or relapse after a
brief response. because of the multifocal nature of nonhodgkin’s lymphoma, other traditional therapeutic interventions such as surgery and external beam radiation are not
useful in the management of patients who are refractory to
the standard therapeutic modalities. these issues represent
an ideal setting for targeted radionuclide therapy such as
radioimmunotherapy (rit), using the antibody to home in
on tumor cells at diffuse sites throughout the body to deliver
localized radiation from a ␤ particle emitting radionuclide.

radioimmunotherapy
an antibody to an epitope expressed on a cell membrane may
have a cytotoxic effect, either complement-mediated or a direct antibody cytotoxic effect via a variety of mechanisms
including promoting apoptosis. rituximab is an example of
an approved unlabeled anti-cd20 antibody that has showed
antitumor effect as a single agent and in combination with a
variety of chemotherapeutic regimen. the therapeutic benefit
from this effect, however, is limited to the number of tumor
cells directly affected by the antibody. however, using the
antibody as a delivery device to target the tumor cell with a
radionuclide has the potential to amplify the cytotoxic effect
via a radiation cross-fire effect, whereby ionizing radiation
has an effect on neighboring cells in a spherical zone surrounding the deposited radionuclide. the volume of this
zone is dependent upon the energy of the charged particle
that determines its path length in tissue.
rit involves the administration of an antibody labeled
with a radionuclide that will emit a ␤ or other charged particle along with sufficient unlabeled antibody to saturate the
nontumor antibody binding sites and to potentially evoke a
direct antitumor effect.
choice of radionuclide. o’donoghue et al3 have described
an ideal tumor cell cluster size for a given ␤-particle energy.
this observation suggests that lower energy ␤ emissions
might be more effective for treatment of microscopic tumor
foci.4 if the distribution of the radiolabeled igg is nonuniform, higher energy emissions with greater range in tissue
would be expected to be more effective for treatment of larger
tumors. this factor, range in tissue, is probably significant in
overall effect, but any single radionuclide may not be ideal for
the range of clinical situations requiring treatment such as
bulky lymph nodes and bone marrow microtumor foci. the
clinical significance of the physical half-life of the therapeutic
radionuclide is complex and has not been clearly defined.
the overall clinical effectiveness will also be dependent on
the distribution pattern of the radionuclide within tumor
masses. these factors (energy and physical half-life) as well as
the total amount of radioactivity that targets the lesions are all
likely relevant to the biological effectiveness of the radiolabeled immunoglobulin. at the present time, however, there
is no consensus on the optimal physical characteristics of the
radionuclide to be used in targeted radionuclide therapy.4
several radionuclides are available as potential labels for
rit: 131i-, 90y, and 177lu (table 1). the longest clinical
experience exists for 131i as it has been used for approxi-

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma

125

table 1 radionuclides used for radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma
radionuclide

physical half-life

decay type

particle energy
(mev)

gamma energy
(mev)

particle path length
(mm)

90y

2.7 d
8d

␤
␤, ␥

2.3
0.6

none
0.364

5.3
0.8

131i

mately 65 years for the treatment of thyroid cancer and
hyperthyroidism.131i is a convenient choice to label immunoglobulins because iodine is readily bound to proteins via a
tyrosyl moiety. a potential shortcoming of iodinated antibodies is that if the immunoglobulin is internalized, it is
digested with release of soluble smaller molecular weight
fragments that can leave the intracellular environment. because the interaction of anti-cd20 antibodies and the cd20
epitope does not result in internalization of the bound antibody, 131i labeled anti-cd20 antibody can be used for the
treatment of b-cell lymphomas and, in fact, is the radioactive
component of bexxar.
by contrast, radiometals such as 90y, 177lu, and 111in become insoluble moieties if the bond to the antibody is lysed
by plasma or cytoplasmic proteolytic enzymes. radiometals,
however, require more demanding chemistry to bind the
metal to the immunoglobulin in a configuration that remains
stable in biological environments. a variety of linking molecules that provide stable metallo-organic compounds are
now available. the radiotherapeutic component of zevalin is
90y that is linked with tiuxetan to the murine monoclonal
antibody ibritumomab (which is also the starting material for
the chimeric rituximab component of zevalin). this is accomplished with the metal binding moiety tiuxetan; hence
the entire molecule is either111in or 90y  xxxd2312xxx . because 90y is a pure ␤ emitter, 111in (a gamma emitting
radiometal with chemistry similar to 90y)  xxxd2312xxx  was used to perform the initial biodistribution studies
and dosimetry. at present, imaging and patient specific dosimetry are no longer necessary to determine the therapeutic
dose of zevalin. nevertheless, in the united states, the food
and drug administration (fda) continues to require the administration of the 111in component of zevalin to confirm
normal biodistribution of the labeled antibody. in the european community, the imaging step has been eliminated but
predosing with the unlabeled component (rituximab) 1 week
before the subsequent administration of the therapeutic components (repeat predosing with rituximab followed by 90y
ibritumoman tiuxetan) is still a component of the therapeutic
regimen. initially, the imaging component of the zevalin regimen required 3 sets of whole-body images. this was subsequently reduced to 2 sets of images, one within the first 24
hours and the second sometime between 48 and 72 hours.
this has been further reduced to a single set of images obtained between 24 and 48 hours. the purpose of these images is to confirm that the blood pool activity has not cleared
too rapidly that would suggest abnormal pharmacokinetics
(perhaps because of circulating hama or damage to the antibody) and to confirm normal biodistribution (ie, absence of
significant activity in the kidneys, lungs, or other organs)

(fig. 2). recently, data from a clinical trial in europe revealed
an unexpected high frequency of aberrant radiolabeled antibody biodistribution in the group of study patients.5 this
finding is of concern, but it is too soon to determine if this
report will lead to modification of the protocol in europe
with adoption of imaging requirements similar to those used
in the united states.
as stated, both the 131i-radiolabeled antibody regimen
(bexxar) and the 90y-radiolabeled antibody regimen (zevalin) are available in the united states. there has not been a
direct comparison in a randomized blinded trial to assess
whether the difference in physical characteristics of the 2
radionuclides, 131i and 90y, such as physical half-life or energy of the ␤ emission have an effect on the beneficial effects
or toxicity of the 2 regimen. nevertheless, one might suspect
that lower energy ␤ particles, ␣ particles, or auger electrons
might be more effective in treating microscopic tumor foci,
whereas higher energy particles would be more effective in
irradiating larger tumor clusters if the intratumoral distribution was limited.4 however, a greater range in tissue, while
potentially beneficial in treating larger tumors, may be associated with greater toxicity because of irradiating normal
marrow elements from radionuclide deposited in a micrometastasis. these characteristics have generated speculation
about the efficacy of a radiolabeled antibody “cocktail;” ie, a
combination of the 2 radiolabeled antibodies administered
simultaneously or sequentially. at the present time, there is
no data evaluating the efficacy of this concept.
predose (administration of “cold” antibody prior to “labeled” antibody). antitumor therapy with radiolabeled
monoclonal antibody is predicated upon delivering the radiolabeled antibody molecule to the tumor site. as previously
described, the cd20 epitope is expressed on the normal b
cell as it evolves in the bone marrow before full maturation
and released into the circulation and continues to be expressed on the circulating b lymphocytes, unless the lymphocytes are stimulated to differentiate further into plasma cells
at which time cd20 is no longer expressed. hence, there are
abundant nonmalignant b cells expressing cd20 in the circulation and in the spleen. administration of radiolabeled
anti-cd20 antibody would result in the bulk of the activity
being rapidly cleared from the circulation and sequestered in
the b-cell reservoir in the spleen (see fig. 3). because the
spleen receives a significant fraction of the cardiac output
compared with even bulky lymphomatous masses, these
nontumor binding sites are saturated with unlabeled (“cold”)
monoclonal antibody before administering the radiolabeled
anti-cd20. this results in prolongation of the plasma halflife, thus allowing more time for the labeled antibody to

s.j. goldsmith

126

figure 2 111in-ibritutmomab tiuxetan anterior and posterior whole body scans at 24 and 72 hrshours in a patient
pretreated with 250 mg/m2 rituximab. at 24 hours, there is prominent activity in the cardiac blood pool and great
vessels. liver activity is prominent but not greater than the blood pool. there is visualization of the spleen on the
posterior projection and minimal renal activity. there is also uptake in the lymph nodes in the mid-abdomen and right
lower quadrant. at 72 hours, there is reduction in the blood pool activity, relative increase in the hepatic activity, and
further increase in the lymph node mass activity. visualization of lymphoma is not a requirement to proceed with
radioimmunotherapy as it is dependent upon tumor size and location. administered radiotracer dose was approximately 185 mbq (5 mci) of 111in.

remain in the circulation. this provides a longer period for
tumor perfusion and antibody-epitope binding.6 although
somewhat counterintuitive (because one might expect that
the tumor cd20 binding sites might be occupied by unlabeled antibody), it has been demonstrated that the percentage of the injected dose in the tumor sites is actually greater if
the infusion of radiolabeled antibody is preceded by an infusion of unlabeled (or “cold” antibody).

nuclear medicine aspects of
lymphoma radioimmunotherapy
generic issues: bexxar and zevalin
currently, 2 radiolabeled antibodies are available for treatment of follicular low-grade non-hodgkin’s lymphoma,
bexxar and zevalin. bexxar contains 131i-labeled  xxxd3405xxx , and zevalin contains 90y-labeled ibrutumomab. in
both cases, the radiolabeled component is a murine  xxxd3132xxx  monoclonal antibody and in both cases, an unlabeled
antibody is infused before the radiolabeled component is
infused. the immunoreactivity of the 2 anti-cd20 murine
monoclonal antibodies is not identical, but it is not clear
whether the differences between ibritumomab and tositu-

momab have an effect on therapeutic efficacy. in the bexxar
regimen, both the labeled and unlabeled antibody is  xxxd3405xxx . in the zevalin regimen, the unlabeled antibody is
rituximab (the chimeric antibody used as an immunotherapeutic and marketed as rituxan) and the labeled antibody is
ibritumomab.
before scheduling treatment, a consultation session should
be held involving the nuclear medicine physician and the
patient as well as involved family members (with the permission of the patient). at this time, it is appropriate to confirm
that the patients meet the following eligibility criteria:
●
●
●

●
●

initial biopsy confirmation of cd20 expression.
recent (within 6-8 weeks) bone marrow biopsy results
to confirm less than 25% involvement.
recent (within 1-2 weeks) complete blood count with
attention to
œ absolute neutrophil count.
œ platelet count.
history of allergies and medications.
other pertinent past medical history.

patients are advised not to use aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents throughout the period from the begin-

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma

figure 3 anterior whole body scan at 1 hour after 131i- xxxd3405xxx ,
without and with prior administration of unlabeled  xxxd3405xxx .
without prior administration of “cold” antibody, a major portion of
the injected radiolabeled antibody is removed by the spleen. when the
radiolabeled antibody is administered after the “cold” antibody, the
sites in the spleen lymphocyte population are relatively saturated and a
greater portion of the radiolabeled antibody remains in the circulation.
although somewhat “counter intuitive,” predosing actually increases
the percentage of administered dose in tumor (reprinted by permission
of the society of nuclear medicine from wahl.6)

ning of evaluation through at least weeks with recovery of
hematologic indices. this session is also an opportunity to
discuss the protocol and number of visits required as well as
to provide personal testimony about past experience with the
agent (when appropriate) and to discuss post-therapy followup, as well as what the patient can expect in terms of side
effects after rit and issues related to radiation safety concerns of family members (see later in the text). when possible, it is our practice to review recent imaging data to have a
record of the baseline against which response will be assessed.
most patients tolerate the antibody infusions well; the
most frequent side effect is somnolence because of the antihistamine administration.
nuclear medicine protocols
for both therapeutic regimen, the unlabeled and radiolabeled anti-cd 20 antibodies are refrigerated during shipping
and stored at 2°c-8°c until the patient is available to begin
the infusion. the material is warmed gradually in a 37°c
water bath.
before infusion, it is recommended that the patient receives an oral antipyretic and anti-histamine such as acetaminophen and diphenhydramine. an intravenous catheter
should be placed and free flow of fluid confirmed before
initiating the therapeutic infusion. the patient (and vital
signs) should be monitored throughout the infusion of both
the unlabeled and labeled antibody. the infusion of the cold
antibody may be associated with infusion reactions (warm

127
feeling, lightheadedness, chills, hives, dyspnea, and decreased blood pressure). these symptoms will usually subside simply by slowing the rate of infusion. mild reactions are
more common with rituximab than  xxxd3405xxx , and it
might require 3 hours or more to complete the infusion of the
cold antibody. in our experience with more than 150 infusions, reactions have been minor, and it has not been necessary to abort the procedure completely.
a nuclear medicine physician, resident, or nurse should be
present during the infusion of the unlabeled antibody to
monitor the patient. a certified nuclear medicine physician is
present during infusion of the radiolabeled component of the
therapeutic infusion. several days after the therapeutic infusion, patients experience fatigue and a flu-like syndrome that
clears within a few days. it is useful to inform the patients of
this likely course in advance because it allays anxiety when
the symptoms appear.
patients should have a complete blood count and platelet
count each week for at least 6 weeks. the results should be
made available to the referring oncologist who is thus informed and able to decide if supportive measures are needed.
at the hematologic nadir (4-6 weeks), patients may again
experience fatigue. at that time, the patient should be monitored for fever and/or bruising and cautioned about the potential for infections, bruising, and the risk of bleeding. the
patient should be advised to restrict activities at that time or
at least to be cautious in their behavior.
each nuclear medicine facility must determine whether
the “cold” antibody infusion will be performed in the nuclear
medicine area followed by the labeled antibody infusion or
whether the procedure will be performed entirely in the oncology infusion area (necessitating the transport of the radiolabeled antibody to a “non-controlled” area and the requirement to assay for contamination after completion). it has
been our practice to administer both the cold  xxxd3405xxx 
and the labeled component of the bexxar regimen entirely
within the nuclear medicine area. the cold  xxxd3405xxx  infusion is generally well tolerated, and the procedure can be
handled expeditiously within nuclear medicine if there is
access to an infusion room and appropriate personnel.
in our practice, when the zevalin regimen is used, the
patient receives the cold infusion in the oncology infusion
area where the staff is quite familiar with rituximab infusion
management. the infusion is coordinated with the nuclear
pharmacy and the nuclear medicine physician. at the completion of the rituximab infusion, the patient is escorted to
the nuclear medicine infusion room to receive the111in or 90y
labeled ibritumomab. the dose to be administered is confirmed, and the radiolabeled component is administered by
the nuclear medicine physician.
after completion of the infusions, the patient is monitored
for approximately 1 hour, although, as already stated, the
only usual side effect is somnolence from the antihistamine.
outpatients (who account for almost all the therapeutic administrations) are encouraged to have a companion accompany them to their residence. discharge instructions including issues and concerns relevant to radiation safety are

s.j. goldsmith

128

figure 4 sample print-out of patient release instructions based on patient-specific data (residence time and administered dose of 131i- xxxd3405xxx ). (color version of figure is available online.)

reviewed with the patient before discharge (more details later
in the text).
radiation safety
131i, the radionuclide component of bexxar, emits both a ␤
particle and a ␥ photon. ␥ photons have greater penetrability
in tissue and hence are more readily detected externally. this
characteristic of gamma photons permits reliable quantitation and imaging but also potentially results in greater exposure of medical personnel and patient’s family following release. during the infusion of the therapeutic dose, portable
shielding is in place between the patient and medical personnel. during dose escalation trials in which patients received
25-129 mci (1-5 gbq) of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  to deliver 30-75cgy total body dose, 26 family members from 22 different
patients were provided monitoring devices that were worn
for up to 17 days. the measured radiation absorbed dose
values were from 17 to 409 mrem, well below the 500 mrem
limit applicable to members of the general public.7 in another
study with administered quantities of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  in a
similar range, the median radiation absorbed dose was 150
mrem. before release, patients are given a detailed printout
providing guidance on the duration and proximity to others
that would minimize exposure. this guidance is based on
patient specific variables including specific dose administered and the biological turnover rate data that had been
obtained for the dosimetry calculations (fig. 4).

harwood et al8 monitored the whole-body radiation exposure of 20 healthcare workers, radiopharmacists, nuclear
medicine technologists, nurses, and physicians at 4 institutions for 2-4.5 years involving 300 administrations of 131itositumomab. the additional mean radiation exposure per
month per healthcare worker involved in administering
 xxxd3405xxx  was 5.8 mrem.
90y, the therapeutic radionuclide in the zevalin regimen, is
a pure ␤ emitter without a concomitant ␥ emission. however, bremsstrahlung radiation is produced and is readily
detectable externally. the exposure associated with these
emissions is far below the allowable amount and not hazardous to medical personnel or family members, but patients
nevertheless require some reassurance and instruction about
intimacy and contact with family and friends.9 in general,
patients are advised to avoid contamination of others with
body fluids (saliva, blood, urine, seminal fluid, and stool),
but instructions about distance and duration of contact are
not considered necessary.
eligibility criteria
patients being considered for treatment with either bexxar or
zevalin should have had histopathologic confirmation of
non-hodgkin’s lymphoma with the expression of the cd-20
epitope. regulatory approval is limited at present to patients
with low-grade follicular lymphoma who have relapsed after
treatment with rituximab or who are refractory (failed to

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma
respond) to rituximab. radiolabeled anti-cd-20 antibodies
have been used to good effect in patients with other histopathologic tumor types (ie, large b cell lymphoma), provided that cd-20 epitope has been demonstrated. treatment
of patients in categories other than those specifically approved should be considered investigational with appropriate informed consent.
patients must have had a recent (within 2 months) bone
marrow biopsy showing less than 25% bone marrow involvement because treatment of patients with 25% or more bone
marrow involvement is associated with severe bone marrow
toxicity.
for both bexxar and zevalin, a platelet count greater than
100,000 is recommended; patients with a platelet count
greater than 150,000 receive a full dose based on other patient specific factors described in the following paragraphs,
whereas patients with platelet counts below 150,000 but
greater than 100,000 receive a modified amount of the therapeutic radiolabeled antibody. pregnancy and breast feeding
are, of course, contraindications to treatment with radiolabeled antibodies.

regimen-specific issues
bexxar
patients receiving bexxar therapeutic regimen should be premedicated (in addition to acetaminophen and diphenhydramine) with  xxxd2375xxx  (saturated solution of  xxxd2375xxx ), 3
drops in water 3 times a day beginning the day before the
initial dosimetric dose administration and continuing for 2
weeks after the treatment dose. the use of the 131i- xxxd3405xxx  preparation (currently only available in the united
states) involves obtaining 3 whole-body scans during the
week after a 185 mbq of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  administered for
purposes of determining the residence time which is necessary to determine the therapeutic dose.
in the event of elution of iodide or iodinated fragments
from sites of radiolabeled antibody deposition, the radioiodine is either excreted in urine or extracted by the thyroid
gland.  xxxd2375xxx  is administered to patients before the dosimetric
131i-labeled antibody dose is administered to block or at least
significantly reduce thyroidal iodine uptake. three drops in
water or juice is taken twice daily, beginning the day before
the initiation of the protocol and continuing for 3 weeks.
patients should be followed up for possible thyroid dysfunction that may not appear for years after treatment. hypothyroidism has been observed in approximately 6% of patients
studied during the initial clinical trials. this usually occurs
months to years after treatment. hypothyroidism is readily
treated with thyroid hormone replacement.
protocol and dose determination. in a series of early clinical trials at the university of michigan, it was determined that
hematologic toxicity as well as a dose and clinical response
relationship existed based on the whole-body radiation-absorbed dose rather than on a mci (or mbq)/kg dosing schedule.6 the maximal tolerated dose was 75 cgy whole-body
radiation absorbed dose for patients with platelet counts
greater than 150,000. patients with platelet counts between

129
100,000 and 150,000 were best managed with 65 cgy
whole-body radiation-absorbed dose. comparison of the results from separate trials confirms that the clinical results
between the patients receiving 65 versus 75 cgy are similar in
terms of orr and the numbers of patients who achieve a
complete response (cr) and a partial response (pr) as well as
the duration of response. nevertheless, it is standard practice
to treat patients with tumors at the “maximum tolerated
dose” until randomized controlled studies are performed to
demonstrate an equivalent efficacy at a lower dose. this has
not been done nor is it likely to be performed. in fact, there is
interest in using larger doses, and clinical trials have been
reported involving myeloablative doses with stem cell transplantation. the clinical use of radioimmunotherapeutic infusions for myeloablation is considered experimental has not
been approved by the fda for clinical use.
the whole-body radiation-absorbed dose is determined
from relatively simple measurements made following the administration of a 5-6 mci (⬃200 mbq) dose of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  preceded by an infusion of 450 mg of unlabeled
tostitumomab. the 450 mg has been determined to be sufficient to ensure prolonged plasma survival of the subsequent
infusion of 131i- xxxd3405xxx .
whole-body counts are determined from the total counts
on the anterior and posterior whole-body scans performed an
hour after the initial infusion and similar scans obtained 2
days later. the third set of scans is obtained 2-3 days after the
second set (fig. 5). for practical reasons, the entire sequence
is usually begun on a wednesday, allowing sufficient time for
the manufacturing facility to prepare and ship the radiolabeled product. scan 1 is obtained before the patient leaves the
department, scan 2 is obtained 48 hours later (on friday),
and scan 3 is obtained at approximately 110 hours (the following monday). the actual “clock-time” is used as it is more
important to know the timing of the scans than for the scans
be obtained at precisely a specified time. the scans can be
performed at 12-15 cm/min (or faster) as the purpose of the
scan is simply to determine the whole-body total counts
rather than to produce a diagnostic image. some investigators have taken issue with this concept holding that it is
necessary to confirm tumor uptake before treatment.10 nevertheless, it is not a requirement that tumor uptake is not
identified by scintigraphy to proceed nor has it been found to
be necessary to achieve the improved clinical results compared to immunotherapy alone. it is not common practice to
scan the patient following the therapeutic dose to document
the degree of localization. the physical parameters involved
in visualizing a tumor (dose administered, suitable ␥ emission, tumor size, and location) are different from those involved in obtaining a radiobiological response.4
the results of the first 2 scans are used for a preliminary
calculation that underestimates the amount to be administered but based on that initial estimate, a sufficient quantity is
prepared so the department radiopharmacy can prepare the
final amount of radioactivity to be administered that had
been determined to deliver the desired whole-body radiation-absorbed dose. similar values have been obtained using
a probe at a fixed distance and geometry from the patient, but

s.j. goldsmith

130

figure 5 sequential whole body scans (8 cm/min) obtained at 2 hours, 2 and 6 d after injection of 185 mbq (5 mci)
131i- xxxd3405xxx .

this method is more vulnerable to procedural errors than
whole-body scans and is not approved for use in this context.
(personal observation; unpublished) it is mentioned at
this time only to reassure the practitioner that the method
is quite reproducible and reliable in determining the residence time.
the calculation of amount of radioactivity to be administered is quite straight forward although initially daunting to
nuclear medicine physicians who have not accustomed
themselves to dosimetry calculations. the geometrical mean
of the initial anterior and posterior whole-body scans is set as
the 100% value. the geometrical mean from the successive
scans are compared to the initial value and expressed as a
percentage of that value. these results are either be plotted by
hand on a semilog plot of “% activity vs time” or a computer
program is provided to do this (or both). this plot is used to
determine the residence time which is defined as the time
for the semilog plot to reach 0.37 of the activity at time
zero (fig. 6).
a table is available that provides the “activity hours” for a
patient of a given weight or 137% of the ideal body weight
that would result in the patient receiving a 75 cgy total-body
radiation-absorbed dose (tbd; table 2). “activity hours” is
the product of the amount of radioactivity and the residence
time. the calculation simply divides the activity hours (product of activity and residence time) by the patient specific
residence time. the remainder is the activity that, in this
patient, would result in a 75 cgy (centigray) absorbed dose.
the following equation summarizes the rather simple relationship:

therapeutic dose (mci)
⫽

activity hours (mci hr)
residence time (hr)

⫻

desired tbd (cgy)
75 cgy

if the desired tbd is 75 cgy, the term on the right side of
the equation becomes 1; if 65 cgy is desired (because the
platelets are ⬎100,000 but ⬍150,000), the term becomes
65/75 ⫽ 0.87, which indicates that the patient with platelets
greater than 100k but less than 150k will receive 87% of the
dose that an otherwise similar patient with platelets greater
than 150k would receive.
seven to nine days after the initial “dosimetric” dose sequence, the infusion sequence (unlabeled  xxxd3405xxx  followed by 131i- xxxd3405xxx ) is repeated with the 131i- xxxd3405xxx  therapeutic dose (50-150 mci (12-120 mbq)) that
had been determined by dosimetry to deliver 65 or 75 cgy
based on the 3 whole-body counts performed after the initial
radiolabeled dose.
zevalin
in the united states, the fda requires intravenous administration of 111in-ibritumomab at the time of the initial rituximab
infusion and whole-body scanning 24-72 hours later. it is required that the whole-body image, anterior and posterior views,
is examined to confirm normal biodistribution. in the eu countries, biodistribution studies are not required before infusion of
the therapeutic dose of 90y-ibritumomab.
although the cd-20 epitope is not internalized after interaction with rituximab and inbritumomab, any free 90y forms

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma

131

graphic estimate of
total body residence time
0

percent injected activity(%ia)

100
90

o

10

20

by definition: residence time = t0.37
30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

160

170

180
100
90

whole body counts @ o-2 hrs, set at 100%

80

80
70

70

% whole body counts @ 48 hrs

60

60
50

50

0.37

40

40

30

30

% whole body
counts @ 120 hrs

0.37

20

20

10

10

residence time = 82 hours
5

5

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

160

170

180

time from dosimetric dose (hours)
figure 6 semi-log plot of data from scans in figure 5. geometrical mean of the anterior and posterior total body counts
is calculated. the value on day 0 (2 h) is set at 100%. geometrical mean values obtained on day 2 and 6 are expressed
as a percentage of the day 0 counts. the 0.37 value is defined as residence time. (color version of figure is available
online.)

insoluble hydroxides that either remain at the site of tissue
deposition or are removed by the reticuloendothelial system
including the bone marrow with potential hematologic toxicity. despite this concern, the overall safety record in hematologic toxicity for zevalin therapy is acceptable.
protocol and dose determination
the therapeutic dose of 90y-ibritumomab for the nonmyeloablative therapy of rituximab refractory or relapsed patients
with low-grade follicular non-hodgkin’s lymphoma is based
on patient weight and platelet count: 0.4 mci/kg (⬃15 mbq/
kg) for patients with platelets ⬎150,000, 0.3 mci/kg[11
mbq/kg] for patients with platelets between 100,000 and
150,000, with a maximal dose of 32 mci. the infusion of the
radioactivity is preceded by 250 mg/m2 rituximab intravenously 1 week prior and again immediately before infusion of
the radiolabeled ibritumomab dose. the infusion rate of the
nonradiolabeled antibody is initially 50 mg/h. this rate is
increased every 30 minutes as tolerated by the patient. if side
effects (flushing, chills, or nausea) occur, the dose is decreased as tolerated. the 90y-labeled preparation is injected
slowly by hand during 10 minutes through a millipore filter
using a syringe in an acrylic shield. as stated previously, in
the united states and canada, 186 mbq (5 mci) of 111inibritumomab is infused in a similar manner after the initial
infusion of rituximab. whole-body images are obtained at
24-48 hours to evaluate the biodistribution pattern (fig. 2).

clinical efficacy:
rit of lymphoma
there are an abundance of clinical studies that demonstrate
the efficacy of rit of follicular low-grade non-hodgkin’s
lymphoma. the initial and, at the time of this writing, current
approval of both bexxar and zevalin was based on results in
patients who were either refractory to, or relapsed after, rituximab therapy. since that time, the use of rituximab has
broadened considerably, and it is now used in many ways: as
maintenance therapy after remission postchemotherapy, as
an initial solo agent, and as initial therapy in combination
with a variety of chemotherapeutic regimens. although there
has not been any broadening of the therapeutic indications
for bexxar or zevalin, numerous clinical trails are either underway or have been published that would support broader
indications. this review cannot summarize all the details of
the clinical trials but several of the trials will be reviewed as
they demonstrate the efficacy and positive effect that rit has
had on the lives of many lymphoma patients and provide a
basis for the future potential of this approach.

bexxar
clinical trials of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  to determine the quantity
of “cold”  xxxd3405xxx  necessary to ensure saturation of the
large quantity of cd20 epitope present on normal b cells as
well as to determine the maximal tolerated dose of the sub-

s.j. goldsmith

132
table 2 activity hours to deliver 75 cgy tbd with
given body mass

131i

for a

body
mass
(kg)

activity
hrs

body
mass
(kg)

activity
hrs

body
mass
(kg)

activity
hrs

90
90.5
91
91.5
92
92.5
93
93.5
94

9633
9682
9730
9779
9827
9875
9924
9972
10020

94.5
95
95.5
96
96.5
97
97.5
98
98.5

10068
10117
10165
10213
10261
10309
10357
10404
10452

99
99.5
100
100.5
101
101.5
102
102.5
103

10500
10548
10595
10643
10690
10738
10785
10833
10880

“activity hours” is the product of the activity to be administered and
the residence time that would result in 75 cgy whole body
radiation absorbed dose. the patient specific residence time is
divided into this product (activity hrs) to determine the amount of
activity to be administered (in mci). if it is desirable to administer
only 65 cgy (platelets <150,000 but >100,000), 0.87 of the
activity is used (65/75 or 0.87).
when inserted into the following formula, the dose to be administered in mci is determined. a separate table can be prepared for
mbq determination:
therapeutic dose (mci)
desired tbd (cgy)*
ⴛ
residence time (hr)
75 cgy
*sixty-five or 75 cgy depending upon platelet count (see text).
tbd indicates.
ⴝ

activity hours (mci hr)

sequently administered 131i- xxxd3405xxx  began in the
1990s. in these trials, it was determined that a preinfusion of
450 mg of “cold”  xxxd3405xxx  increased the percentage injected dose in the circulation of subsequently infused 131itositumomab. furthermore, in a series of experiments with
incremental doses of 131i- xxxd3405xxx  that included dosimetry, it was observed that the orr was optimized in patients
receiving 65-75 cgy whole-body radiation-absorbed dose
rather than on a mci/kg basis. patients with more than 25%
bone marrow involvement regularly had grade iv hematologic toxicity, and this level of marrow involvement became
an exclusionary criterion. patients with platelet counts
greater than 150,000 cells/mm3 tolerated the maximal dose,
but patients with platelet counts between 100,000 and
150,000 were limited to 65 cgy. nevertheless, the clinical
results at the 65-cgy level were similar to those receiving the
75 cgy dose.
in 2005, fisher et al11 summarized the results obtained in
250 patients in 5 clinical trials that included a subset of
heavily pretreated patients. one of the early trials was limited
to patients who had relapsed after chemotherapy at least
twice, with many patients having been treated more than 3
times before receiving bexxar rit. of the 250 patients, 226
(90%) had stage iii or iv disease, and 46% had bone marrow
involvement. sixty-one percent of the patients had bulky
tumors (diameter greater than 5 cm). in this group of patients
with a considerable disease burden, the orr was 56%, and
the median duration of response was 12.9 months with a
range from 10.9 to 17.3 months. a cr was seen in 30% of the

patients. in the cr group, the median duration of response
was almost 5 years (58.4 months), with a minimum duration
of 28.3 months. many patients remained in remission beyond the 5 years that had elapsed at the time of the analysis.
in subsequent trials with patients treated earlier in their
clinical course, response rates were even more impressive. in
1 study, patients received an abbreviated course of the chemotherapeutic agent,  xxxd2120xxx  for 3 cycles.12 this was
followed after 6-8 weeks by the bexxar regimen. the orr
was 98% with 30 of 35 patients obtaining a cr. the minimal
progression-free survival (pfs) was 27 months and the median pfs had not been reached after 58 months of follow-up,
but it was calculated to exceed 48 months. the rate of hama
formation was 6%.
in another trial, bexxar was used as the initial, sole therapeutic in 76 patients with stage iii or iv follicular lymphoma.13 the
orr was 95%, and 75% of the patients had a cr. however,
63% of the patients treated without prior or concomitant
immunosuppression developed hamathat could interfere
with subsequent immuno- and rit using murine antibodies.
dosik et al14 evaluated the effects of subsequent chemotherapy in 44 of 68 patients who had previously received
 xxxd3405xxx  in a variety of protocols at the new yorkpresbyterian hospital-weill cornell medical center and either failed to respond or relapsed after a response to bexxar
rit. the median values for the white blood cell count, absolute neutrophil count, and hemoglobulin at the time of disease recurrence were not significantly different from pre-rit
values. the median platelet value had a moderate decrease
from 193,000 to 130,000 cells/␮l. the 44 patients received
a variety of cytotoxic chemotherapy including anthracyclines, platinum,  xxxd2120xxx , or stem cell transplantation. at
the time of analysis, 50% of the patients had completed treatment and had responded or were still receiving treatment.
eighteen patients failed to respond and died of progressive
disease. the significance of this report is that there is evidence of bone marrow recovery after bexxar rit. patients
with progressive disease after bexxar treatment are able to
receive subsequent cytotoxic chemotherapy including anthracyclines, platinum or  xxxd2120xxx , immunotherapy alone
or in combination, as well as stem cell transplantation.14

zevalin
in the initial clinical publication entitled “randomized
controlled trial of 90y-labeled  xxxd2312xxx  rit vs
rituximab immunotherapy for patients with relapsed or
refractory low-grade, follicular or transformed b-cell nonhodgkin’s lymphoma,” witzig et al15 reported an orr of
80% for 73 patients treated with 90y- xxxd2312xxx  vs
56% in 70 patients who received rituximab weekly for 4
weeks. the cr was 30% and 16%, respectively with an additional 4% unconfirmed crs in each group. the duration of
response for 90y- xxxd2312xxx  was 14.2 months
compared with 12.1 months for rituximab immunotherapy
alone. none of the patients had previously received rituximab. reversible myelosuppression was observed in the rit

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma
group. this publication was followed by a report evaluating
zevalin treatment in 57 patients who had not responded to
rituximab or who relapsed in less than 6 months after rituximab therapy.16 the orr was 74% with 15% cr. the time to
progression was 8.7 months for the responders. the incidence of grade 4 neutropenia was 35%, thrombocytopenia
9%, and anemia 4%.
recently, data have become available on the efficacy of
zevalin after chemotherapeutic induction of a cr or pr in
208 patients vs a similar group of 206 patients who received
no additional therapy. in this multi-centered phase iii trial,
the group receiving the so-called “consolidation therapy”
had a median pfs of 36.5 months vs 13.3 months for the
control group. cr patients had a pfs of 53.9 months vs 29.5,
and pr patients had a pfs of 29.3 vs 6.2 months. seventyseven percent of pr patients after induction converted to cr
with consolidation therapy.17
despite the impressive orr obtained in patients treated
with zevalin, there is concern that the bone marrow radiation exposure compromises the bone marrow rendering
the patient at greater risk of adverse hematologic consequences if and when the disease progresses and the patient
relapses. data from several clinical trials involving subsequent treatment of patients with disease progression after
zevalin rit were summarized by ansell et al.18 subsequent therapies varied from site to site and included chemotherapy such as chop (cyclophosphoamide, hydroxy
rubicin,  xxxd3512xxx , prednisone), cvp (cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, prednisone), and other aggressive chemotherapeutic protocols, bioimmunotherapy, radiation therapy, or
autologous stem cell transplantation. an orr of 53% was
obtained in patients receiving chemotherapy. ansell et al18
compared the hematologic toxicity to re-treatment with chemotherapy in 59 patients previously treated with zevalin to a
control group of 60 years of age, gender and histopathologically matched patients who had not received zevalin. there
was neither significant difference between the zevalin and
control group in grade 4 cytopenia, neutropenic fever, hospitalizations for complications, or requirement for  xxxd2106xxx  or platelet transfusion nor did
the earlier bone marrow radiation exposure and transient
depression of hematologic indices associated with zevalin
interfere with subsequent efforts to harvest stem cells. an
adequate collection of stem cells was obtained in 7 of 8 patients who received growth factor mobilization in preparation for autotransplantation. in the eighth patient, direct
bone marrow sampling was necessary. in all 8 patients, the
subsequent transplant was successful with development of
satisfactory blood indices. in another study, successful transplantation was reported in 9 patients who had received zevalin, a median of 13.3 months previously.
in summary, these data demonstrate that zevalin is an
effective therapy with an orr of approximately 80% and a
cr of approximately 30% in patients who are refractory to
unlabeled anti-cd20 immunotherapy and chemotherapy or
have relapsed after these therapies. in the cr subgroup, there
is an impressive duration of response. these results have
been obtained with manageable hematologic toxicity. the

133
concern that patients treated with zevalin will have severe
marrow impairment rendering them ineligible for further
therapy is not substantiated by the results of several studies
comparing retreatment with chemotherapy, stem cell mobilization, and successful autotransplantation of zevalintreated patients to otherwise matched control groups.18
in considering the 2 preparations, bexxar and zevalin that
are available for rit of low-grade follicular rituximab refractory or relapsed non-hodgkin’s lymphoma, 2 questions inevitably arise:
●

which radioimmunotherapeutic regimen is preferable
for the treatment of cd-20 positive lymphoma?

which regimen is preferable? at the present time, there
has not been a direct randomized comparison of the clinical
efficacy of the 2 agents. in comparing the available data from
separate trials, although similar clinical data points are available for the 2 agents such as for the frequency of hematological or other complications, the percentage of patients who
have had a cr or a pr (together these 2 parameters become
the orr), and the time to progression (that is relapse), it is
clear that there are many variables among the patient groups
studied—such as extent of disease, number and type of prior
therapies, duration of response to prior therapy, and status of
bone marrow as well as the usual demographics (age and
gender). hence, one cannot claim or demonstrate a clear
superiority of one agent over the other based on a metaanalysis of the material published to date.
nevertheless, there are practical and theoretical issues that
might influence the selection of one regimen. at the present
time, zevalin is available in europe, and bexxar is not available. in this situation, there is no choice. both zevalin and
bexxar are available in the united states. although iodine
allergy affects only a small subset of patients, iodine allergy
would preclude the use of bexxar because it is necessary to
administer  xxxd2375xxx  prior and during bexxar treatment to block
thyroid uptake of the radioiodine. although thyroid iodine
uptake could be suppressed with exogenous thyroid hormone to reduce the thyroid radiation absorbed dose, this is
generally not recommended. in these situations, the choice is
simplified and zevalin would be selected.
a nuclear medicine physician and facility should acquire
experience with both agents (when available) so that if further information becomes available that is favorable to one or
the other regimen in a specific clinical setting, the nuclear
medicine physician or radiation oncologist can proceed with
the agent-of-choice.
in a theoretical comparison of physical characteristics,
there are differences in the energy of the ␤ emission and in
the physical half-life of the 2 radionuclides, 131i and 90y. the
greater energy of the ␤ particle associated with 90y is thought
to be advantageous in the therapy of larger tumor masses
(greater than 5 cm), whereas the lower energy of 131i is
thought of as an advantage for treating patients with small
tumor foci (greater fractional absorption) and marrow involvement (less radiation to surrounding elements)— even
though the use of either agent is precluded in the non-my-

s.j. goldsmith

134
eloablative setting for patients with 25% or more marrow
involvement.
at the new york-presbyterian/weill cornell medical center, we have acquired experience with both agents having
treated over 200 patients in various clinical trials and clinical
situations following regulatory approval. the entire administration of the bexxar regimen (unlabeled  xxxd3405xxx  and
131i  xxxd3405xxx ) both for dosimetry and therapy is performed in nuclear medicine. when the zevalin regimen is
selected for a patient, the initial rituximab infusion is performed in the oncology service suite before administration
of either the111in-labeled ibritumomab for imaging 24-48
hours later as well as the therapeutic dose of 90y ibritumomab. we have found that patients do not tolerate an infusion of the cold (unlabeled) rituximab (component of the
zevalin regimen) at as fast a rate (ml/min) as they can of the
(unlabeled)  xxxd3405xxx . approximately 3 hours are scheduled for the cold antibody, rituximab, infusion to be completed at which time, the patient is accompanied to the nuclear medicine infusion area. the labeled preparations are
administered in the nuclear medicine therapy infusion area.
●

why is it necessary to perform “dosimetry” for bexxar
and not for zevalin?

dosimetry
when bexxar is selected as the therapeutic regimen, wholebody dosimetry is performed to determine the whole-body
radiation-absorbed dose since the early trials demonstrated a
dose response between the whole-body radiation-absorbed
dose to the percentage of patients with crs or prs. the
optimal clinical benefit with acceptable hematologic toxicity
was observed at 65-75 cgy whole body radiation absorbed
dose. there is no correlation between the dose administered
based on patient weight (mci/kg) and the clinical response.
similarly, hematologic toxicity was more predictable based
on whole-body radiation-absorbed dose for selection of the
dose to be administered compared to selecting a dose based
on mci per unit body weight.6
the radiation-absorbed dose to be delivered is either 65 or
75 cgy as determined by the platelet count. a table of “activity hours” to deliver 75 cgy of from131i labeled antibody is
provided. “activity hours” is a product of the t0.37eff (in
hours) and administered activity for a given mass of distribution (for whole body dosimetry, this is the body weight). by
dividing “activity hours” by “residence time,” the quotient
(remainder) is the activity (in mci or mbq) that will result in
delivering the prescribed radiation absorbed dose (75, 65 ⫽
0.89 ⫻ 75 cgy) to a patient with a specified body mass.
the variable that needs to be determined for each patient
(other than body weight and platelet count) is the “residence
time.” residence time is a function of the t1/2 effective; residence time is actually the t0.37 of the log of activity vs time
plot.
t1/2 effective and t0.37 effective are determined by the t1/2 physical
and the t1/2 biological with the relationship

t1⁄2 effective ⫽

t1⁄2 physical ⫻ t1⁄2 biological
t1⁄2 physical ⫹ t1⁄2 biological

t1/2 effective is always less than either the t1/2 physical or the
t1/2 biological. the range of values for the t1/2 biological and
hence residence time can vary by several fold, from perhaps
as brief as 8 days to possibly 24 days or more.
because the t1/2 physical of 90y is 2.4 days, the t1/2 effective
would always be less than 2.4 days compared to 131i, where
the t1/2 effective could be from 4 days to almost 8 days.
doubling of the residence time for a given administered dose
of a 131i-labeled monoclonal antibody results in doubling the
radiation absorbed dose.
although there is indeed some variation in radiation absorbed dose for a given administered dose of a 90y-labeled
monoclonal antibody such as 90y-ibritumomab depending
on the t1/2 biological, the variation from patient to patient is
inconsequential because of trivial differences in the t1/2 effective because of the short t1/2 physical. accordingly, it is
sufficient to identify the therapeutic dose of 90y based on
activity (mci or mbq) per kg (body weight), ie, 15 mbq (0.4
mci)/kg if platelets exceed 150,000; reduced dose for platelets between 100,000 and 150,000 is 12 mbq (0.3 mci)/kg.
in summary, in an application where a t1/2 physical is less
than the lowest value of the range of possible t1/2 biological
values, differences in the t1/2 biological value have not much
effect on the t1/2 effective or the radiation absorbed dose. when
the t1/2 physical is greater than the t1/2 biological value in some
patients, the t1/2 effective and consequently the whole body
radiation absorbed dose is dependent upon the t1/2 biological. in
these circumstances, whole body dosimetry is necessary to
determine the maximal tolerated dose.

conclusions
bexxar and zevalin are approved by regulatory agencies, government, and private health insurance companies in the
united states and canada for the treatment of patients with
follicular, low-grade non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. they produce significant improvement, sometimes with no evidence
of disease (cr) for many months to several years. other patients, with prs, also remain symptom-free for long periods.
the regimen were initially approved in patients who had
relapsed or were refractory to previous treatment, and excellent results have been obtained when these agents have been
used as part of an initial treatment protocol. orrs of over
80% to almost 100% have been observed in various studies.
although somewhat more demanding than oral administration of 131i therapy in the treatment of thyroid cancer,
nuclear medicine facilities have the training, personnel, and
technical resources to administer either bexxar or zevalin
without significant personal exposure. a coordinated team
approach involving the referring oncologists, oncology support personnel, nuclear medicine physicians, pharmacists,
nurses, and technologists is essential to efficiently and satisfactorily administer a radioimmunotherapeutic regimen. in
the united states, patients can be treated as outpatients. in
various other governmental jurisdictions, local regulations

radioimmunotherapy of lymphoma
may require hospitalization for purposes of radiation isolation. the procedure is well tolerated by patients. the additional effort expended by nuclear medicine personnel is compensated for by improving the quality of life and prolonging
the lives of patients with non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. hopefully, the benefits of rit can be extended to other tumor
types in the near future.

acknowledgments
the author expresses gratitude and appreciation to colleagues present and past: morton coleman, md, john leonard, md, shankar vallabhajosula, phd, vasilios avlonitis,
rph, zubaida rahman, rph, and lale kostakoglu, md for
their support during the period in which we worked together
to understand and improve the principles and practice of
radioimmunotherapy and to make this therapy available to
patients with non-hodgkin’s lymphoma.

references
1. davis ta, grillo-lópez aj, white ca, et al: rituximab anti-cd20
monoclonal antibody therapy in non-hodgkin’s lymphoma: safety and
efficacy of re-treatment. j clin oncol 18:3135-3143, 2000
2. kohler g, milstein c: continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity. nature 256:495-497, 1975
3. o’donoghue ja, bardies m, wheldon te: relationships between tumor
size and curability for uniformly targeted therapy with beta-emitting
radionuclides. j nucl med 36:1902-1909, 1995
4. leonard jp, siegel ja, goldsmith sj: comparative physical and pharmacologic characteristics of iodine-131 and yttrium-90: implications
for radioimmunotherapy for patients with non-hodgkin’s lymphoma.
cancer invest 21:241-252, 2003
5. arico d, grana cm, vanazzi a, et al: the role of dosimetry in the high
activity 90y- xxxd2312xxx  regimens: two cases of abnormal
biodistribution. cancer biother radiopharm 24:271-275, 2009
6. wahl rl:  xxxd3405xxx  and 131i therapy in non-hodgkin’s lymphoma.
j nucl med 46:128s-140s, 2002

135
7. rutar fj, augustine sc, colcher d, et al: outpatient treatment with
131
i-anti-b1 antibody: radiation exposure to family members. j nucl
med 42:907-915, 2001
8. harwood sj, rutar f, sullivan g, et al: bexxar radioimmunotherapy can
be safely administered by healthcare professionals with minimal whole
body exposure. j nucl med 44:327, 2003
9. wagner hn, wiseman ga, marcus cs, et al: administration guidelines
for radioimmunotherapy with 90y-labeled anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody. j nucl med 43:267-272, 2002
10. britton k: radioimmunotherapy of non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. j nucl
med 45:924-925, 2004
11. fisher ri, kaminski ms, wahl rl, et al:  xxxd3405xxx  and iodine-131
 xxxd3405xxx  produces durable complete remissions in a subset of
heavily pretreated patients with low-grade and transformed nonhodgkin’s lymphomas. j clin oncol 23:7565-7573, 2005
12. leonard jp, coleman m, kostakoglu l, et al: abbreviated chemotherapy with  xxxd2120xxx  followed by  xxxd3405xxx  and iodine i-131  xxxd3405xxx  for untreated follicular lymphoma. j clin oncol 23:56965704, 2005
13. kaminski ms, tuck m, estes j, et al: 131i-tositumomabtherapy as initial
treatment for follicular lymphoma. n engl j med 352:441-449, 2005
14. dosik ad, coleman m, kostakoglu l, et al: subsequent therapy can be
administered after  xxxd3405xxx  and iodine i-131  xxxd3405xxx  for
non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. cancer 106:616-622, 2006
15. witzig te, gordon li, cabanillas f, et al: randomized controlled trial
of yttrium-90-labeled  xxxd2312xxx  radioimmunotherapy versus rituximab immunotherapy for patients with relapsed or refractory
low-grade, follicular, or transformed b-cell non-hodgkin’s lymphoma.
j clin oncl 20:2453-2463, 2002
16. witzig te, flinn iw, gordon li, et al: treatment with ibritumomab
tiuxetan radioimmunotherapy in patients with rituximab refractory
follicular non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. j clin oncl 20:3262-3269, 2002
17. morschauer f, radford j, van hoff a, et al: phase iii trial of consolidation therapy with yttrium-90- xxxd2312xxx  compared with no
additional therapy after first remission in advanced follicular lymphoma. j clin oncl 26:5156-5164269, 2008
18. ansell sm, schilder rj, pieslor pc, et al: antilymphoma treatments
given subsequent to yttrium 90  xxxd2312xxx  are feasible in
patients with progressive non-hodgkin’s lymphoma: a review of the
literature. clin lymphoma 5:202-204, 2004

