pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

contents lists available at sciencedirect

pharmacology & therapeutics
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s ev i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / p h a r m t h e r a

atypical behavioural effects of lorazepam: clues to the design of novel therapies?
anne giersch a,⁎, muriel boucart b, mark elliott c, pierre vidailhet a
a
b
c

physiopathologie et psychopathologie cognitive de la schizophrénie, inserm u666, psychiatry dept, centre hospitalier régional universitaire de strasbourg, france
lab. neurosciences fonctionnelles & pathologies, université lille nord de france, cnrs, france
school of psychology, national university of ireland, galway, ireland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
aside from their pharmacokinetic properties, e.g. their speed of action and the duration of residual effects,
benzodiazepines are still considered as equivalent in terms of their effects on cognition. here we review
evidence suggesting that certain benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam, differ in a number of respects, in
particular with respect to their effects on cognition. we focus this review on memory, attention and visual
perception, where impairments may be brought about by only a subset of benzodiazepines in spite of their
administration at doses inducing similar sedative effects. this precludes an explanation in terms of sedation.
differences in the effects of benzodiazepines have also been found in electrophysiological and animal
behavioural studies.
these studies are important for therapeutic approaches for two reasons: ﬁrst, effects of benzodiazepine
prescription on cognitive functions will differ according to the benzodiazepine, contrary to what is usually
believed. less straightforwardly are the possible therapeutic implications of speciﬁc effects on cognition
following treatment with lorazepam. indeed, the speciﬁc effects this drug has on cognition may reveal not
only side-effects but also effects of potential therapeutic value. current research concentrates on a ﬁne scale
analysis of the effects of gaba on different sub-types of gabaa receptors. we suggest that from looking at
what makes lorazepam different in a behavioural sense from other benzodiazepines we may be in a position
to design innovative treatments for major aspects of complex disorders, including schizophrenia.
© 2010 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.

keywords:
benzodiazepines
lorazepam
gaba
perception
memory
imaging
cognition

contents
1.
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.
dissociating benzodiazepines by their effects on perceptual priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.
dissociating benzodiazepines by their effects on form perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.
effects of benzodiazepines on attention: is diazepam more potent than lorazepam? . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.
physiological arguments for a dissociation between benzodiazepines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.
effects of chronic intake and signiﬁcance of the qualitative differences between benzodiazepines in everyday use
7.
possible molecular bases for a qualitative difference between benzodiazepines–metabolites . . . . . . .
8.
do the selective effects of lorazepam signify therapeutic properties? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.
conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
glossary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

95
95
99
101
101
102
103
104
105
105
105
108
105

abbreviations: eeg, electroencephalography; fmri, functional magnetic resonance imaging; meg, magnetoencephalography; pdp, process dissociation procedure; pet, positron
emission tomography; sai, short-latency afferent inhibition; sici, short-latency intracortical inhibition; tms, transcranial magnetic stimulation.
⁎ correponding author. inserm u666, centre hospitalier régional de strasbourg, département de psychiatrie i, hôpital civil, 1, pl de l'hôpital, f-67091 strasbourg cedex, france.
tel.: +33 3 88 11 64 71; fax: +33 3 88 11 64 46.
e-mail address: giersch@alsace.u-strasbg.fr (a. giersch).
0163-7258/$ – see front matter © 2010 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.01.004

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

1. introduction
benzodiazepines are widely prescribed for their anxiolytic,
hypnotic, myorelaxant and anti-epileptic properties. they facilitate
ﬁxation of gaba on gabaa receptors, and in this way increase the
inhibitory effect of gaba (kaila, 1994). it is widely held that all
benzodiazepines affect gabaergic transmission in the same way, but
in spite of this a large number of different types of gabaa/
benzodiazepine receptors has now been described (review in möhler,
2007). this research suggests that different molecules differ in their
afﬁnity for sub-types of the gabaa/benzodiazepine receptor. moreover, there is now a variety of evidence claiming qualitative
differences in the psychological effects of different benzodiazepines.
in particular, as reviewed here, there is substantial evidence
identifying lorazepam as distinct in its effects on cognitive processes
relative to other benzodiazepines (pompéia et al., 2003b, 2005).
gaba is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and
benzodiazepine receptors are ubiquitously distributed throughout the
central nervous system. it is thus not surprising that benzodiazepines
have a number of different effects on cognition beside their desired
therapeutic effects. these include effects on memory (brown et al.,
1982; curran, 1991; danion et al., 1992 ; buffet-jerrott & stewart,
2002), visual perception (giersch et al., 1997; giersch, 1999; giersch
& lorenceau, 1999; giersch, 2001) and attention (jalava et al., 1995;
johnson et al., 1995; post et al., 1997; carter et al., 1998; boucart et al.,
2000, 2007). the effects of individual benzodiazepines have been
shown to differ qualitatively in a number of studies, especially those
comparing lorazepam with other drugs, usually diazepam. there are
few studies in each domain, i.e., cognition, animal behaviour, eeg or
tms, and the methodologies used, as well as the type of drug response
differ markedly across studies, making it difﬁcult to realize a metaanalysis. in spite of this the results consistently indicate qualitative
differences between benzodiazepines. in our review, we have not
selected positive results among papers, but simply extracted the few
papers from the literature that directly compared different benzodiazepines with the aim of providing a comparative analysis of the
different drug effects. we emphasize only those papers in which
effects cannot be explained by a trivial difference in metabolism, with
some drugs acting longer than others, or having their peak plasma
concentrations at different times relative to the drug intake, or by
differences in dosages. except when otherwise stated, the studies
described here compared benzodiazepines at dosages inducing a
similar level of sedation and displaying similar effects on anxiety, and
the effects of the drugs were compared at their peak of action. the
majority of the described studies deal with young healthy volunteers.
detailed information regarding dosages, therapeutic effects and sideeffects in such studies can be found in table 1. there are some aspects
we do not develop here, because they seem only poorly supported
until now, like the beneﬁcial effects of lorazepam on epilepsia, which
might be attributed to the dosages used in the studies, or the effects
on mania or catatonia (table 1). these effects might warrant further
exploration, though, and we mention them in the table. with the
remaining information, we both review and discuss evidence for a
qualitative difference between existing benzodiazepines, with two
aims: ﬁrstly, it is useful to disseminate this knowledge because it
means that different benzodiazepines will differ in terms of their side
effects. the studies to date suggest that lorazepam affects visual
perception and some aspects of memory (‘perceptual priming’). these
effects are not shared by all benzodiazepines and they persist at least
in part following chronic intake. the effects are not very well known,
and we put special emphasis on them and on their possible impact on
everyday life. second, the qualitative difference between benzodiazepines may reveal a property (or properties) of a sub-group of
benzodiazepines which might be of interest with respect to novel
therapeutics. we will detail the arguments supporting this assertion
with the aim of encouraging research at the molecular level to provide

95

an explanation of qualitative differences between benzodiazepines.
this may in turn uncover a target(s) for innovative drug or treatment
design especially for complex disorders in which benzodiazepines are
frequently prescribed, for example schizophrenia.
2. dissociating benzodiazepines
by their effects on perceptual priming
following acute dosage, all benzodiazepines provoke anterograde
amnesia without retrograde amnesia: they impair explicit memory for
information learned after, but not before drug intake. this amnesic
effect has been well documented using classic recall and recognition
tasks in which subjects are explicitly instructed to recollect past
information voluntarily and consciously (brown et al., 1982, 1989;
curran, 1991; danion et al., 1992). this amnesic effect is shared by all
benzodiazepines, although its magnitude and proﬁle differ quantitatively between drugs depending on a variety of factors including
dosage and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic properties (ghoneim
& mewaldt, 1990). effects on explicit memory are the best known
cognitive effects of benzodiazepine administration. however, these
are not effects we intend to focus on here, as to date no qualitative
difference has been found between benzodiazepines in explicit
memory. there is another form of memory, however, which is
differentially affected by benzodiazepines, that is perceptual priming
which is an unconscious, non intentional form of memory. perceptual
priming refers to a change in behavioural response to a stimulus
following re-exposure. it is explored in tasks such as word-stem or
picture completion, in which prior presentation of a stimulus item
facilitates its subsequent identiﬁcation even though no explicit
instruction is given to subjects to recollect the item concerned
(tulving & schacter, 1990). this form of implicit memory can be
dissociated from explicit memory in amnesic patients, who are unable
to consciously recollect any past information, nonetheless show
preserved perceptual priming. even though these patients are unable
to remember whether or not they have experienced an item, they are
still facilitated in the identiﬁcation of that particular item when
presented with it on a subsequent occasion. the evidence for this
facilitation is the accelerated response or the need for only scant
information to identify the item. this form of facilitation is taken as a
sign of perceptual priming. to date, most benzodiazepines have been
shown to preserve perceptual priming in healthy subjects (pompéia et
al., 2003b) with the notable exception of lorazepam which, in direct
contrast to this general trend is reported to impair perceptual priming
(brown et al., 1989; knopman, 1991; danion et al., 1992; sellal et al.,
1992; curran & gorenstein, 1993; vidailhet et al., 1994; bishop &
curran, 1995; curran et al., 1995; legrand et al., 1995; stewart et al.,
1996; buffet-jerrott et al., 1998a; vidailhet et al., 1999; pompéia et al.,
2000; martin et al., 2002; pompéia et al., 2003a). the impairment by
lorazepam of perceptual priming is dose-dependent and maximal at
the time of the theoretical peak plasma concentration of the drug
(legrand et al., 1995). it has been observed in different tasks and
modalities, i.e. visual or auditory, with words or pictures (sellal et al.,
1992; vidailhet et al., 1994; legrand et al., 1995; vidailhet et al.,
1999). this differential effect of lorazepam on perceptual priming is
qualitative in nature since it has been reported in studies directly
comparing lorazepam to other benzodiazepines, where the deleterious effect on explicit memory and/or on attention and sedation were
equivalent (sellal et al., 1992; curran & gorenstein, 1993; pompéia et
al., 2000; martin et al., 2002; pompéia et al., 2003a). this suggests it is
not related to a difference in potency between drugs: if lorazepam had
been more potent than other benzodiazepines, then differences
between drugs should have been observed for the different cognitive
measures. on the contrary, lorazepam affects some speciﬁc aspects of
cognition that remain preserved under the effect of other drugs,
whereas benzodiazepines are found to be equipotent on other,
dissociated aspects of cognition. it is this kind of results that suggests

96

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

table 1
the cited studies take into account possible differences in metabolism, and in particular in action delays (either the compared drugs share the same proﬁle, or their effect is compared
at peak of action).
dose of lorazepam
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

dose of compared
benzodiazepine
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

design

benzodiazepine effects
that are similar

1 mg oral

10 mg diazepam
4.8 mg midazolam
20 mg  xxxd1718xxx 
15 mg clorazepate
1 mg ﬂunitrazepam
0.5 mg alprazolam
5.5 mg  xxxd369xxx 
0.5 mg clonazepam
20 mg oxazepam

between-subject

similar effects on anxiety

epilepsia
cock & schapira, 2002, qjm

4 mg iv

10 mg iv diazepam

between-subject
retrospective
n = 72

similar effect on seizure
termination. no difference
in reported side effects
(sedation, hypotension,
respiratory depression)

qureshi et al., 2002, seizure

0.13 mg/kg iv

0.32 mg/kg iv diazepam

between-subject
n = 48

similar effect on seizure
termination

alldredge et al., 2001,
new engl j med

2–4 mg

5–10 mg diazepam or
placebo

between-subject
n = 205

similar rate of respiratory
or circulatory complications

appleton et al., 1995, dev
med child  xxxd122xxx 

0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv
or rectal

0.3–0.4 mg/kg diazepam
iv or rectal

between-subject
n = 86

leppik et al., 1983, jama

4 mg iv

10 mg diazepam iv

between-subject
n = 78

side-effects (diverse)
mendelson et al., 1996,
sleep

1–2 mg

2.5–10 mg diazepam
0.25 mg alprazolam

n around 1200

sympathetic activity
agelink et al., 2002, crit
care med

0.06 mg/kg

0.13 mg/kg diazepam
0.07 mg/kg midazolam

between-subject
n = 45

tulen & man in't veld, 1998,
j cardiovasc pharmacol

2 mg lorazepam

1 mg alprazolam

within-subject
n = 12

van den berg et al., 1996,
psychopharmacology

2 mg lorazepam

1 mg alprazolam

within-subject
n = 12

roelofse & van der bijl,
1994, j oral maxillofac
surg

0.05 mg/kg iv

0.25 mg/kg diazepam
0.1 mg/kg midazolam

between-subject
n = 60

pomara et al., 2004,
neuropsychopharmacology

0.5–1 mg acute
and chronic

0.25–0.5 mg alprazolam

between-subjects
(n = 68)

sedation evaluated
subjectively

signiﬁcant increase of cortisol
plasma level under alprazolam but
not lorazepam

catatonia symptoms
schmider et al., 1999, biol
psychiatry

2 mg

60 mg oxazepam

within-subject
(n = 17)

similar efﬁciency on the
ﬁrst day of treatment

lorazepam was more efﬁcient on
the second day of treatment (but
the cross-over design makes the
interpretation difﬁcult)

anxiolysis
the ashton manual,
ashton, 2002

benzodiazepine effects that differ

fewer seizure recurrence under
lorazepam (but see doses)

better odd ratio for lorazepam
than for diazepam (but see doses)
slightly larger efﬁcacy under
lorazepam than diazepam, and less
respiratory depression.

adverse effects similar
(respiratory depression)

lorazepam slightly more efﬁcient
than diazepam (but see doses)

frequency of adverse effects
(confusion, mild somnolence,
respiratory depression, agitation,
sedation, rash) larger in
lorazepam-treated (0.05%) than
in subjects treated with other
benzodiazepines (0.02% or lower,
but see doses)

reduction in the vagal
tone increase in the
resting heart rate
reduction in plasma noradernaline
concentration under alprazolam
but not lorazepam, with an increase
in the cardiac vagal tone
sedation evaluated
subjectively

suppression of adrenomedullary
activity under alprazolam but not
lorazepam
dysrhythmia observed in 25%
diazepam-treated subjects, 5%
midazolam treated subject, and 0%
lorazepam-treated subject.

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

97

table 1 (continued)
dose of lorazepam
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

dose of compared
benzodiazepine
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

design

6–24 mg

6–24 mg clonazepam

between-subject
(n = 206)

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
n = 30

sedation evaluated
subjectively (visual
analogue scales)

detection of discontinuities altered
in lorazepam but not diazepam

giersch & herzog, 2004,
neuropsychopharmacology

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

within-subject
n = 12

sedation evaluated
subjectively (visual
analogue scales) and
objectively (pupillography)

vernier offset discrimination altered
in lorazepam but not diazepam

elliott et al., 2006,
psychopharmacology

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

within-subject
n = 12

sedation evaluated
subjectively (visual
analogue scales)

dynamic ﬁgural priming increased
under lorazepam but not diazepam

wagemans et al., 1998,
psychopharmacology

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
n = 36

impairment in the identiﬁcation of
fragmented pictures under
lorazepam, but not under
diazepam

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 36)

increase in the magnitude and duration
of the attentional blink effect, more
pronounced under diazepam than
under lorazepam

jalava et al., 1995, pharmacol, 2 mg
biochem & behav

15 mg diazepam ethanol
placebo

between-subject
(n = 21)

effect on focus attention

effect on divided attention more
pronounced under lorazepam than
under diazepam

memory
pompéia et al., 2000,
j psychopharmacol

2 mg

0.6, 0.8, 1 mg
ﬂunitrazepamplacebo

between-subject
(n = 60)

explicit memory

perceptual priming more severely
impaired by lorazepam (only
lorazepam b placebo)

pompéia et al., 2003a, hum
psychopharmacol

2 mg

1.2 mg ﬂunitrazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 36)

using the pdp, both
drugs impaired the
estimates of controlled,
but not automatic
memory processes

only lorazepam impaired
perceptual priming. the proﬁle of
impairment of the 2 drugs differed in
the exclusion and inclusion test
conditions of the pdp

curran & gorenstein, 1993,
int clin psychopharmacol
stewart et al., 1996,
psychopharmacology
buffet-jerrott et al., 1998a,
psychopharmacology
martin et al., 2002,
psychopharmacology

2 mg (except
for martin et al:
2.5 mg)

30 mg oxazepam placebo

between subject
(n = 30 to n = 36)

explicit memory

lorazepam impaired perceptual
priming in the 4 studies while
oxazepam impaired it in only 2
(for a critical review of these latter
studies, see martin et al., 2002 and
pompéia et al., 2003a)

curran et al., 1987,
psychopharmacology

1, 2 mg

15, 30 mg oxazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 45)

explicit memory

the magnitude of explicit memory
impairment was higher after
lorazepam (2 mg) than oxazepam
(30 mg)

block & berchou, 1984
pharmacol biochem behav
kumar et al., 1987, j clin
psychiatry
greenblatt et al., 1988, clin
pharmacol ther
pomara et al., 1998,
psychopharmacol bull

2 mg

0.25, 0.5 or 1 mg
alprazolam

between-subject or
cross-over (n = 12
to n = 39)

explicit memory after
ﬁrst or repeated dosage
(6 days)

dissociations in the pattern of
tolerance for cognitive effects after
3 weeks of treatment (pomara et al.,
1998)

brown et al., 1982,
neuropsychologia

3 mg iv

7.5 mg diazepam iv
placebo

between-subject
(n = 27)

explicit memory

lorazepam affected recognition
more than recall

acute mania
bradwejn et al., 1990, j clin
psychopharmacol

perception
beckers et al., 2001, vis res

attention
boucart et al., 2000,
psychopharmacology

benzodiazepine effects
that are similar

benzodiazepine effects that differ

improvement in the psychopathology
score larger under lorazepam than
under clonazepam. (but see
meta-analysis by curtin &
schulz, j affective disorders,
2004)

(continued on next page)

98

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

table 1 (continued)
design

benzodiazepine effects
that are similar

benzodiazepine effects that differ

explicit memory impaired
by diazepam and
lorazepam

no deleterious effect of  xxxd1718xxx 
on memory

dose of lorazepam
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

dose of compared
benzodiazepine
(except otherwise
stated, the intake
is oral)

2 mg

10 mg diazepam  xxxd1718xxx  cross-over (n = 10)
20 mg placebo

healey et al., 1983, j clin
psychiatry

1 or 2 mg

5 or 10 mg diazepam 7.5 or cross-over (n = 10)
15 mg clorazepate placebo

conner et al., 1978, j clin
pharmacol

2 or 4 mg iv

diazepam 10 or 20 mg iv

between-subject
(n = 120)

explicit memory

sellal et al., 1992,
psychopharmacology

1.75 or 2.5 mg

15 or 20 mg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 60)

explicit memory

vidailhet et al., 1994,
psychopharmacology

0.026 or
0.038 mg/kg

0.2 or 0.3 mg/kg diazepam between-subject
placebo
(n = 60)

explicit memory and
perceptual priming

legrand et al., 1995,
psychopharmacology

0.026 or
0.038 mg/kg

0.2 or 0.3 mg/kg diazepam between-subject
placebo
(n = 60)

explicit memory

vidailhet et al., 1996,
psychopharmacology

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 60)

huron et al., 2001,
psychopharmacology

0.038 mg/kg

0.3 mg/kg diazepam
placebo

between-subject
(n = 36)

curran, 1992,
j psychopharmacol

1.6 mg (mean)

8.6 mg diazepam (mean)

subjects having  xxxd1459xxx  explicit memory
dependence (n = 7
for lorazepam and
n = 9 for diazepam)

only lorazepam altered perceptual
priming

1 mg

5 mg diazepam

within-subject,
n=1

larger sedation under lorazepam
than under diazepam (but see doses),
and qualitative differences in eeg
signal

pompeia et al., 2000, 2003a, j
psychopharmacol

2 mg

0.6 to 1.2 mg
ﬂunitrazepam

between-subject
n = 30 to 36

dsst, and sedation
evaluated subjectively
(visual analogue scales)

larger slowing down under
ﬂunitrazepam in the simple reaction
time test, but reversed results for
shape identiﬁcation. longer latencies
in evoked potentials under lorazepam
than under ﬂunitrazepam

di lazzaro et al., 2005a, j
physiol

2.5 mg

20 mg diazepam

within-subject
n = 11

effects on short-latency
intra-cortical inhibition
(sici)

short-latency afferent inhibition (sai)
affected by lorazepam but not by
diazepam

memory
patat et al., 1987, eur j clin
pharmacol

electrophysiology
itil et al., 1989, int clin
psychopharmacol

that lorazepam differs qualitatively from other drugs. moreover,
additional methods have been used to distinguish perceptual priming
from explicit memory. indeed, identiﬁcation of incomplete pictures or
completion of word stems that have been presented previously might
be based on explicit memory rather than on perceptual priming per
se. this ‘explicit contamination’ usually explains why other benzodiazepines than lorazepam may, in some studies, display a deleterious
effect on perceptual priming index, compared to placebo (vidailhet et
al., 1994; legrand et al., 1995; stewart et al., 1996; buffet-jerrott et al.,
1998a,b). with this in mind, some authors have used a ‘retrieval
intentionality criterion’ to eliminate an explanation in terms of a
contamination of the priming task by explicit memory (bishop &
curran, 1995). finally, using the ‘process-dissociation procedure’
(pdp) from which non contaminated estimates of controlled and
automatic memory processes can be obtained (jacoby, 1991), our
group has shown that lorazepam, and not diazepam, impairs
automatic memory processes (vidailhet et al., 1996; see pompéia et
al., 2003a, for a critical discussion of our results).

only lorazepam impaired explicit
memory

perceptual priming more severely
impaired by lorazepam than diazepam

perceptual priming impaired by
lorazepam but not diazepam
in the pdp, only lorazepam altered
the estimate of automatic memory
processes

conscious recollection
for true but not false
memories no effect on
familiarity

as the cognitive mechanisms involved in lorazepam-impaired
perceptual priming begin to be understood light may be shed on the
mechanisms by which lorazepam differs from other benzodiazepines
and in the following we will develop this point. lorazepam impairs the
acquisition of information, whilst leaving intact its storage and retrieval
(vidailhet et al., 1994). impaired performance is observed when
lorazepam is given prior to information acquisition but is not evident
when administered immediately after acquisition. lorazepam impairs
both visual and auditory perceptual priming (vidailhet et al., 1999).
according to roediger and challis (1992), perceptual priming involves
both modality-speciﬁc sensory processing alongside modality-independent, more abstract processes (including lexical processes, i.e. the
access to the name corresponding to the picture or the word) both of
which appear to be impaired by lorazepam in word-stem completion
tasks (vidailhet et al., 1999). this conclusion is further supported by
functional brain imaging studies, which permit exploration of the
neurobiological foundations of perceptual priming and allow more
detailed analysis of the different cognitive processes involved. these

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

studies typically show a ‘suppression repetition effect’, that is lower
brain activity for primed compared to non-primed stimuli (schacter
et al., 2007) which may correspond to the facilitation of stimulus
processing. the suppression repetition effect has been observed in
several brain regions, some of which are modality-speciﬁc and
implicated in perceptual identiﬁcation while others are more anterior
and multimodal and subserve more abstract (phonological, lexical or
semantic) processes (henson, 2003; bergerbest et al., 2004; schacter
et al., 2007; also see horner & henson, 2008 for the implication of some
prefrontal regions in increased efﬁciency in stimulus-decision coupling). thiel et al. (2001) have used event-related fmri to explore the
effect on the brain of a single dose of lorazepam (2 mg per os) while
subjects were performing a visual word-stem completion task. they
observed a reduction in the “repetition suppression effect” in several
regions, including extrastriatal occipital and left middle and inferior
frontal regions. all in all, these results suggest that lorazepam impairs
both abstract and more perceptual processes involved in perceptual
priming.
3. dissociating benzodiazepines
by their effects on form perception
several processes involved in visual perception appear to be
affected by benzodiazepines and, as found in perceptual priming
tasks, lorazepam seems to have effects on visual perception that are
not shared by other benzodiazepines. since our aim is to focus on
these differences, we will not describe all visuo-perceptual effects of
benzodiazepines. for example we will not describe results suggesting
that benzodiazepines affect low-level visual processes such as
contrast sensitivity, ocular convergence, and eye movements in
general (reviewed in giersch et al., 2006b; reilly et al., 2008).
variations in these visual capabilities are important side-effects of
benzodiazepine administration and of particular signiﬁcance to
everyday visual cognition which requires good contrast sensitivity
and visual acuity. yet, it is still unclear whether these effects are
observed with all benzodiazepines. it should be noted that care has
been taken to distinguish between the effects of lorazepam on aspects
of cognition, for instance form perception, and its effects on ocular
convergence or low level visual functions such as contrast sensitivity
(giersch et al., 1996, 1997, 2006b).
it has frequently been shown that lorazepam affects identiﬁcation
of fragmented pictures. this observation was ﬁrst made in perceptual
priming tasks (sellal et al., 1992; vidailhet et al., 1994; legrand et al.,
1995) in which complete pictures were presented during an initial
encoding phase and presented again in a test phase where pictures
were presented incomplete or fragmented. each fragmented picture
was initially presented with very few contours. additional contours
were added in subsequent steps until identiﬁcation. identiﬁcation
performance was then compared between a situation with pictures
previously presented and a situation with novel pictures. it was found
that administration of lorazepam reduced the advantage provided by
the prior presentation of the pictures, indicating a deleterious effect
on perceptual priming. however, lorazepam-treated subjects also
required more contour information than placebo-treated subjects to
identify new pictures. signiﬁcantly, this was not the case in diazepamtreated subjects, despite the fact that, as with perceptual priming,
diazepam had a similar effect on sedation and explicit memory (sellal
et al., 1992; vidailhet et al., 1994; legrand et al., 1995; wagemans
et al., 1998).
subsequent studies have explored several mechanisms underlying
the identiﬁcation of pictures that are affected by lorazepam but not by
diazepam. as was the case for perceptual priming, we will describe
these mechanisms because they shed some light on the functional
differences between lorazepam and other benzodiazepines. according
to classical models of visual perception (boucart et al., 1994; boucart,
1996), visual information processing occurs over successive stages,

99

fig. 1. illustration of the effects of lorazepam on visual perception. a: treated
participants had more difﬁculties to locate gaps between parallel elements (fig. 1a on
the left) than between co-linear elements (fig. 1a on the right). b: conversely,
participants under the effect of lorazepam integrated elements in a global conﬁguration
faster when they were parallel (fig. 1b on the right) than when they were co-linear
(fig. 1b on the left).

the ﬁrst corresponding to the extraction of visual primitives, such as
orientation, color, and light intensity at stages no later than primary
visual cortex. visual primitives are coded locally, in functionally
speciﬁc neuronal systems. later, this contour information must be
correctly bound together in order to recover the object's global form.
this can be complex, especially if objects are constructed from
multiple and different features, and if the object is occluded, i.e.,
partially hidden behind a foreground object, as they often are in
natural scenes. recovering an object's shape requires the integration
of fragmented contour information into a continuous contour, and to
correctly separate contours that belong to different objects. the
recovered shape must then be compared to representations of objects
stored in memory in order to extract the object's identity.
some results suggest that later processing stages in perception are
affected by lorazepam: wagemans et al. (1998) used fragmented
pictures and manipulated the type of gap between contours, i.e.
whether gaps were located at the inﬂexion, the maxima (for convex
contours) or minima (for concave contours). contour integration
would permit completion across the gaps but the efﬁciency of
completion differs according to the location of the gap (lamote &
wagemans, 1999; de winter & wagemans, 2008). in fact, it is much
easier to complete across two elements that are aligned, because
contour alignment is an efﬁcient cue for binding two elements into an
integrated whole (boucart et al., 1994; kovacs et al., 1999). in
contrast, concave contours are natural segmentation cues and
elements separated by a gap located at minima are more difﬁcult to
bind together (hoffman & richards, 1984). despite this, the difﬁculty
to identify fragmented pictures when treated with lorazepam was
equivalent whatever the type of gap. this suggests that the
mechanisms inﬂuenced by lorazepam involve processes taking place
after contour completion and likely involve a comparison of the form
with representations stored in memory (see wagemans et al., 1998,
for a complete discussion of these results).
results differed, however, when stimuli were geometrical shapes
(giersch et al., 1997; giersch, 1999; giersch & lorenceau, 1999; elliott
et al., 2000; beckers et al., 2001; giersch, 2001; lorenceau et al., 2005;
elliott et al., 2006), or when the task did not involve picture
identiﬁcation (giersch et al., 1995, 1996). in all of these cases, the
performance in lorazepam-treated participants differed according to
the type of gaps present in the pictures, suggesting that the drug also
affects the processes directly responsible for visual integration. most
of the studies published to date concern these visual integration
processes with a number comparing the effects of lorazepam and
diazepam. while the experimental paradigm was different on each
occasion – eliminating arguments appealing to the use of a particular
type of test – the results were consistent across studies with a similar
difference between lorazepam and diazepam. whenever the gap is

100

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

fig. 2. illustration of the ambiguity of visual cues like line-ends (or line terminations). in (a) line terminations (indicated by the arrows) represent true line-ends, meaning that they
indicate the edge of the shape. in (b), they result of an occlusion, i.e. line terminations are produced only because another object at the forefront hides part of the background
rectangle.

located between parallel elements (fig. 1), lorazepam-treated
participants experienced difﬁculties detecting the gap, whereas this
difﬁculty is not observed and in some cases facilitation is evident
when the gap is located between aligned (‘co-linear’) elements
(giersch, 1999; beckers et al., 2001;giersch, 2001; giersch & vidailhet,
2006). this leads to difﬁculty in integrating aligned elements into a
global form, this being true for both static and moving forms (giersch
et al., 1995, 1996, 1997; giersch & lorenceau, 1999; elliott et al., 2000;
lorenceau et al., 2005; elliott et al., 2006). in contrast, the integration
of parallel elements appears to be facilitated (fig. 1).
these effects can be related to the mechanisms underlying the
computation of contour at the earliest stages of visual information
processing, where forms are not identiﬁed and contours are not
attributed to forms. the visual system is believed to make use of two
types of signals to derive the form of objects and to separate them
from the background or from other objects (boucart et al., 1994): local
orientation provides information regarding the contour of objects,
whereas line-ends and edges indicate the transition between the
object and the background, or between different objects or object
parts (von der heydt & peterhans, 1989). such cues are inherently
ambiguous, however, since they have to be processed even before an
object is identiﬁed. line terminations can represent true line-ends,
meaning that they indicate the edge of a shape. alternatively, they can
be the result of an occlusion, i.e. an edge is perceived only because
some other object at the forefront hides part of the contour and
artiﬁcially produces a line-end (nakayama et al., 1989; stoner et al.,
1990; grossberg, 1994). in the ﬁrst case, the line-end signal is

fig. 3. (a) example of a vernier stimulus: subjects are instructed to discriminate the
offset direction of the lower line-segment, relative to the upper line-segment (on the
example, the lower line-segment is offset to the right. (b) example of a grating with 5
elements, used to mask the vernier stimulus.

especially important, since it helps to distinguish the object from the
background and from nearby objects. in the latter case however, the
line-end is not indicating a true edge, and the contour is not ending at
the location of the line-end (fig. 2). on the contrary it should be
bound together with the other parts of the hidden object.
this leads to the idea of a competition between integration and
separation (or ‘segmentation’) mechanisms (lorenceau et al., 2005),
and of a possible modulation of the line-end signals in healthy
volunteers (giersch & fahle, 2002; giersch & caparos, 2005). we have
proposed that lorazepam affects the balance between integration and
segmentation signals (lorenceau et al., 2005) and the modulation of
the processing of line-ends (giersch, 2001) with the consequence that
the resolution of any ambiguity associated with the attribution of a
line-end signal to one or other object is slowed. this then increases
the time required to identify objects in the environment. this was
directly suggested in a masking paradigm using vernier stimuli
(giersch & herzog, 2004). vernier stimuli are composed of two
abutting vertical lines that offset in a horizontal direction, and
subjects have to decide if the lowest line is offset to either the right or
left (fig. 3a). this offset is very small, i.e. below 200 arc sec (200 arc
sec represents 0.5 mm when the stimulus is at a distance of 60 cm
from the eyes) and offset discrimination relies on the pooling of
information across a large number of neurons that are sensitive to
spatial position and orientation (herzog et al., 2001, 2003). difﬁculty
to integrate co-linear (aligned) elements was likely to impair this
pooling process and indeed, the results showed that ﬁve of twelve
lorazepam-treated subjects were unable to perform the task and
successfully discriminate the offset of the vernier stimuli. in the seven
remaining subjects the vernier stimulus was masked by a grating of
vertical elements (fig. 3b), allowing the evaluation of the time needed
to complete the task before masking. the results showed that for
lorazepam-treated subjects, information had to be displayed for a
much longer period of time for successful task completion than for
placebo-treated subjects (between 3 and 4 times the duration
required under placebo). this suggests that visual information
processing is prolonged as a consequence of lorazepam administration. in this study and in two others (beckers et al., 2001; elliott et al.,
2006), the effects of lorazepam administration contrasted markedly
with those of treatment with diazepam.
in all the results described until now, lorazepam has additional
effects on information processing when compared with other
benzodiazepines. this tends to raise a question of the relative
potencies of the drugs being compared and in particular the
possibility that lorazepam is more potent than diazepam at the dose
used. this question has been addressed in several ways: the doses
used in studies of visual perception were the same as those used in the
memory studies which showed a similar effect of diazepam and
lorazepam on explicit memory but a deleterious effect of lorazepam
on implicit memory. they were chosen on the basis of earlier studies
showing equipotency of the two drugs on sedation levels and explicit
memory (dundee et al., 1979; kothary et al., 1981). at these doses and

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

in our studies, the two drugs also led to similar levels of sedation,
conﬁrmed by both subjective evaluations of sedation and pupillography. the latter has the advantage of measuring sedation using an
objective method (schaeffel et al., 1993; lüdtke et al., 1998). the size
of the pupil is measured continuously during 11 min, in order to derive
an index corresponding to the pupil's tendency to oscillate. as
expected, this index increased systematically following benzodiazepine administration, but there was no quantitative difference between
diazepam and lorazepam. a ﬁnal argument for eliminating hypotheses
based upon the different potencies of lorazepam and diazepam can be
found in studies showing a somewhat larger effect of diazepam than
lorazepam, and therefore showing that lorazepam is not systematically more potent than other benzodiazepines. double dissociations of
this sort have been found in studies measuring event-related
potentials or attention (boucart et al., 2000; pompéia et al., 2003a;
boucart et al., 2007) and are detailed in the following section.
4. effects of benzodiazepines on
attention: is diazepam more potent than lorazepam?
though it seems reasonable to expect that benzodiazepines will
affect vigilance and attention through their sedative, drowsiness and
psychomotor slowing properties, relatively few studies have been
conducted on the effect of benzodiazepines on attentional processes
and even fewer have made a direct comparison between different
classes of benzodiazepines.
as with memory, attention is a complex cognitive function that
involves several different components. studies on the effect of
benzodiazepines on vigilance and sustained attention (the ability to
maintain attention during continuous and repetitive activity) have
used simple reaction time to the appearance of a visual signal and a
continuous attention task, in which a series of stimuli are ﬂashed on
the screen at various intervals with participants asked to respond
whenever two consecutive stimuli are the same. in general, both
lorazepam and diazepam impair accuracy and slow down response
times in these attention tasks (e.g., duka et al., 1995; see also buffetjerrott & stewart, 2002 and stewart, 2005 for reviews) with the
results being consistent with the idea that both drugs have similar
effects on sedation. lorazepam and diazepam are suggested to differ,
however, in their effects on tasks requiring divided attention, i.e. the
ability to focus attention simultaneously on different information
levels or locations (jalava et al., 1995). in one test involving 4 parallel
computer screens, a ball appeared to move along a circular obstacle
course on each screen at different rates. participants were instructed
to press a key corresponding to the screen (1 to 4) when the ball
entered an obstacle on any screen, this task requiring them to
simultaneously monitor each screen and thereby divide attention
across the 4 screens. it was found that lorazepam impaired divided
attention more clearly than diazepam, at least when their doses were
matched for their sedative effects.
results differ across studies when considering the effects on spatial
attention which involves the ability to engage attention to or at a
particular spatial location, and also to disengage attention from this
location in order to move it to another one. in such explorations, a cue
typically indicates a location, and is followed by a target which has to be
located, detected or identiﬁed. the target appears either at the location
of the cue or at another location. some studies suggest that the effect of
the cue is facilitated in treated subjects, while others suggest difﬁculty in
disengaging attention from the cue location. it may also be possible that
the time course of these effects is slowed. more work is required before
one can interpret these effects (johnson et al., 1995; post et al., 1997;
carter et al., 1998). benzodiazepines differ markedly, however,
regarding other types of attention mechanisms.
the effects of benzodiazepines on selective attention have been
investigated using paradigms involving selective processing of a
target and the inhibition of irrelevant distractor information. they

101

have especially employed negative priming paradigms. negative
priming refers to the increase in response time and the frequency of
response error when required to name a stimulus (a word, a letter or
an object) that had been suppressed on the immediately preceding
trial (e.g., the stimulus to-be- named on t2 “lion” that was preceded
by the target to-be-named on t1 “wolf” and the distractor to-beignored on t1 “lion”). mintzer and grifﬁths (2003) reported that
lorazepam does not affect negative priming whilst, in a previous study
using the same paradigm (mintzer & grifﬁths, 1999), they found that
another benzodiazepine (triazolam) produced an increase in negative
priming, attributed to increased inhibition of the irrelevant distractor.
research on the effect of benzodiazepines on the temporal dynamics
of visual attention has used the attentional blink paradigm (raymond et
al., 1992) in which stimuli are presented in a stream at a rapid rate (e.g.,
10–20 items/s) at the same spatial location. performance is compared in
two conditions: in the main condition participants are required (1) to
identify a ﬁrst target speciﬁed by a physical characteristic (e.g., the
single white letter of the stream) and (2) to detect the presence of a
second target (e.g., the letter x) occurring at various intervals following
the ﬁrst target. in the control condition participants are asked to detect
the second target and to ignore the ﬁrst. participants are able to detect or
to identify a single target with high accuracy even at high rates but,
when the task involves multiple targets, participants experience
difﬁculties in reporting the second target if it occurs in a temporal
window of about 400 ms following the ﬁrst target, a phenomenon
referred to as the “attentional blink” (raymond et al., 1992; chun &
potter, 1995). boucart et al. (2000) examined the effect of lorazepam
and diazepam on the attentional blink using drawings of objects as
stimuli. they found that the attentional blink was more pronounced
both in magnitude and duration for benzodiazepine-treated participants and especially for diazepam relative to placebo-treated participants. the relatively larger blink effect for diazepam was unlikely to be
due to sedation given ﬁrst, that performance was equivalent for both
benzodiazepines in the control condition, and second, that the doses
(lorazepam 0.038 mg/kg and the diazepam 0.3 mg/kg) were equally
sedative (dundee et al., 1979). this result was conﬁrmed in a second
study (boucart et al., 2007) which investigated whether the increased
magnitude of the blink effect is dose dependent. here, it was found that
the magnitude and duration of the attentional blink increased with the
dose of benzodiazepine: in the main condition performance was 2 times
more degraded for the diazepam 0.1 mg/kg, and 4 times more degraded
for the diazepam 0.3 mg/kg groups than for the placebo group. again,
performance varied little across the three groups in the control
condition and the ﬁrst target was identiﬁed with high accuracy in the
three groups suggesting that sedation was not the critical factor for the
strong attentional blink observed in the benzodiazepine treated groups.
the increased duration and magnitude of the attentional blink under
diazepam is likely to reﬂect impairment in shifting attention from one
target to a second target over time.
what is important here is that diazepam appears to exert a more
potent effect than lorazepam on selective attention which inﬂuences
the temporal dynamics of attention. this is all the more remarkable in
that the doses used in studies on attention are exactly the same as
those used in studies on visual perception and implicit memory
suggesting a double dissociation between the effects of lorazepam and
diazepam: i.e. lorazepam is more potent than diazepam on visual
perception and perceptual priming, whereas the reverse is true for
selective attention and temporal dynamics of attention.
5. physiological arguments for a
dissociation between benzodiazepines
if studies on cognition, and especially on memory, have pioneered
description of the qualitative differences between benzodiazepines,
some evidence can be found in other domains, for example, indirect
evidence by means of behavioural studies in animals. those studies

102

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

explore to which extent conditioning with one drug generalizes to
another drug. conditioning consists in training animals to press a
speciﬁc lever when they are under the effect of the drug with training
expected to carry over when the drug is changed but the animal
cannot discriminate between the two drugs. in this case the animals
continue to respond in the same way irrespective of the drug,
indicating that the ﬁrst drug generalizes to the second. in contrast, in
the case where the animals discriminate between the two consecutive
drugs, they refrain from pressing on the lever associated with the ﬁrst
drug once treated with the second. this is a strong argument in favour
of a qualitative difference between two drugs and there are several
such studies that provide evidence that lorazepam differs qualitatively from other benzodiazepines. when rats are trained with
pentobarbital or diazepam they generalize their behaviour to all
tested compounds with anxiolytic properties, i.e. benzodiazepines
and barbiturates, also non-benzodiazepine anxiolytics and even
neuroactive steroids (ator & kautz, 2000). on the other hand, when
rats are trained with lorazepam, their generalization proﬁle appears
much more restricted. in fact these rats only generalize to full agonists
at the benzodiazepine ﬁxation site on the gabaa-receptor complex
(ator et al., 1993) and do not generalize to barbiturates or
neurosteroids. results such as these were conﬁrmed in baboons and
were dissociated from training doses or route administration (ator &
grifﬁths, 1989; ator, 1990; ator & grifﬁths, 1997). more direct
evidence has been revealed by using rats, ﬁrst trained to discriminate
between a low dose of midazolam, a high dose of midazolam and an
absence of drug. when tested with benzodiazepines these rats failed
to generalize the high dose of midazolam to several benzodiazepines,
and especially lorazepam (sannerud & ator, 1995). this is the only
study of this type which directly suggests a qualitative difference
between benzodiazepines.
another way to discriminate drugs is to examine their impact on
the eeg. it is not entirely clear whether or not the effects of lorazepam
on eeg differ or not from those of other benzodiazepines, but we will
brieﬂy review the existing evidence in studies on the human scalp
eeg. benzodiazepines usually cause a decrease in the alpha-rhythm (8–
12 hz) and an increase of power in the beta-range (13–30 hz) (saletu &
grünberger, 1979; greenblatt et al., 1989; link et al., 1991; mandema
et al., 1992; feshchenko et al., 1997). one of the rare studies
comparing lorazepam and diazepam during eeg recording found
both quantitative and qualitative differences between the two drugs
(itil et al., 1989). interestingly, they found the classical increase of
power in the beta-range under the inﬂuence of diazepam, whereas
power in the alpha range was found to be decreased over time with
lorazepam. consistent with the discrimination studies in animals the
authors found that the eeg proﬁle observed under diazepam was
closer than lorazepam to the usual proﬁle of anxiolytic compounds.
another qualitative difference between diazepam and lorazepam
regarded the location in the brain at which the effects of the drugs are
ﬁrst observed. whereas the effects of diazepam were mainly conﬁned
to the frontal area, the effects of lorazepam originated in occipital
areas. an important limitation of this study is that sedation induced by
diazepam was lower than with lorazepam, suggesting that the two
drugs were not administered at equipotent dosages. indeed, the ratio
of the diazepam vs. lorazepam dosage was 5, whereas dosages can be
considered as equipotent for ratios of about 10 (dundee et al., 1979;
kothary et al., 1981; vidailhet et al., 1994). this means that it cannot
be ruled out that differences between drugs observed in this study
could reﬂect the differences in potencies.
if the study of itil et al. (1989) requires clariﬁcation before ﬁrm
conclusions can be reached, it should be noted that a speciﬁc impact of
lorazepam on visual areas in the brain has also been suggested by
means of event-related potentials. in elegant studies, pompéia et al.
(2000, 2003a) compared the effects of ﬂunitrazepam with those of
lorazepam and observed a double dissociation, with ﬂunitrazepam
being more potent than lorazepam on some effects, whereas the

reverse is true for other effects. as with the studies of attention, these
results are especially important because they show that the effects
observed selectively with lorazepam are not due to a global difference
in potency between lorazepam and the other benzodiazepines but are
instead due to some speciﬁc effect of the drug. flunitrazepam induced
more slowing than lorazepam in simple reaction time, whereas the
reverse was true for fragmented shape identiﬁcation. furthermore,
the latency of event-related potentials was differentially affected by
the two drugs. lorazepam induced a larger increase in the latency of
visual relative to auditory evoked erps with an increase in the visual
modality larger than that observed under ﬂunitrazepam. as with eeg
studies, these results suggest a particular effect of lorazepam on visual
pathways.
this is further conﬁrmed through meg and pet studies. using
meg, ahveninen et al. (2007) showed a large decrease of alpha
activity in the parieto-occipital and calcarine sulci under the effect of
lorazepam. these results are consistent with pet studies showing that
lorazepam reduces brain metabolic responses mainly in the thalamus
and occipital cortex (wang et al., 1996), even at relatively low doses
(matthew et al., 1995). however, these authors did not compare
different benzodiazepines, while high receptor occupancy in posterior
brain areas have also been observed with zolpidem (abadie et al.,
1996) or benzodiazepine antagonists such as ﬂumazepil (frey et al.,
1991) or iomazenil (bremner et al., 1999).
a more recent study using transcranial magnetic stimulation
(tms) found a clear qualitative difference between lorazepam and
diazepam-treated subjects (di lazzaro et al., 2005b). stimulation of
the motor cortex through tms usually induces muscle responses and
different kinds of inhibition can be observed, namely short-latency
afferent inhibition (sai) and short-latency intracortical inhibition
(sici). in the ﬁrst case (sai), the stimulation of the peripheral nerve
mediating the motor response suppresses the effect of the tms
stimulation through afferent inhibition within the cerebral cortex
(tokimura et al., 2000). this ﬁrst kind of inhibition has been shown to
be sensitive to the muscarinic antagonist scopolamine and to
lorazepam (di lazzaro et al., 2000, 2005a). in the second case (sici)
a ﬁrst sub-threshold tms stimulation suppresses the following suprathreshold stimulation as long as the interval between the two
stimulations is short enough (kujirai et al., 1993). this phenomenon
is supposed to be mediated by gabaa-ergic inhibitory neuronal
circuits (ziemann et al., 1996; di lazzaro et al., 2005b). di lazzaro et
al. directly compared the effects of both diazepam and lorazepam on
the two phenomena and observed that sai was affected by lorazepam
but not by diazepam. importantly the two drugs did not differ in their
effect on the phenomenon putatively mediated by gabaa-ergic
circuits, i.e. sici. as emphasized above, this kind of dissociation, in
which the effects of the two drugs are similar in one condition but
differ in another, is an important argument eliminating alternative
explanations in terms of quantitative rather than qualitative differences between the two drugs.
6. effects of chronic intake and signiﬁcance of the
qualitative differences between benzodiazepines in everyday use
up to this point our review says little about the consequences of
chronic intake of benzodiazepines. the effects of chronic intake of a
psychotropic substance can differ markedly from that after acute
administration (nordberg & wahlström, 1992; follesa et al., 2006)
and this is especially true for benzodiazepines which lead to
dependence, habituation and tolerance. these effects indicate brain
adaptation and can lead to changes in the behavioural consequences
of the drug and this also increases the difﬁculty with which the effects
of chronic treatment of the drug can be measured. for example, a
dependence-inducing drug cannot be administered for a long period
in healthy volunteers and the consequences of an intake of longer
than a few weeks must therefore be examined in patients ordinarily

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

treated with the drug. such studies, however, entail a number of
confounding factors including the lack of knowledge regarding
patients' performance prior intake of the drug, the role of the
underlying pathology (including factors such as anxiety for example)
and the possible intake of other drugs in addition to the one under
consideration. for these reasons such studies are rare and when
realized rarely distinguish between different benzodiazepines. to the
best of our knowledge only two such studies have explored the effects
of a chronic intake of lorazepam on visual perception or perceptual
priming. of these, curran (1992) used an elegant method of testing
subjects as they withdrew from chronic treatment with benzodiazepines. this protocol allowed the assessment of cognitive functions
under the effect of the drug but also several months after the
withdrawal, thus providing data with and without the drug. curran is
also one of the only researchers to have explored perceptual priming
as a result of a chronic intake of lorazepam. she found that the
deleterious effect of lorazepam on perceptual priming persisted
throughout chronic intake as long as perceptual priming was
evaluated at the peak plasma concentrations. this contrasts with
another study, in which subjects with a chronic intake of lorazepam
were tested without taking into account the peak plasma concentration, and where no effect was observed on perceptual priming
(giersch & vidailhet, 2006). in this latter study however, a deleterious
effect was observed on visual integration ability as explored in the
same kind of experiment as described above (see chapter 3). these
studies require replication, but suggest that effects which are
selectively observed under lorazepam persist, at least partially, after
chronic treatment. it should be noted here that another pending
question regards the effect of lorazepam in aging populations,
especially as a degradation of gaba-mediated inhibition has been
suggested in aging visual cortex (leventhal et al., 2003).
these studies raise important questions concerning the impact of
these effects on patients in everyday life as compared with the
laboratory settings. this question is especially difﬁcult when one
considers perceptual priming and visual perception because these
processes involve many mechanisms that cannot be accessed directly
via introspection. this makes it difﬁcult for patients to report any
problems they may experience especially as other impairments, for
example sedation, and slowed or impaired memory may obscure
other symptoms. it is only through laboratory settings that the
consequence of the drug intake can be inferred. despite these
difﬁculties, we can derive some hypotheses from the studies
regarding the effects of lorazepam on perceptual priming or visual
integration. firstly in the case of perceptual priming, lorazepam
treated subjects do not beneﬁt as much as controls from the repetition
of information. secondly, disturbance of the process of visual
integration is observed mainly when there is some ambiguity
regarding contour terminations, i.e. at the junction between objects
and ground, or between objects or parts of objects (fig. 2). in both
cases, the processes allow adaptation to environmental information.
this suggests that, in addition to the effects observed with all
benzodiazepines, it may be harder for lorazepam-treated subjects to
adapt to the environment. lorazepam may especially slow down the
resolution of visual information ambiguities occurring when edges
and line-ends indicate either a true object border or the location of an
occlusion (giersch et al., 2006a). patients should thus be especially
slowed down in identifying and exploring their environment when
many objects are partially hidden. this is actually the case in most
environments which compounds the other visual impairments such
as impaired contrast sensitivity that also appear to persist with
chronic intake (giersch et al., 2006b). these impairments have to date
been largely ignored. however, they may lead to serious consequences especially in everyday tasks that involve control of machinery
and more particularly of motor vehicles.
some studies on driving performance have been conducted but
have focused mainly on the impact of reduced attention. o'hanlon

103

et al. (1995) compared the effects of benzodiazepines (diazepam,
lorazepam) and benzodiazepine-like anxiolytics (alpidem and suriclone) on driving performance in healthy volunteers. the driving
tests were carried out 1–2 h following treatment for 8 days and
consisted of driving an instrumented vehicle over a 100 km circuit
with an instructor (the circuit was a real one). the task was to
maintain a constant speed of 95 km/h and a steady lateral position
between the delineated boundaries of the slower trafﬁc lane. after a
week's treatment, lorazepam (2 mg) and diazepam (5 mg) had
similarly marked effects on driving performance while the benzodiazepine-like drugs had a lesser effect. it should be noted however, that
the doses used were not equisedative, diazepam at 5 mg being less
sedative than lorazepam at 2 mg. since diazepam should have been
less potent than lorazepam, but in fact was not, the results could be
equated with the larger impact of diazepam on attention. hindmarch
and gudgeon (1980), on the other hand observed large effects of
lorazepam (1 mg) on car driving abilities (evaluated on the private
roads of a driver training centre), indicated by reverse parking
between 2 cars and a slalom around ﬁxed bollards, width estimation
passage between obstacles and braking reaction. however, their data
do not allow for a distinction between effects arising from sedation or
to more selective impairments. more work is warranted to deﬁne the
impact of lorazepam while taking into account its effects on
perceptual priming and visual integration abilities. such studies
would be all the more useful that lorazepam, like other benzodiazepines, has been suggested to be at the origin of driving impairments
(leading to blood samplings and toxic analysis) even when taken in
isolation, i.e. without any additional drug (clarkson et al., 2004;
augsburger et al., 2005).
7. possible molecular bases for a qualitative
difference between benzodiazepines–metabolites
a question that remains unresolved is the reason why lorazepam
exerts qualitatively different effects on visual perception and
perceptual priming when compared with other benzodiazepines,
particularly diazepam. in fact, all benzodiazepines are full agonists at
the gabaa/benzodiazepine receptor, through which they exert their
actions. consequently, it is generally held that their effects only differ
quantitatively, that is to say in terms of time of onset, peak, depth and
the duration of their effects. these mainly depend on the method of
administration, the dose, the afﬁnity for the receptor, and the
pharmacokinetic properties of the drug and its metabolites (greenblatt, 1992). an explanation in terms of metabolites is unlikely as
lorazepam is transformed by conjugation to inactive compounds
(bourin, 1989). another possible explanation is that lorazepam binds
to speciﬁc subtypes of gabaa receptors and has a different brain
distribution. different subtypes of gabaa receptors, characterized by
the nature of their constitutive sub-units do exist within the brain
with different regional distributions (mckernan & whiting, 1996).
indeed the gabaa receptor is composed of 5 subunits, the most
common being the alpha, beta, and gamma. several subtypes have been described
for each of these subunits, leading to a large number of combinations
and thus to many different types of receptors. these receptors differ in
their brain localization and are very probably involved in distinct
functions, as indicated by studies in transgenic mice with deletions or
mutations on speciﬁc subtypes, and by pharmacological studies. these
studies have in particular led to a distinction between the different alpha
subunits, with the  xxxg830xxx  subunit subserving sedation,  xxxg831xxx  anxiolysis, and
 xxxg834xxx  effects on memory (reviews in möhler, 2007; atack, 2008). these
receptor subtypes are currently subject to intensive research since
they offer the possibility of developing drugs with effects that are
more selective, for instance drugs possessing anxiolytic properties
without inducing sedation (whiting, 2006) or displaying procognitive effects without unwanted side-effects (atack, 2008; ballard
et al., 2009). consequently, it is conceivable that lorazepam would

104

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

bind to some receptor sub-types that play a speciﬁc role in perceptual
priming and vision and/or are particularly dense in brain regions
subserving these cognitive processes. in this way, lorazepam would
thus differ from diazepam and other benzodiazepines.
to the best of our knowledge, there is only one study that has
compared lorazepam with other benzodiazepines on its receptor proﬁle,
as estimated with the ic50 and by taking into account the main different
subtypes of gabaa receptors (alpha1beta2gamma2, alpha2beta1gamma2, alpha2beta1gamma3, alpha3beta3gamma2,
alpha3beta3gamma3, alpha5beta3gamma2, alpha5beta3gamma3, alpha6beta3gamma2). although lorazepam was not
found to differ from other benzodiazepines in its receptor proﬁle
(dämgen & lüddens, 1999), it remains possible that the ec50, i.e. the
concentration required to achieve the half-maximal effect, rather than
half-maximal inhibition, differs between lorazepam and other benzodiazepines when looking at individual gabaa receptor subtypes
(dämgen & lüddens, 1999). in addition, there are a number of subtypes
identiﬁed since the work by dämgen and lüddens (1999), especially
those including a  xxxg839xxx  unit while there are several subtypes whose
existence is probable but not yet established (reviewed in olsen &
sieghart, 2009). as stated by pompéia et al. (2005), very little is known
about binding characteristics of benzodiazepines to distinct receptor
subtypes in different brain regions. promoting this type of research is all
the more justiﬁed if this can lead to new and innovative therapeutics. it
would be especially interesting to know to which extent new developed
compounds induce the very speciﬁc cognitive effects described in the
present review.
8. do the selective effects of
lorazepam signify therapeutic properties?
lorazepam appears to have selective effects that are not shared by
all benzodiazepines. it seems reasonable to postulate that such
selective effects might also have positive clinical implications.
however, regarding main clinical indications, i.e. anxiety, sleep
disorders or epilepsy, there is no clear indication that benzodiazepines
differ. on the contrary, in the majority of the studies reported here
benzodiazepines have been administered at doses that produce
equivalent effects on sedation and anxiety, so that selective effects
of drugs cannot be explained by a non-speciﬁc effect on sedation or a
global difference in potency between the drugs. there is only very few
studies suggesting a selective effect of lorazepam on clinical
symptoms and these have generally not been conﬁrmed (see
table 1). here we focus on schizophrenia, because the lack of
satisfactory curative drugs in this pathology justiﬁes examining
alternatives, even though speculative at this time, and because the
role of gaba in this pathology has been particularly emphasized

(review in gonzalez-burgos & lewis, 2008). moreover, our own data
suggests an effect of lorazepam that might be beneﬁcial in the case of
schizophrenia. benzodiazepines are frequently prescribed to patients
with schizophrenia, usually as an adjunct to antipsychotics (pecknold,
1993; pickar et al., 2008). case reports and controlled studies indicate
that lorazepam can be effective in treating some patients with
schizophrenia, inﬂuencing core symptoms such as delusions, hallucinations, thought disorders as well as negative symptoms, sometimes
even as a sole treatment, i.e. without being associated with
neuroleptics (greenberg et al., 1986; lingjaerde, 1991; wolkowitz &
pickar, 1991; jaspert & ebert, 1994). lorazepam also seems particularly effective in treating catatonia, a motor condition associated with
several neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia (seethalakshmi et al., 2008). this has been shown with other benzodiazepines as well (lingjaerde, 1991; wolkowitz & pickar, 1991), but
beneﬁts are not that obvious when reviewing controlled studies
(gillies et al., 2005; volz et al., 2007; gibson & walcott, 2008). to our
knowledge, no study to date has ever shown that one benzodiazepine
is more effective than another in treating schizophrenia. however, in
our personal experience (see also kane, 1996) and in a large crosssectional survey of patients with schizophrenia occupying psychiatric
rehabilitation beds (paton et al., 2000), lorazepam is the most
frequently prescribed benzodiazepine in the mid or long term for
this condition. this could reﬂect the fact that lorazepam is frequently
used for rapid tranquilisation and therefore most likely to be
continued on a chronic basis (paton et al., 2000). another possibility
is that it may speculatively reveal speciﬁc therapeutic properties. we
will now review the arguments in favour of the latter possibility.
several mental pathologies, and especially schizophrenia, are now
believed to be characterized by an absence of proper coordination
between cooperating brain areas during cognition and action (friston &
frith, 1995; goldberg & weinberger, 1995; andreasen, 1999; tononi &
edelman, 2000; roach & mathalon, 2008; uhlhaas et al., 2008).
interestingly, there is a variety of evidence, both empirical and based
upon simulations that support the involvement of gaba in brain
systems dynamics, i.e. in synchronization phenomena that allow
cooperation between brain areas (reviewed in whittington et al.,
2000). inhibitory interneurons inﬂuence pyramidal cells through the
production of rhythmic trains of ipsps (whittington et al., 2001) which,
in combination with glutamate and acetylcholine systems activation,
may permit the pyramidal cells to ﬁre repeatedly and at high frequency
for extended periods of time. neuronal networks would then achieve
stability as a consequence of the mutual activity of both inhibitory and
excitatory transmission (whittington et al., 1997). this may also allow
spatially separate, but interconnected regions to oscillate in synchrony,

fig. 4. illustration of the priming paradigm devised by elliott and müller (2000). the four image frames illustrated in (a) are presented one after the other at a frequency of 10 hz, and
form the 3 × 3 premask matrix illustrated in (b) on the left. this premask matrix represents a prime, and is followed by another 3 × 3 matrix composed of corners (as illustrated in
(b) on the right. subjects have to tell whether or not this last matrix includes a square made up of four co-linear corners (in the top left part of the matrix in the example).

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

potentially leading to the common processing of identical stimuli across
anatomically and functionally different but physiologically connected
regions of the brain (whittington et al., 1997; faulkner et al., 1998;
whittington et al., 2001). all in all, this tends to suggest that the type of
coordination supposed to break down in disorders like schizophrenia is
ordinarily, directly supported by inhibitory interneuron modulation of
pyramidal cell activity. that this mechanism is selectively inﬂuenced by
benzodiazepine administration has been revealed by faulkner et al.
(1999), who have shown that diazepam does not abolish beta
oscillations in excitatory neurones, or gamma oscillations in inhibitory
neurons. diazepam did, however, affect the duration of excitatory
synaptic events and induced a prolongation of the time taken to stabilize
coherent oscillations. they also tested temazepam and found no
difference with diazepam, but they never explored, to the best of our
knowledge, the effect of lorazepam. related evidence linking oscillatory
synchronization and lorazepam has been shown indirectly in two
studies, mediated by an effect on perceptual organization (or visual
integration). a relationship with perceptual organization is not
surprising, given that initially, synchronization phenomena have been
related mainly to visuo-perceptual integration processes (eckhorn et al.,
1988; gray et al., 1989; see gray, 1999 or singer, 1999, for reviews).
the two studies linking oscillatory phenomena to the effects of
lorazepam predicate on the priming task devised by elliott and müller
(1998, 2000, and 2001). elliott and müller use a priming stimulus
comprising 4 crosses presented in a square arrangement. the prime
occupies 1 of 4 separate image frames which, when combined, forms a
regular 3 × 3 element premask matrix (fig. 3). image frames
(comprising the priming and the other premask matrix crosses) are
presented one after the other at a frequency of 10 hz, with a frameonset-asynchrony of 25 ms (ms, equivalent to a frame by frame
presentation frequency of 40 hz) and with an inter-frame interval of
less than 1 ms. the combination of high-frequency presentation with
b1 ms inter-frame interval renders the content structure of a given
image frame non determinable (elliott & müller, 1998, experiment 2).
instead, the phenomenological effect of this temporal modulation is of
a stochastic surface ﬂicker across an otherwise static 3 × 3 matrix of
premask crosses. this display is followed by another 3 × 3 matrix
composed of disconnected corners, and subjects are instructed to look
for a target made up of four co-linear corners (i.e. aligned), arranged
to form a square (fig. 4).
reaction times are recorded to the presence or absence of a target.
priming effects are measured in terms of the difference between
reaction times to targets following the presentation of a prime (i.e. 1 of 4
image frames then contains 4 crosses presented at the same matrix
locations as the target elements) relative to reaction times following
premask without any prime (i.e. all crosses, including the 4 crosses
presented at the target locations are divided pseudo-randomly across
two or more frames). mean priming effects commonly vary across the
25–30 ms range and do not vary substantively with variations in the
target reaction times (elliott & müller, 1998, 2000, 2001). elliott and
müller proposed a feedforward-feedback model of priming including
40 hz phenomena, and conﬁrmed this with an independent-components decomposition of the eeg accompanying premask-matrix
presentation (elliott et al., 2003; conci et al., 2004). according to this
model, neurons in primary visual cortex might become active at ∼40 hz
by virtue of this frequency being fed back from later cortical
mechanisms (see conci et al., 2004 for more details).
testing the effects of benzodiazepines in this paradigm permitted
exploration of how the lorazepam, which is known to inﬂuence the
coding of spatial aspects of a stimulus would interact with the coding
of relevant temporal properties. in two different studies, lorazepam
signiﬁcantly enhanced priming, whereas diazepam decreased it
(elliott et al., 2000, 2006). in lorazepam-treated subjects, the priming
effect increased threefold in magnitude (to give an rt advantage of
around 71 ms for primed targets) when the prime crosses were
reinforced by spatial cues that particularly supported the computation

105

of a cross — cross continuity signal (elliott et al., 2006). inasmuch as
this effect is mediated through neuronal synchronization, the results
show that lorazepam enhanced rather than decreased the magnitude
of priming.
lorazepam can be concluded to positively inﬂuence visual organization at a preattentive level of processing and via an inﬂuence on the
dynamics of the mechanism correlating with perceptual coherence. in
this respect, lorazepam is of potential relevance not only to the
behaviour of that system under normal circumstances, but is also of
interest when that system performs sub-optimally, as it may do in
schizophrenia. we may only speculate on the precise mechanism that
brings about enhanced priming following lorazepam administration.
however, on the basis of elliott et al.'s (2003) ﬁndings, we may
tentatively suggest that this involves a facilitation of the long distance
synchronization of posterior and formal neocortex via pyramidal cell
activity. this might be all the more interesting that such synchronization
is supposed to be impaired in mental disorders like schizophrenia. it
might also imply that the speciﬁc effects of lorazepam, as compared to
the effects of other benzodiazepines, might be related with those
receptors that are involved in phenomena of long distance synchronization. it would be of special interest to know if some subtypes of the
gabaa receptor are involved in a special way in these phenomena.
9. conclusion
in summary, some results suggest that lorazepam may have a
positive effect on synchronization phenomena that are known to be
impaired in disorders like schizophrenia. inasmuch as disordered
connectivity is a key target for new therapeutics in mental diseases,
and given the involvement of gaba in these phenomena (review in
gonzalez-burgos & lewis, 2008), the special effect of lorazepam on
synchronization phenomena represents an interesting possibility to
remediate synchronization impairments in schizophrenia, which warrants exploration. the possibility that lorazepam has selective effects on
neuronal synchronization may explain why lorazepam seems more
efﬁcient than other benzodiazepines in treating some aspects of mental
diseases, and why lorazepam seems to differ from other benzodiazepines in all the tests we have described in this paper. moreover, isolating
the mechanisms of this effect of lorazepam may promote the discovery
of new drugs that act selectively on synchronization phenomena,
independently of the other effects that are shared by all benzodiazepines.
such new drugs might be of special interest for mental diseases.
acknowledgments
the authors wish to thank dr lüddens and dr peter boejinga for
their help in writing the manuscript.
references
abadie, p., rioux, p., scatton, b., zariﬁan, e., barré, l., patat, a., et al. (1996). central
benzodiazepine receptor occupancy by zolpidem in the human brain as assessed by
positron emission tomography. eur j pharmacol 295, 35−44.
agelink, m. w., majewski, t. b., andrich, j., & mueck-weymann, m. (2002). short-term
effects of intravenous benzodiazepines on autonomic neurocardiac regulation in
humans: a comparison between midazolam, diazepam, and lorazepam. crit care
med 30, 997−1006.
ahveninen, j., lin, f. h., kivisaari, r., autti, t., hämäläinen, m., stufﬂebeam, s., et al.
(2007). mri-constrained spectral imaging of benzodiazepine modulation of
spontaneous neuromagnetic activity in human cortex. neuroimage 35, 577−582.
alldredge, b. k., gelb, a. m., isaacs, s. m., corry, m. d., allen, f., ulrich, s., et al. (2001). a
comparison of lorazepam, diazepam, and placebo for the treatment of out-ofhospital status epilepticus. n engl j med 345, 631−637.
andreasen, n. c. (1999). a unitary model of schizophrenia: bleuler's “fragmented
phrene” as schizencephaly. arch gen psychiatry 56, 781−787.
appleton, r., sweeney, a., choonara, i., robson, j., & molyneux, e. (1995). lorazepam
versus diazepam in the acute treatment of epileptic seizures and status epilepticus.
dev med child  xxxd122xxx  37, 682−688.
ashton, c. h. (2002). benzodiazepines — how they work and how to withdraw. edinburgh:
churchill livingstone.

106

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

atack, j. r. (2008). gabaa receptor subtype-selective efﬁcacy:  xxxd822xxx , an  xxxg831xxx /  xxxg832xxx 
selective non-sedating anxiolytic and alpha51a, an  xxxg834xxx  selective cognition enhancer.
cns neurosci ther 14, 25−35.
ator, n. a. (1990). drug discrimination and drug stimulus generalization with
anxiolytics. drug dev res 20, 189−204.
ator, n. a., & grifﬁths, r. r. (1989). differential generalization to pentobarbital in rats
trained to discriminate lorazepam, chlordiazepoxide, diazepam or triazolam.
psychopharmacology 98, 20−30.
ator, n. a., & grifﬁths, r. r. (1997). selectivity in the generalization proﬁle in baboon
trained to discriminate lorazepam: benzodiazepines, barbiturates and other
sedative/anxiolytics. j pharmacol exp ther 282, 1442−1457.
ator, n. a., & kautz, m. a. (2000). differentiating benzodiazepine- and barbiturate-like
discriminative stimulus effects of lorazepam, diazepam, pentobarbital, imidazenil
and zaleplon in two- versus three-lever procedures. behav pharmacol 11, 1−14.
ator, n. a., grant, k. a., purdy, r. h., paul, s. m., & grifﬁths, r. r. (1993). drug discrimination
analysis of endogenous neuroactive steroids in rats. eur j pharmacol 241, 237−243.
augsburger, m., donzé, n., ménétrey, a., brossard, c., sporkert, f., giroud, c., et al.
(2005). concentration of drugs in blood of suspected impaired drivers. forensic sci
int 153, 11−15.
ballard, t. m., knoﬂach, f., prinssen, e., borroni, e., vivian, j. a., basile, j., et al. (2009).
ro4938581, a novel cognitive enhancer acting at gaba(a)  xxxg834xxx  subunit-containing
receptors. psychopharmacology 202, 207−223.
beckers, t., wagemans, j., boucart, m., & giersch, a. (2001). different effects of
lorazepam and diazepam on perceptual integration. vis res 41, 2297−2303.
bergerbest, d., ghahremani, d. g., & gabrieli, j. d. e. (2004). neural correlates of
auditory repetition priming: reduced fmri activation in the auditory cortex. j cogn
neurosci 16, 966−977.
bishop, k. i., & curran, h. v. (1995). psychopharmacological analysis of implicit and
explicit memory: a study with lorazepam and the benzodiazepine antagonist
ﬂumazenil. psychopharmacology 121, 267−278.
block, r. i., & berchou, r. (1984). alprazolam and lorazepam effects on memory
acquisition and retrieval processes. pharmacol biochem behav 20, 233−241.
boucart, m. (1996). la reconnaissance des objets. : presses universitaires de grenoble.
boucart, m., delord, s., & giersch, a. (1994). the computation of contour information in
complex objects. perception 23, 399−409.
boucart, m., de visme, p., & wagemans, j. (2000). effect of benzodiazepine on temporal
integration in object perception. psychopharmacology 3, 249−255.
boucart, m., waucquier, n., michael, g. a., & libersa, c. (2007). diazepam impairs the
temporal dynamic of visual attention. exp clin psychopharmacol 15, 115−122.
bourin, m. (1989). les benzodiazépine. de la pharmacologie à la dépendance, 2d édition
ellipses.
bradwejn, j., shriqui, c., koszycki, d., & meterissian, g. (1990). double-blind
comparison of the effects of clonazepam and lorazepam in acute mania. j clin
psychopharmacol 10, 403−408.
bremner, j. d., baldwin, r., horti, a., staib, l. h., ng, c. k., tan, p. z., et al. (1999).
quantitation of benzodiazepine receptor binding with pet [11c] iomazenil and
spect [123i] iomazenil: preliminary results of a direct comparison in healthy
human subjects. psychiatry res 91, 79−91.
brown, j., lewis, v., brown, m., horn, g., & bowes, j. b. (1982). a comparison between
transient amnesias induced by two drugs (diazepam and lorazepam) and amnesia
of organic origin. neuropsychologia 20, 55−70.
brown, m. w., brown, j., & bowes, j. b. (1989). absence of priming coupled with
substantially preserved recognition in lorazepam-induced amnesia. q j exp psychol
41a, 599−617.
buffet-jerrott, s. e., & stewart, s. h. (2002). cognitive and sedative effects of
benzodiazepine use. curr pharm des 8, 45−58.
buffett-jerrott, s. e., stewart, s. h., & teehan, m. d. (1998). a further examination of the
time-dependent effects of oxazepam and lorazepam on implicit and explicit
memory. psychopharmacology 138, 344−353.
buffett-jerrott, s. e., stewart, s. h., bird, s., & teehan, m. d. (1998). an examination of
differences in the time course of oxazepam's effects on implicit vs explicit memory.
j psychopharmacol 12, 338−347.
carter, c. s., maddock, r., chaderjian, m., & post, r. (1998). attentional effects of single
dose triazolam. prog neuropsychopharmacol 22, 279−292.
chun, m. m., & potter, m. c. (1995). a two-stage model for multiple target detection in
rapid serial visual presentation. j exp psychol hum percept perform 21, 109−127.
clarkson, j. e., gordon, a. m., & logan, b. k. (2004). lorazepam and driving impairment.
j anal toxicol 28, 475−480.
cock, h. r., & schapira, a. h. v. (2002). a comparison of lorazepam and diazepam as
initial therapy in convulsive status epilepticus. qjm 95, 225−231.
conci, m., elliott, m. a., müller, h. j., wendt, j., & becker, c. (2004). the dynamics of
operations in visual memory: a review of conclusions drawn from evidence for
oscillatory priming. exp psychol 51, 300−310.
conner, j. t., katz, r. l., bellville, j. w., graham, c., pagano, r., & dorey, f. (1978).
diazepam and lorazepam for intravenous surgical premedication. j clin pharmacol
18, 285−292.
curran, h. v. (1991). benzodiazepines, memory and mood: a review. psychopharmacology
105, 1−8.
curran, h. v. (1992). memory functions, alertness and mood of long-term benzodiazepine users: a preliminary investigation of the effects of a normal daily dose.
j psychopharmacol 6, 69−75.
curran, h. v., & gorenstein, c. (1993). differential effects of lorazepam and oxazepam
on priming. int clin psychopharmacol 8, 37−42.
curran, h. v., schiwy, w., & lader, m. (1987). differential amnesic properties of
benzodiazepines: a dose–response comparison of two drugs with similar
elimination half-lives. psychopharmacology 92, 358−364.

curran, h. v., barrow, s., weingartner, h., lader, m., & bernik, m. (1995). encoding,
remembering and awareness in lorazepam-induced amnesia. psychopharmacology
122, 187−193.
dämgen, k., & lüddens, h. (1999). zaleplon displays a selectivity torecombinant gabaa
receptors different from zolpidem, zopiclone and benzodiazepines. neurosci res
commun 25, 139−148.
danion, j. m., peretti, s., grangé, d., bilik, m., imbs, j. l., & singer, l. (1992). effects of
chlorpromazine and lorazepam on explicit memory, repetition priming and
cognitive skill learning in healthy volunteers. psychopharmacology 108, 345−351.
de winter, j., & wagemans, j. (2008). the awakening of attneave's sleeping cat:
identiﬁcation of everyday objects on the basis of straight-line versions of outlines.
perception 37, 245−270.
di lazzaro, v., oliviero, a., proﬁce, p., pennisi, m. a., di giovanni, s., zito, g., et al. (2000).
muscarinic receptor blockade has differential effects on the excitability of
intracortical circuits in the human motor cortex. exp brain res 135, 455−461.
di lazzaro, v., oliviero, a., saturno, e., dileone, m., pilato, f., nardone, r., et al. (2005).
effects of lorazepam on short latency afferent inhibition and short latency
intracortical inhibition in humans. j physiol 564, 661−668.
di lazzaro, v., pilato, f., dileone, m., tonali, p. a., & ziemann, u. (2005). dissociated
effects of diazepam and lorazepam on short-term afferent inhibition. j physiol 569,
315−323.
duka, t., redemann, b., & voet, b. (1995). scopolamine and lorazepam exert different
patterns of effects in a test battery assessing stages of information processing.
psychopharmacology 119, 315−324.
dundee, j. w., gowan, w. a. w., lilburn, j. k., mckay, a. c., & hegarty, j. e. (1979).
comparison of the actions of diazepam and lorazepam. br j anaesth 51, 439−446.
eckhorn, r., bauer, r., jordan, w., brosch, m., kruse, w., munk, m., et al. (1988).
coherent oscillations: a mechanism of feature linking in the visual cortex? multiple
electrode and correlation analyses in the cat. biol cybern 60, 121−130.
elliott, m. a., & müller, h. j. (1998). synchronous information presented in 40-hz ﬂicker
enhances visual feature binding. psychol sci 9, 277−283.
elliott, m. a., & müller, h. j. (2000). evidence for a 40-hz oscillatory short-term visual
memory revealed by human reaction-time measurements. j exp psychol learn mem
cogn 26, 703−718.
elliott, m. a., & müller, h. j. (2001). effects of stimulus synchrony on mechanisms of
perceptual organization. vis cogn 8, 655−677.
elliott, m. a., becker, c., boucart, m., & müller, h. j. (2000). enhanced gaba(a) inhibition
enhances synchrony coding in human perception. neuroreport 11, 3403−3407.
elliott, m. a., conci, m., & müller, h. j. (2003). prefrontal cortex maintains visual
information in very short-term oscillatory persistence. behav brain sci 26,
733−734.
elliott, m. a., giersch, a., & seifert, d. (2006). some facilitatory effects of lorazepam on
dynamic visual binding. psychopharmacology 184, 229−238.
faulkner, h. j., traub, r. d., & whittington, m. a. (1998). disruption of synchronous
gamma oscillations in the rat hippocampal slice: a common mechanism of
anaesthetic drug action. br j pharmacol 125, 483−492.
faulkner, h. j., traub, r. d., & whittington, m. a. (1999). anaesthetic/amnesic agents
disrupt beta frequency oscillations associated with potentiation of excitatory
synaptic potentials in the rat hippocampal slice. br j pharmacol 128, 1813−1825.
feshchenko, v. a., veselis, r. a., & reinsel, r. a. (1997). comparison of the eeg effects of
midazolam, thiopental, and propofol: the role of underlying oscillatory systems.
pharmacoelectroencephalograpy 35, 211−220.
follesa, p., biggio, f., talani, g., murru, l., serra, m., sanna, e., et al. (2006).
neurosteroids, gabaa receptors, and ethanol dependence. psychopharmacology
186, 267−280.
frey, k. a., holthoff, v. a., koeppe, r. a., jewett, d. m., kilbourn, m. r., & kuhl, d. e. (1991).
parametric in vivo imaging of benzodiazepine receptor distribution in human brain.
ann  xxxd122xxx  30, 663−672.
friston, k. j., & frith, c. d. (1995). schizophrenia: a disconnection syndrome? clin
neurosci 3, 89−97.
ghoneim, m. m., & mewaldt, s. p. (1990). benzodiazepines and human memory: a
review. anesthesiology 72, 926−938.
gibson, r. c., & walcott, g. (2008). benzodiazepines for catatonia in people with
schizophrenia and other serious mental illnesses. cochrane database syst rev,
cd006570.
giersch, a. (1999). a new pharmacological tool to investigate integration processes. vis
cogn 6, 267−297.
giersch, a. (2001). the effects of lorazepam on visual integration processes: how useful
for neuroscientists? vis cogn 8, 549−563.
giersch, a., & caparos, s. (2005). focused attention is not enough to activate
discontinuities in lines, but scrutiny is. conscious cogn 14, 613−632.
giersch, a., & fahle, m. (2002). modulations of the processing of line discontinuities
under selective attention conditions. percept psychophys 64, 67−88.
giersch, a., & herzog, m. (2004). lorazepam strongly prolongs visual information
processing. neuropsychopharmacology 29, 1386−1394.
giersch, a., & lorenceau, j. (1999). effects of a benzodiazepine, lorazepam, on motion
integration and segmentation: an effect on the processing of line terminations? vis
res 39, 2017−2025.
giersch, a., & vidailhet, p. (2006). dissociation between perceptual processing and
priming in long-term lorazepam users. int j neuropsychopharmacol 9, 695−704.
giersch, a., boucart, m., danion, j. m., vidailhet, p., & legrand, f. (1995). effects of
lorazepam on perceptual integration of visual forms in healthy volunteers.
psychopharmacology 119, 105−114.
giersch, a., boucart, m., speeg-schatz, c., muller-kauffmann, f., & danion, j. m. (1996).
lorazepam impairs perceptual integration of visual forms: a central effect.
psychopharmacology 126, 260−270.

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108
giersch, a., boucart, m., & danion, j. m. (1997). lorazepam, a benzodiazepine, induces
atypical distractor effects with compound stimuli: a role for line terminations in
the processing of compound letters. vis cogn 4, 337−372.
giersch, a., humphreys, g. w., barthaud, j. c., & landmann, c. (2006). a two-stage
account of computing and binding occluded and visible contours: evidence from
visual agnosia and effects of lorazepam. cogn neuropsychol 23, 261−277.
giersch, a., speeg-schatz, c., tondre, m., & gottenkiene, s. (2006). impairment of
contrast sensitivity in long-term lorazepam users. psychopharmacology 186,
594−600.
gillies, d., beck, a., mccloud, a., & rathbone, j. (2005). benzodiazepines alone or in
combination with antipsychotic drugs for acute psychosis. cochrane database syst
rev, cd003079.
goldberg, t. e., & weinberger, d. r. (1995). a case against subtyping in schizophrenia.
schizophr res 17, 147−152.
gonzalez-burgos, g., & lewis, d. a. (2008). gaba neurons and the mechanisms of
network oscillations: implications for understanding cortical dysfunction in
schizophrenia. schizophr bull 34, 944−961.
gray, c. m. (1999). the temporal correlation hypothesis of visual feature integration:
still alive and well. neuron 24, 31−47.
gray, c. m., könig, p., engel, a. k., & singer, w. (1989). oscillatory responses in cat visual
cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization which reﬂects global stimulus
properties. nature 338, 334−337.
greenberg, w. m., triana, j. p., & karajgi, b. (1986). lorazepam in the treatment of
psychotic symptoms. am j psychiatry 143, 7.
greenblatt, d. j. (1992). pharmacology of benzodiazepine hypnotics. j clin psychiatry
53(s6), 7−13.
greenblatt, d. j., harmatz, j. s., dorsey, c., & shader, r. i. (1988). comparative single-dose
kinetics and dynamics of lorazepam, alprazolam,  xxxd2999xxx , and placebo. clin
pharmacol ther 44, 326−334.
greenblatt, d. j., ehrenberg, b. l., gunderman, j., locniskar, a., scavone, j. m., harmatz,
et al. (1989). pharmacokinetic and electroencephalographic study of intravenous
diazepam, midazolam, and placebo. clin pharmacol ther 45, 356−365.
grossberg, s. (1994). 3-d vision and ﬁgure-ground separation by visual cortex. percept
psychophys 55, 48−120.
healey, m., pickens, r., meisch, r., & mckenna, t. (1983). effects of clorazepate,
diazepam, lorazepam, and placebo on human memory. j clin psychiatry 44,
436−439.
henson, r. n. (2003). neuroimaging studies of priming. prog neurobiol 70, 53−81.
herzog, m. h., fahle, m., & koch, c. (2001). spatial aspects of object formation revealed
by a new illusion, shine-through. vis res 41, 2325−2335.
herzog, m. h., ernst, u. a., etzold, a., & eurich, c. w. (2003). local interactions in neural
networks explain global effects in the masking of visual stimuli. neural comput 15,
2091−2113.
hindmarch, i., & gudgeon, a. c. (1980). the effects of  xxxd1718xxx  and lorazepam on
aspects of psychomotor performance and car handling ability. br j clin pharmacol
10, 145−150.
hoffman, d. d., & richards, w. (1984). parts of recognition. cognition 18, 65−96.
horner, a. j., & henson, r. n. (2008). priming, response learning and repetition
suppression. neuropsychologia 46, 1979−1991.
huron, c., servais, c., & danion, j. m. (2001). lorazepam and diazepam impair true, but
not false, recognition in healthy volunteers. psychopharmacology 155, 204−209.
itil, t., shapiro, d., itil, k. z., eralp, e., bergamo, m., & mucci, a. (1989). discrimination of
mode of action of anxiolytics using an integrated computer data bank and dynamic
brain mapping (cns effects of diazepam and lorazepam). int clin psychopharmacol
4, 273−283.
jacoby, l. l. (1991). a process dissociation framework: separating automatic from
intentional uses of memory. j mem lang 30, 513−541.
jalava, k. m., mattila, m. j., tarssanen, m., & vanakoski, j. (1995). lorazepam and
diazepam differently impair attention. pharmacol biochem behav 51, 189−197.
jaspert, a., & ebert, d. (1994). benzodiazepine monotherapy in acute schizophrenia.
nervenarzt 65, 62−65.
johnson, d. n., weingartner, h. j., andreason, p., & george, d. t. (1995). an effect of
triazolam on visual attention and information processing. psychopharmacology 121,
145−149.
kaila, k. (1994). ionic basis of gabaa receptor channel function in the nervous system.
prog neurobiol 42, 489−537.
kane, j. m. (1996). schizophrenia. new engl j med 334, 34−41.
knopman, d. (1991). unaware learning versus preserved learning in pharmacologic
amnesia: similarities and differences. j exp psychol learn mem cogn 17, 1017−1029.
kothary, s. p., brown, a. c. d., pandit, u. a., samra, s. k., & pandit, s. k. (1981). time
course of antirecall effect of diazepam and lorazepam following oral administration. anesthesiology 55, 641−644.
kovacs, i., kozma, p., feher, a., & benedek, g. (1999). late maturation of visual spatial
integration in humans. proc natl acad sci 96, 12204−12209.
kujirai, t., caramia, m. d., rothwell, j. c., day, b. l., thompson, p. d., ferbert, a., et al.
(1993). corticocortical inhibition in human motor cortex. j physiol 471, 501−519.
kumar, r., mac, d. s., gabrielli, w. f., jr, & goodwin, d. w. (1987). anxiolytics and
memory: a comparison of lorazepam and alprazolam. j clin psychiatry 48, 158−160.
lamote, c., & wagemans, j. (1999). rapid integration of contour elements: from simple
ﬁlling-in to parts-based shape description. vis cogn 6, 345−361.
legrand, f., vidailhet, p., danion, j. m., grangé, d., giersch, a., van der linden, m., et al.
(1995). time course of the effects of diazepam and lorazepam on perceptual
priming and explicit memory. psychopharmacology 118, 475−479.
leppik, i. e., derivan, a. t., homan, r. w., walker, j., ramsay, r. e., & patrick, b. (1983).
double-blind study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepticus. jama 249,
1452−1454.

107

leventhal, a. g., wang, y., pu, m., zhou, y., & ma, y. (2003). gaba and its agonists
improved visual function in senescent monkeys. science 300, 812−815.
lingjaerde, o. (1991). benzodiazepines in the treatment of schizophrenia: an updated
survey. acta psychiatr scand 84, 453−459.
link, c. g., leigh, t. j., & fell, g. l. (1991). effects of graniseton and lorazepam, alone and
in combination, on the eeg of human volunteers. br j clin pharmacol 31, 93−97.
lorenceau, j., giersch, a., & seriès, p. (2005). dynamic competition between contour
integration and contour segmentation probed with moving stimuli. vis res 45,
103−116.
lüdtke, h., wilhelm, m., adler, f., schaeffel, h., & wilhelm, h. (1998). mathematical
procedures in data recording and processing of pupillary fatigue waves. vis res 38,
2889−2996.
mandema, j. w., kuck, m. t., & danhof, m. (1992). differences in intrinsic efﬁcacy of
benzodiazepines are reﬂected in their concentration-eeg effect relationship. br j
pharmacol 105, 162−170.
martin, j., matthews, a., martin, f., kirkby, k. c., alexander, j., & daniels, b. (2002).
effects of lorazepam and oxazepam on perceptual and procedural memory
functions. psychopharmacology 164, 262−267.
matthew, e., andreason, p., pettigrew, k., carson, r. e., herscovitch, p., cohen, r., et al.
(1995). benzodiazepine receptors mediate regional blood ﬂow changes in the
living human brain. proc natl acad sci usa 92, 2775−2779.
mckernan, r. m., & whiting, p. j. (1996). which gabaa-receptor subtypes really occur
in the brain? tins 19, 139−143.
mendelson, w. b., thompson, c., & franko, t. (1996). adverse reactions to sedative/
hypnotics: three years' experience. sleep 19, 702−706.
mintzer, m. z., & grifﬁths, r. r. (1999). triazolam and zolpidem: effects on human
memory and attentional processes. psychopharmacology 144, 8−19.
mintzer, m. z., & grifﬁths, r. r. (2003). lorazepam and scopolamine: a single-dose
comparison of effects on human memory and attentional processes. exp clin
psychopharmacol 11, 56−72.
möhler, h. (2007). molecular regulation of cognitive functions and developmental
plasticity: impact of gabaa receptors. j neurochem 102, 1−12.
nakayama, k., shimojo, s., & silverman, g. h. (1989). stereoscopic depth: its relation to
image segmentation, grouping, and the recognition of occluded objects. perception
18, 55−68.
nordberg, a., & wahlström, g. (1992). cholinergic mechanisms in physical dependence
on barbiturates, ethanol and benzodiazepines. j neural transm gen sect 88,
199−221.
o'hanlon, j. f., vermeeren, a., uiterwijk, m. m., van veggel, l. m., & swijgman, h. f.
(1995). anxiolytics' effects on the actual driving performance of patients and
healthy volunteers in a standardized test. an integration of three studies.
neuropsychobiology 31, 81−88.
olsen, r. w., & sieghart, w. (2009). gabaa receptors: subtypes provide diversity of
function and pharmacology. neuropharmacology 56, 141−148.
patat, a., klein, m. j., & hucher, m. (1987). effects of single oral doses of  xxxd1718xxx ,
diazepam and lorazepam on performance tasks and memory. eur j clin pharmacol
32, 461−466.
paton, c., banham, s., & whitmore, j. (2000). benzodiazepines in schizophrenia. is there
a trend towards long-term prescribing? psychiatr bull 24, 113−115.
pecknold, j. c. (1993). survey of the adjuvant use of benzodiazepines for treating outpatients with schizophrenia. j psychiatry neurosci 18, 82−84.
pickar, d., vinik, j., & bartko, j. j. (2008). pharmacotherapy of schizophrenic patients:
preponderance of off-label drug use. plosone 3, e3150.
pomara, n., tun, h., dasilva, d., hernando, r., deptula, d., & greenblatt, d. j. (1998). the
acute and chronic performance effects of alprazolam and lorazepam in the elderly:
relationship to duration of treatment and self-rated sedation. psychopharmacol bull
34, 139−153.
pomara, n., willoughby, l. m., ritchie, j. c., sidtis, j. j., greenblatt, d. j., & nemeroff, c. b.
(2004). interdose elevation in plasma cortisol during chronic treatment with
alprazolam but not lorazepam in the elderly. neuropsychopharmacology 29, 605−611.
pompéia, s., bueno, o. f., lucchesi, l. m., manzano, g. m., galduróz, j. c., & tuﬁk, s.
(2000). a double-dissociation of behavioural and event-related potential effects of
two benzodiazepines with similar potencies. j psychopharmacol 14, 288−298.
pompéia, s., bueno, o. f., galduroz, j. c., & tuﬁk, s. (2003). stem-completion tasks
(indirect, direct inclusion and exclusion) are differently affected by equipotent
doses of lorazepam and ﬂunitrazepam. hum psychopharmacol 18, 541−549.
pompéia, s., bueno, o. f., & tuﬁk, s. (2003). lorazepam should no longer be used as a
prototypical benzodiazepine. psychopharmacology 169, 211−212.
pompéia, s., manzano, g. m., tuﬁk, s., & bueno, o. f. a. (2005). what makes lorazepam
different from other benzodiazepines? j physiol 569, 709.
post, r. b., chaderjian, m. r., lott, l. a., & maddock, r. j. (1997). effects of lorazepam on
the distribution of spatial attention. exp clin psychopharmacol 5, 143−149.
qureshi, a., wassmer, e., davies, p., berry, k., & whitehouse, w. p. (2002). comparative
audit of intravenous lorazepam and diazepam in the emergency treatment of
convulsive status epilepticus in children. seizure 11, 141−144.
raymond, j. e., shapiro, k. l., & arnell, k. m. (1992). temporary suppression of visual
processing in an rsvp task: an attentional blink? j exp psychol hum percept perform
18, 849−860.
reilly, j. l., lencer, r., bishop, j. r., keedy, s., & sweeney, j. a. (2008). pharmacological
treatment effects on eye movement control. brain cogn 68, 415−435.
roach, b. j., & mathalon, d. h. (2008). event-related eeg time-frequency analysis: an
overview of measures and an analysis of early gamma band phase locking in
schizophrenia. schizophr bull 34, 907−926.
roediger, h. l. i. i. i., & challis, b. h. (1992). effects of exact repetition and conceptual
repetition on free recall and primed word-fragment completion. j exp psychol learn
mem cogn 18, 3−14.

108

a. giersch et al. / pharmacology & therapeutics 126 (2010) 94–108

roelofse, j. a., & van der bijl, p. (1994). cardiac dysrhythmias associated with
intravenous lorazepam, diazepam, and midazolam during oral surgery. j oral
maxillofac surg 52, 247−250.
saletu, b., & grünberger, j. (1979). evaluation of pharmacodynamic properties of
psychotropic drugs: quantitative eeg, psychometric and blood level investigations
in normals and patients. pharmakopsychiatr neuropsychopharmakol 12, 45−58.
sannerud, c. a., & ator, n. a. (1995). drug discrimination analysis of midazolam under a
three-lever procedure ii: differential effects of benzodiazepine receptor agonists.
j pharmacol exp ther 276, 183−193.
schacter, d. l., wig, g. s., & stevens, w. d. (2007). reduction in cortical activity during
priming. curr opin neurobiol 17, 171−176.
schaeffel, f., wilhelm, h., & zrenner, e. (1993). inter-individual variability in the
dynamics of natural accommodation in humans: relation to age and refractive
errors. j physiol 461, 301−320.
schmider, j., standhart, h., deuschle, m., drancoli, j., & heuser, i. (1999). a double-blind
comparison of lorazepam and oxazepam in psychomotor retardation and mutism.
biol psychiatry 46, 437−441.
seethalakshmi, r., dhavale, s., suggu, k., & dewan, m. (2008). catatonic syndrome:
importance of detection and treatment with lorazepam. ann clin psychiatry 20,
5−8.
sellal, f., danion, j. m., kauffmann-muller, f., grangé, d., imbs, j. l., van der linden, m.,
et al. (1992). differential effects of diazepam and lorazepam on repetition priming
in healthy volunteers. psychopharmacology 108, 371−379.
singer, w. (1999). neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the deﬁnition of relations?
neuron 24, 49−65.
stewart, s. a. (2005). the effects of benzodiazepines on cognition. j clin psychiatry 66
(suppl 2), 9−13.
stewart, s. h., rioux, g. f., connolly, j. f., dunphy, s. c., & teehan, m. d. (1996). effects of
oxazepam and lorazepam on implicit and explicit memory: evidence for possible
inﬂuences of time course. psychopharmacology 128, 139−149.
stoner, g. r., albright, t. d., & ramachandran, v. s. (1990). transparency and coherence
in human motion perception. nature 344, 153−155.
thiel, c. m., henson, r. n., morris, j. s., friston, k. j., & dolan, r. j. (2001).
pharmacological modulation of behavioral and neuronal correlates of repetition
priming. j neurosci 21, 6846−6852.
tokimura, h., di lazzaro, v., tokimura, y., oliviero, a., proﬁce, p., insola, a., et al. (2000).
short latency inhibition of human hand motor cortex by somatosensory input from
the hand. j physiol 523, 503−513.
tononi, g., & edelman, g. m. (2000). schizophrenia and the mechanisms of conscious
integration. brain res rev 31, 391−400.
tulen, j. h., & man in't veld, a. j. (1998). noninvasive indices of autonomic regulation
after alprazolam and lorazepam: effects on sympathovagal balance. j cardiovasc
pharmacol 32, 183−190.
tulving, e., & schacter, d. l. (1990). priming and human memory systems. science 247,
301−306.
uhlhaas, p. j., haenschel, c., nikolic, d., & singer, w. (2008). the role of oscillations and
synchrony in cortical networks and their putative relevance for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. schizophr bull 34, 927−943.
van den berg, f., tulen, j. h., boomsma, f., noten, j. b., moleman, p., & pepplinkhuizen, l.
(1996). effects of alprazolam and lorazepam on catecholaminergic and cardiovascular
activity during supine rest, mental load and orthostatic challenge. psychopharmacology
128, 21−30.
vidailhet, p., danion, j. m., kauffman-muller, f., grangé, d., giersch, a., van der linden,
et al. (1994). lorazepam and diazepam effects on memory acquisition in priming
tasks. psychopharmacology 115, 397−406.
vidailhet, p., kazès, m., danion, j. m., kauffmann-muller, f., & grangé, d. (1996). effects
of lorazepam and diazepam on conscious and automatic memory processes.
psychopharmacology 127, 63−72.
vidailhet, p., danion, j. m., chemin, c., & kazès, m. (1999). lorazepam impairs both
visual and auditory perceptual priming. psychopharmacology 147, 266−273.
volz, a., khorsand, v., gillies, d., & leucht, s. (2007). benzodiazepines for schizophrenia.
cochrane data base syst rev, cd006391.
von der heydt, r., & peterhans, e. (1989). mechanisms of contour perception in monkey
visual cortex 1: lines of pattern discontinuities. j neurosci 9, 1731−1748.
wagemans, j., notebaert, w., & boucart, m. (1998). lorazepam but not diazepam
impairs identiﬁcation of pictures on the basis of speciﬁc contour fragments.
psychopharmacology 138, 326−333.
wang, g. j., volkow, n. d., overall, j., hitzemann, r. j., pappas, n., pascani, k., et al.
(1996). reproducibility of regional brain metabolic responses to lorazepam. j nucl
med 37, 1609−1613.
whiting, p. j. (2006). gaba-a receptors: a viable target for novel anxiolytics? curr opin
pharmacol 6, 24−29.
whittington, m. a., traub, r. d., faulkner, h. j., stanford, i. m., & jefferys, j. g. r. (1997).
recurrent excitatory post-synaptic potentials induced by synchronised fast cortical
oscillations. proc natl acad sci usa 94, 12198−12203.

whittington, m. a., traub, r. d., kopell, n., ermentrout, b., & buhl, e. h. (2000).
inhibition-based rhythms: experimental and mathematical observations on
network dynamics. int j psychophysiol 38, 315−336.
whittington, m. a., doheny, h. c., traub, r. d., lebeau, f. e., & buhl, e. h. (2001).
differential expression of synaptic and nonsynaptic mechanisms underlying
stimulus-induced gamma oscillations in vitro. j neurosci 21, 1727−1738.
wolkowitz, o. m., & pickar, d. (1991). benzodiazepines in the treatment of
schizophrenia: a review and reappraisal. am j psychiatry 148, 714−726.
ziemann, u., lonnecker, s., steinhof, b. j., & paulus, w. (1996). effects of antiepileptic
drugs on motor excitability in humans: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study.
ann  xxxd122xxx  40, 367−378.

glossary
explicit and implicit memory: are deﬁned by the type of instructions given to the
subjects. in explicit memory tasks, subjects are explicitly asked to remember
previously presented information. usual tasks are free recall tasks, in which items
are ﬁrst presented to subjects during a study phase. during the recall phase,
subjects are instructed to cite as many items as they remember, but without any
cue to help them. in recognition tasks in contrast, new and old items are presented
to the subjects during the recall phase, and they are instructed to tell whether they
saw these items or not in the study phase. in implicit memory tasks, no reference
is usually made to the previous study phase, and typical tasks are to identify
fragmented pictures or to complete word stems. priming effects are revealed by
the improvement of performance observed when the item to identify has already
been presented during the study phase, as compared to new items.
priming task: the main task in a priming task concerns a target, which most often has
to be identiﬁed. this target is preceded by a ‘prime’, i.e. a stimulus which is not
relevant to the task at hand but which inﬂuences performance during the main
task, either in a facilitatory way (perceptual priming) or in an inhibitory way
(negative priming). in some cases, the prime is presented long before the target,
like in implicit memory tasks (chapter 2). it can also precede immediately the
target, deﬁning short-term priming effects (chapter 8).
acquisition, storage and retrieval: deﬁne different stages of processing during memory
tasks. acquisition occurs during the study phase, when items to be memorized are
presented to the subjects. storage deﬁnes the maintenance of information in
memory, whereas retrieval deﬁnes the processes occurring when subjects restitute information.
the retrieved intentionality criteria: is a method used in the domain of memory to
explore the possibility that subjects make use of explicit strategies in a task designed
to measure implicit memory. the main idea is to manipulate a variable that affects
implicit and explicit memory in a different way. for example, during the study
phase, subjects are asked either to process the meaning of words or to count
syllables. the effect of this variable on memory performance is then compared when
instructions are referring to the study phase (explicit instructions) or not (implicit
instructions). in our example, the manipulation during study phase is supposed to
have a larger effect on explicit than on implicit memory. a large effect of this
manipulation in a task designed to measure implicit memory would then indicate
the use of explicit strategies.
controlled and automatic processes in memory: represent a distinction of memory
processes that overlap partly with the implicit and explicit distinction, but refers
to a conceptualization of the processes involved in memorization rather than to
the instructions given to the subjects. more speciﬁcally, it refers to the idea that
memory involves mechanisms that are unconscious and automatic, or conscious
and controlled. this distinction is supported by the process-dissociation procedure
(see below).
the process-dissociation procedure (pdp): is used to distinguish between controlled
and automatic processes involved in memorization. the procedure includes a
classical recognition task in which subjects are ﬁrst presented with two series of
items. during recognition, two conditions are used. in the ﬁrst condition, subjects
are asked to select all items they recognize in a list including new and old items. in
the second condition, subjects are instructed to avoid items of one of the two
series. this avoidance is supposed to be based exclusively on controlled processes,
whereas the items selection in the ﬁrst condition includes both automatic and
controlled processes. a quantitative estimation of automatic processes is derived
through subtraction of performance observed in the two conditions. the same
procedure can be applied to word-stem completion.
visual integration and binding: refer to processes allowing to derive the form of objects
in the visual environment. since visual information is ﬁrst processed in the
primary visual cortex by specialized neurons coding for some speciﬁc aspect of
visual information (orientation, color), information needs to be bound together
correctly in order to identify objects and not only local contours. it is the binding
mechanisms that bring about visual integration and ultimately complex object
perception.

