the american journal on addictions, 19: 169–177, 2010
c american academy of addiction psychiatry
copyright 
issn: 1055-0496 print / 1521-0391 online
doi: 10.1111/j.1521-0391.2009.00025.x

effect of ptsd diagnosis and contingency management
procedures on cocaine use in dually cocaine- and
opioid-dependent individuals maintained on laam: a
retrospective analysis
michael j. mancino, md,1 janette mcgaugh, md,2 zachary feldman, ms,1
james poling, phd,3 alison oliveto,  xxxg684xxx 
1

department of psychiatry, university of arkansas for medical sciences, little rock, arkansas
medical department, community counseling services inc., hot springs, arkansas
3
department of psychiatry, yale school of medicine and the va ct healthcare system, west haven, connecticut
2

this randomized clinical trial retrospectively examined
the effect of post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) and contingency management (cm) on cocaine use in opioid and
cocaine dependent individuals maintained on high or lowdose laam randomly assigned to cm or a yoked-control
condition. cocaine-positive urines decreased more rapidly
over time in those without ptsd versus those with ptsd
in the noncontingency condition. in participants with ptsd,
cm resulted in fewer cocaine-positive urines compared to the
noncontingent condition. this suggests that cm may help improve the potentially worse outcomes in opioid- and cocainedependent individuals with ptsd compared to those without
ptsd. (am j addict 2010;19:169–177)

introduction
although psychiatric comorbidities, including posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd), are prevalent in persons
with substance use disorders,1–4 their impact on treatment
outcome is unclear. for instance, one of the earliest studies
to examine the interaction between psychiatric severity, as
measured by the addiction severity index, and treatment
modality on treatment outcomes found that alcohol- and
other drug-dependent males with low psychiatric severity improved regardless of the treatment modality, while
those with high psychiatric severity showed virtually no
improvement in any treatment setting.5 other studies utireceived may 4, 2009; revised june 2, 2009; accepted june 24,
2009.
address correspondence to dr. mancino, university of
arkansas for medical sciences, 4301 west markham, slot 848,
little rock, ar 72205. e-mail: mjmancino@uams.edu.

lizing different instruments to assess psychiatric comorbidity as well as different measures of treatment outcome had
similar findings in heterogeneous substance abusing populations.6–8
on the other hand, results of studies limited to opiatedependent populations are mixed in terms of the impact
of psychiatric comorbidity on treatment outcomes.9–12 for
instance, comorbid psychiatric diagnosis has been shown
to have a negative impact on functioning up to 2.5 years
after seeking treatment.10,11 however, although axis i or
ii diagnosis has been shown to predict poorer psychosocial
functioning and medical status at the time of admission and
follow-up,10 comorbid psychiatric diagnosis had no impact
on the number of positive urines for opiates or cocaine at
7-month follow-up.9,10 in contrast, patients with an antisocial personality disorder diagnosis reportedly have higher
rates of cocaine and heroin use.12
whether comorbid psychiatric illness impacts retention
in treatment is also somewhat unclear. although the results
of numerous studies demonstrated no impact of comorbid
psychiatric illness on treatment outcome as determined by
retention in treatment,10,12–16 others found that patients
with a personality disorder diagnosis were less likely to
stay in treatment continuously for 7 months.9 in contrast,
gelkopf and colleagues16 found that patients with a comorbid axis i diagnosis stayed in treatment longer than those
with no axis i diagnosis.
similarly, whether ptsd impacts treatment response is
unclear. two previous studies specifically examining the impact of ptsd on substance abuse treatment outcomes suggest that higher levels of ptsd are associated with negative
substance use disorder treatment outcomes,17,18 whereas
two other recent studies indicate no significant difference

169

in outcome.19,20 ouimette et al.17 demonstrated that male
heterogeneous substance abusing veterans with ptsd have
more rapid relapse, greater substance use, and more problems from substance use following an intensive treatment
or residential substance use disorder treatment program
than veterans without ptsd. moreover, hien et al.18 reported that new methadone patients with current ptsd
had significantly more ongoing drug use, including cocaine
use, at 3 months than those without ptsd. a more recent study examining 6-month treatment outcomes among
cocaine-dependent outpatients with and without ptsd
found that substance use disorder-ptsd (sud-ptsd) patients were more impaired, and showed significantly less improvement in alcohol use and most addiction-related psychosocial problems compared with sud-only patients.21
however, the two groups did not differ significantly in improvement over time on drug use or global psychological
severity.
in contrast, mills et al.19 reported that, although ptsd
was associated with continued physical and mental disability and reduced occupational functioning in heroindependent patients across a variety of settings, no significant differences in treatment retention and no significant
differences in rates of other substance use were found between those with and without current ptsd across the
2 years of the study. those with current ptsd were also
less likely to use heroin than those without current ptsd.19
in addition, no significant differences in opiate or cocaine
use were found between predominately male veterans in
opiate agonist treatment with and without a ptsd diagnosis.20 trafton et al.20 suggest several possible reasons for the
differences in outcomes across these studies, including differences in dropout-rate between the hien et al. and trafton
et al. studies and the lack of detail regarding the treatment
intervention such as methadone maintenance doses.20 in
addition, methodological differences, such as the measures
employed to assess outcome, methods to determine ptsd
diagnosis or symptom severity, and comorbid drug dependence may be at least partial determinants of these seemingly conflicting data.
meanwhile, behavioral interventions, notably contingency management procedures, have been increasingly
examined in drug-dependent individuals, demonstrating
some efficacy in facilitating illicit drug abstinence in general, as well as in dually cocaine- and opioid-dependent
populations.22–30 contingency management has also been
shown to improve treatment retention in cocaine abusers.31
yet, to our knowledge, only a few studies have examined the
relative impact of psychiatric comorbidity and severity on
outcome under contingency management conditions. for
instance, in alcohol, cocaine- or opioid-dependent individuals who received standard treatment or standard treatment
plus contingency management, which rewarded negative
urine screens and completion of goal-related activities, a
significant interaction was found between psychiatric severity and treatment modality in relation to treatment reten170

tion, such that participants with greater psychiatric severity were more likely to drop out of treatment earlier in the
standard treatment condition, while retention was similar
across the psychiatric severity groups in the contingency
management condition.22 in contrast, saxon et al.32 examined predictors of outcome at 18 months posttreatment
entry for 353 admissions to methadone maintenance who
received random assignment to one of three counseling conditions: (1) medication only, (2) standard counseling, and
(3) enhanced services with either no contingencies or contingency contracting. subjects in contingency contracting
were placed on contingency contracts that punished positive urine toxicology results and ultimately discharged patients for unremitting drug use. lower asi psychiatric composite scores consistent with lower psychiatric symptom
severity predicted higher rates of total, opiate and cocainepositive urines. higher rates of opiate-positive urines were
also predicted by assignment to medication only condition. lower rates of cocaine-positive urines were predicted
by assignment to the enhanced contingency contracting
condition. overall, these findings suggest that contingency
management and psychiatric severity impact treatment outcomes in a complex manner and deserve further study.
to our knowledge, only one study has examined the
prognostic relevance of trauma history and ptsd symptoms on outcome in a randomized trial of contingency
management compared to standard treatment in cocaineor heroin-dependent outpatients.33 results were that the
severity of complex ptsd symptoms predicted poorer outcomes in terms of retention in treatment and objectively verified continuous abstinence from cocaine and heroin use in
treatment. the absence of an interaction effect for complex
ptsd symptoms and treatment condition suggested that
the predictive relationship occurred both in standard treatment and contingency management. however, closer inspection of the results for each treatment condition showed
that complex ptsd symptoms were predictive of outcome
only in the contingency management condition. however,
in this study a third of participants met criteria for opiate
dependence, and only slightly more than one-fifth were receiving opiate agonist treatment at baseline. taken together,
these findings suggest that the impact of ptsd diagnosis
and contingency management on treatment outcomes in
cocaine abusing, opiate-dependent patients needs further
exploration.
a previous clinical trial examined the effects of
levoalpha-acetyl methadyl (laam) maintenance dose and
contingency management procedures aimed at facilitating illicit drug abstinence in dually cocaine- and opioiddependent individuals.30 results showed that contingency
management increased cocaine abstinence over time to a
greater degree in those maintained on an adequate dose
of laam relative to a yoked control. given that opioid
maintenance dose was fixed and contingency management
procedures were employed, we conducted a retrospective
analysis to examine the prognostic significance of ptsd

ptsd/contingency management effects on cocaine use

march–april 2010

diagnosis on outcome in this sample. our hypothesis was
that those with ptsd would have poorer outcomes than
those without ptsd and contingency management would
facilitate better outcomes than the yoked control in those
with ptsd.

methods
subjects
data were obtained from a previously reported study.30
a total of 140 male and female dually cocaine- and opioiddependent individuals (ages 21–55, including 45 females,
39 african-americans, 10 hispanics, and 91 caucasians)
seeking opioid maintenance treatment were recruited from
the greater new haven area after giving informed consent
to participate in this randomized clinical trial approved
by the yale human investigations committee and the va
connecticut human studies subcommittee. subjects were
entered into this study from 1997 through 2000. thus data
collected in this previous study were obtained prior to safety
requirements for laam regarding ecg testing to monitor
qtc interval or a review of other medications that might extend laam half-life or produce independent qtc interval
changes. individuals who could not tolerate laam were
tapered off laam and referred to a local opioid maintenance program. only two subjects were unable to tolerate
laam at the dose outlined in the protocol. all participants met the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorder (dsm-iv) criteria for opioid and cocaine dependence, as determined from the structured clinical interview
for dsm-iv (scid), and had urine toxicologies positive
for both drugs. exclusions included medical reasons contraindicating laam maintenance (eg, pregnancy, respiratory condition such as asthma, abnormal liver enzyme levels, or use of medications that might interact with laam),
a current diagnosis of other drug or alcohol physical dependence (other than tobacco), a history of major psychiatric disorder (psychosis, schizophrenia, bipolar), current
suicidality, and an inability to read and understand the
consent form. alcohol physical dependence was defined as
those having experienced tolerance or withdrawal during
the preceding 12 months. women of childbearing age were
included provided they had a negative urine pregnancy test,
agreed to use adequate contraception to prevent pregnancy
during the study, and agreed to monthly pregnancy tests.
research design and procedures
in this 12-week, randomized, double-blind, outpatient clinical trial, 140 patients were randomized by
sex to one of the following treatment groups: lowdose laam (30, 30, 39 mg/mwf) with contingency management procedures (lc); low-dose laam
(30, 30, 39 mg/mwf) without contingency management procedures (ly); high-dose laam (100, 100,
130 mg/mwf) with contingency management procedures
mancino et al.

(hc); high-dose laam (100, 100, 130 mg/mwf) without contingency management procedures (hy). during
laam induction, patients received an initial dose of
20 mg of laam on monday of week 1. this dose was
increased by 10 mg at next dosing such that patients received 30 mg on wednesday of week 1. the patients in the
low-dose group then received their maintenance doses of
laam (30 mg on mondays and wednesdays; 39 mg on
fridays), while subjects in the high-dose group continued
to be inducted onto laam in 10 mg dose increments until
they received their maintenance dose of 100 mg by friday of week 4. all patients were then maintained on their
respective maintenance dose of laam through week 12.
further details regarding laam induction procedures are
described elsewhere.30 at the end of the study, subjects were
detoxified from laam over a 4-week period unless they
opted to transfer to a regular opioid maintenance program.
contingency management procedures
the contingency management procedures used in this
study were adapted from those developed by higgins
et al.31,34,35 supervised urines were collected thrice weekly
(mwf) prior to being medicated in order to implement the
contingency management procedures, which began during
week 1 along with weekly group and weekly individual
therapy sessions. during weeks 1–12, subjects in the contingency management group had the opportunity to obtain vouchers for illicit drug abstinence. subjects received a
monetary voucher for every drug-free urine sample. during
weeks 1–12, the first drug-free urine sample was rewarded
with a $3 monetary voucher. the value of the voucher increased by $1 for every consecutive drug-free urine sample
thereafter. a drug-positive urine sample reset the voucher
value back to $3. those subjects not placed on contingency
management procedures were each yoked to a subject in
the contingency group, such that he/she received monetary
vouchers whenever the subject in the contingency group received them. subjects were blind to this schedule, but were
informed that they may receive vouchers on a random basis. subjects exchanged their vouchers for mutually agreedupon goods or services at any time during the course of
the study. subjects in the contingency management group
who remained abstinent during the first 12 weeks earned
goods and services worth a maximum of $738.00. additional details regarding contingency management procedures and weekly/individual therapy sessions can be found
elsewhere.30
laboratory tests
urine samples were analyzed for the presence of opioids
and cocaine metabolites upon submission of a urine sample on a thrice-weekly basis. this frequency of urine testing
was employed in order to detect most opioid and cocaine
use. breath analysis for alcohol was performed on a random basis or when recent alcohol use had been suspected.
march–april 2010

171

if the breath alcohol level was >.00 and <.05, one-half the
laam dose was administered. breath alcohol levels ≥.05
resulted in the laam being withheld on that day. urines
were also screened for barbiturates and benzodiazepines
on a weekly basis. a urine sample was rated positive if the
quantity of opioids was greater than 200 ng/ml for opioids and quantity of other drugs and their metabolites was
300 ng/ml. urine toxicology results were available the next
day from the va clinical laboratory. blood chemistries
(sma 20, cbc) and electrocardiogram (ecg) as well
as a general physical examination were performed during
screening.
psychosocial assessments
self-reported opioid and cocaine use, as well as opiate withdrawal symptoms, were assessed at baseline and
weekly using instruments we have developed in previous studies.36,37 since medication hours were between 7
and 10 a.m., the time of day for these ratings was relatively standardized. ratings were completed before laam
dosing.
at intake, the scid interview was completed for dsmiv psychiatric diagnoses. subjects identified to have been
exposed to a traumatic event were first identified using the
traumatic events booklet38 and impact of events scale.39
those events were then used as reference points during the
ptsd portion of the scid. substance-related problems
and psychosocial functioning were assessed at intake using
the addiction severity index (asi), a 140-item structured
clinical interview using both subjective and objective information to make severity ratings on 10-point scales in seven
areas: alcohol and drug use, medical status, legal status,
psychiatric symptoms, occupational functioning, and family/social functioning.40 information on training of raters
is published elsewhere.30
data analyses
information regarding current ptsd diagnosis was
available on 137 of 140 participants. the intent to treat sample of 137 participants was used for the statistical analyses.
subjects were grouped within each treatment cell by the
presence or absence of current ptsd. information about
the lifetime rate of ptsd in this sample was unavailable.
baseline and retention data were analyzed between those
participants with ptsd and those without ptsd with ttests on the continuous variables and chi-square for categorical variables. for data sampled at several time points,
participants were assigned to eight groups (hc with ptsd,
hc without ptsd, hy with ptsd, etc.). hierarchical linear modeling (hlm) was used to determine whether the
number of positive urines decreased at a different rate across
conditions over time.41,42
the primary outcome in the intent to treat sample was
urine toxicology screening result. we compared the mean
proportion of the three weekly urine samples that were
172

opiate-positive, cocaine-positive, and negative from both
each week ranging between 0 and 1 in a manner similar
to that described previously.38,39 urinalyses were analyzed
using hierarchical linear models (hlms), which examine
the linear trend of categorical and continuous data over
time and the interaction of temporal trend with treatment
factors and subject characteristics.42 the hlms allow for
inclusion of data from patients who did not complete treatment, varying assessment times, and different numbers of
assessments per subject. urinalysis data were first calculated as weekly proportion of urines positive for the target
drug; zero reflected “no drug screens positive,” one of two,
one of three, or two of three drug screens positive were recoded 1 for “some use,” and all drug screens positive was
recoded 2, reflecting “all drug screens for that week positive.” these data were entered into 2 × 2 × 2 (high dose
vs. low dose, contingency vs. noncontingency, and ptsd
vs. no-ptsd) design over 12 time points to give an 8 × 12
ordinal response hierarchical linear model with random intercept.41,42 slopes were compared over the eight groups to
compare rate of positive urine decrease over time. we used
the mixor program of hedeker43 for ordinal hlm analyses and sas for baseline analysis. these analyses yielded
z-scores for pairwise comparison of slopes that assessed the
linear increase or decrease in data values over the course of
the study as a function of laam dose, contingency management condition, and ptsd diagnosis. this approach
was selected to maintain the power of the analyses given
smaller sample sizes in each of the eight groups. for all
analyses, statistical significance was inferred by a p value
less than .05.

results
baseline characteristics and treatment retention
baseline and demographic characteristics of 137 subjects
based on the presence or absence of a ptsd diagnosis are
shown in table 1. thirty-one of 137 (22.6%) of participants
met dsm iv criteria for ptsd. participants with ptsd
were more likely to be female, have a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, and have a diagnosis of major depression.
baseline cocaine-positive urine screens did not differ across
groups.
there was a trend toward a longer duration of participation in those without ptsd than those with ptsd. participants with ptsd were more likely to leave the study
early compared to those without ptsd in the absence of
contingency management (t = 2.46, p = .02), but not in the
contingency management condition (t = .45, p = .65).
cocaine use during the trial
illicit opioid use and the combination of opioids and
cocaine use are not reported here as there were no significant differences in urine toxicology results when examining participants with and without a diagnosis of ptsd.

ptsd/contingency management effects on cocaine use

march–april 2010

table 1.

baseline subject characteristics and study retention

measure
n
age (years)
race (c/aa/h)
gender (f/m)
alcohol dependence
education (# ≥ hs grad)
employment (# ≥ p/t)
scid dx depression
wks in study
scid dx opiate depend
scid dx cocaine depend

no ptsd (sd)

ptsd (sd)

106
35.3 (7.3)
69/32/5
28/78
13
81
46
10
14.7 (8.7)
106
99

31
34.2 (7.8)
21/6/4
14/17
9
23
12
18
12.0 (9.5)
30 (1-missing)
30

t

chi2

p

3.5
8.8
5.0
.07
.22
34.9

.90
.17
.003
.03
.80
.64
<.0001
.15

.14

1.5

race: c = caucasian; aa = african american; h = hispanic.
employment: # ≥ p/t = number of subjects with part time or full time employment.
no ptsd = no current ptsd diagnosis.
ptsd = current ptsd diagnosis.

figure 1. cocaine use over time: impact of ptsd diagnosis and contingency management. cocaine use as a function of time over a
12-week period. left panel: hlm point estimate to show lack of any change over time in cocaine-positive urines in participants with ptsd
(open squares) versus those without ptsd (closed squares). right panel: hlm point estimate to show direction of change in cocaine-positive
urines in participants with ptsd receiving contingency (open circles), those with ptsd and no contingency (open squares), those without
ptsd receiving contingency (closed triangles), and those without ptsd and no contingency (closed squares).

complete results without ptsd as a factor have already
been published elsewhere.30
the overall impact of ptsd and contingency management on cocaine use is shown in fig. 1. regardless
of laam dose and contingency management condition,
changes in cocaine-positive urines over time did not differ by the presence or absence of ptsd (z = .8, p = .43).
furthermore, the presence or absence of ptsd did not
impact cocaine-positive urines in the contingency management condition (z = −.1, p = .92). however, for participants
without contingency management, cocaine-positive urines
decreased more rapidly over time in those without a ptsd
diagnosis relative to those with a ptsd diagnosis (z = 2.3,
p = .02). in participants with ptsd contingency management was associated with fewer positive urines for cocaine
mancino et al.

over time compared to the yoked control (z = 2.5, p =
.014).
when controlling for both laam dose and contingency
management condition, cocaine-positive urines decreased
more rapidly over time in the hy group without ptsd relative to the hy group with ptsd (z = −2.4, p = .015) (see
fig. 2). cocaine use decreased over time in the ly group
without ptsd while increasing over time in the ly group
with ptsd (z = 4.1, p < .001). the change in the proportion of cocaine-positive urines over time did not differ in the
hc group with ptsd relative to hc group without ptsd
(z = −.65, p = .51). similarly, changes in the proportion
of cocaine-positive urines over time did not differ between
lc group with ptsd and without ptsd (z = −1.0, p =
.32) (see fig. 3).
march–april 2010

173

figure 2. cocaine use over time: high-dose laam. cocaine use as a function of time over 12 weeks in participants receiving high-dose
laam. left panel: mean percentage of cocaine-positive urines in participants with ptsd receiving contingency (hc-open circles), those with
ptsd and no contingency (hy-open squares), those without ptsd receiving contingency (hc-closed circles), and those without ptsd and no
contingency (hy-closed squares). right panel: hlm generated estimates to show the direction of changes, if any.

figure 3. cocaine use over time: low-dose laam. cocaine use as a function of time over 12 weeks in participants receiving low-dose laam.
left panel: mean percentage of cocaine-positive urines in participants with ptsd receiving contingency (open circles), those with ptsd and no
contingency (open squares), those without ptsd receiving contingency (closed circles), and those without ptsd and no contingency (closed
squares). right panel: hlm generated estimates to show the direction of changes, if any.

discussion
to our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the
impact of ptsd diagnosis on the efficacy of contingency
management procedures in a dually cocaine- and opioiddependent population maintained at different doses of an
opioid agonist. the prevalence of ptsd in our study population (ie, 22.6%) is consistent with other clinical studies
that report high rates of ptsd among people in treatment for opioid dependence (lifetime: 14–41%; current:
20–31%)15,18,44,45 relative to those observed among the
general population (lifetime: 1–8%; current: 1–4%).46–49
that those with ptsd were more likely to be female, be
174

alcohol dependent or depressed is also consistent with previous studies. for instance, ptsd diagnosis is reportedly
more common in females.18–20 in addition, patients diagnosed with ptsd have significantly longer histories of
 xxxd102xxx  to intoxication20 and are also more likely
to be diagnosed with depression.19,20
our study did not show any significant differences in
outcome with regard to opiate-positive urines in participants with ptsd compared to those without ptsd. it has
been postulated that the need for an adequate dose of opiate
medication is perhaps the most important factor in treatment outcome, especially as it pertains to opiate use.13,20,32
that opioid use differed between the high and low laam

ptsd/contingency management effects on cocaine use

march–april 2010

maintenance dose conditions,30 but not between those with
and without ptsd within each dose condition supports
this view.
the finding that cocaine-positive urines did not differ between those with and without a ptsd diagnosis regardless
of treatment condition during the study would seem to be
in agreement with recent studies.20,21 however, one of these
studies reported that patients with ptsd received higher
doses of opiate medication, attended more psychosocial
treatment sessions for substance-use disorder, and had better treatment retention.20 these additional contacts may
have contributed to outcomes that were similar between
those with and without ptsd.
in contrast, a trend toward earlier dropout for participants with ptsd compared to those without ptsd
was observed in the present study. furthermore, the addition of the contingency management condition was associated with an elimination of the differences seen in
dropout between those with and without ptsd. that participants with ptsd had worse outcomes than participants
without ptsd in terms of retention in treatment and
cocaine-positive urines in the absence of contingency management is in keeping with the findings of others demonstrating worse outcomes in patients with higher levels of
ptsd.18,19
the fact that participants with ptsd in the contingency
management conditions had greater reductions in cocaine
use over time relative to participants with ptsd in the noncontingency condition suggests that negative outcomes due
to the presence of ptsd may be diminished by incorporating contingency management procedures that reward positive behavior change into the treatment program. to our
knowledge, this is the first report that contingency management procedures using positive reinforcement for drug abstinence may improve upon treatment outcomes for those
with ptsd. as such these findings extend findings from
earlier studies that demonstrate some efficacy in facilitating illicit drug abstinence22–30 to facilitating abstinence in
the context of a comorbid psychiatric disorder. thus, contingency management procedures may be especially beneficial in substance abusers with ptsd. even within the
context of a fixed opioid maintenance dose, those with
ptsd had a more rapid decline in cocaine-positive urines
over time in the contingency management group relative to
the yoked control. moreover, within the yoked control low
laam dose condition cocaine-positive urines increased
over time in those with ptsd, but decreased over time
in those without ptsd. this is consistent with previous
findings32 that lower methadone dose predicts higher rates
of cocaine-positive urines. however, this earlier study did
not specifically examine the impact of ptsd on treatment
outcomes. the hien et al.18 study also reported that new
methadone patients with current ptsd had significantly
more ongoing cocaine use, at 3 months than those without
ptsd. this study did not specifically examine the interac-

mancino et al.

tion between dose and treatment outcome so it is difficult to
draw comparisons between these previous studies and the
current study which examines both the impact of dose and
ptsd as well as contingency management on outcomes.
it could be argued that one of the main limitations of this
study relates to baseline characteristics associated with the
ptsd diagnosis. indeed in our study population ptsd diagnosis was associated with being female, having a lifetime
alcohol diagnosis and having a depression diagnosis. however, similar analyses including each of these as a cofactor
did not show similar patterns of effect observed with ptsd
in the contingent versus noncontingent conditions. (these
data are not shown due to being beyond the scope of the
current paper.) thus, the cooccurring presence of female
sex, lifetime alcohol dependence diagnosis, or depression
diagnosis does not appear to account for the more rapid
decrease in cocaine-positive urines over time in those with
ptsd under contingency management relative to yoked
control.
nevertheless, there are several limitations of this study.
for instance, these data were analyzed retrospectively.
thus, treatment groups had not been stratified on ptsd
diagnosis. be that as it may, there were not significant differences in the proportion of those with and without ptsd
across treatment groups. moreover, retention was relatively
low, with only 53% of participants completing the 12-week
trial. however, the analytic strategy employed (ie, hlm)
does allow inclusion of data from participants who have
missing data, including those who drop out prior to study
completion, and uses existing data to estimate a linear trend
of changes over time, if any. nevertheless, we cannot account for potential sample bias due to the relatively small
sample size for those with ptsd relative to those without,
although the association of ptsd with other subject characteristics did not appear to impact outcome. in addition,
given that laam maintenance is no longer a common opioid agonist treatment because of the black box warnings
related to adverse cardiac events, whether these findings
extend to those on methadone or buprenorphine maintenance is unclear. additional work is necessary in cocainedependent methadone and buprenorphine maintained individuals to clarify better both the impact of ptsd diagnosis
on outcome and the potential of contingency management
to improve outcomes.

conclusion
these results suggest that dually cocaine- and opioiddependent individuals with ptsd may have worse treatment outcomes than those without ptsd. however, in
the presence of contingency management procedures, dually cocaine- and opioid-dependent patients with and without ptsd have similar treatment outcomes during opioid
maintenance.

march–april 2010

175

the authors wish to thank nichole sanders, who assisted
in the creation of the figures included in the manuscript.

declaration of interest
the authors report no conflicts of interest. the authors
alone are responsible for the content and writing of the
paper.
references
1. rounsaville bj, weissman mm, kleber h, et al. heterogeneity of
psychiatric diagnosis in treated opiate addicts. arch gen psychiatry.
1982;39:161–166.
2. dansky b, saladin m, brady k, et al. prevalence of victimization
and posttraumatic stress disorder among women with substance use
disorders. int j add. 1995;30:1079–1099.
3. fullilove mt, fullilove re, smith m, et al. violence, trauma, and
post-traumatic stress disorder among women drug users. j trauma
stress. 1993;6:533–543.
4. najavits l, gastfriend d, barber j, et al. cocaine dependence with
and without ptsd among subjects in the national institute on
drug abuse collaborative cocaine treatment study. am j psychiatry.
1998;155:214–219.
5. mclellan at, luborsky l, woody ge, et al. predicting response to
alcohol and drug abuse treatments: role of psychiatric severity. arch
gen psychiatry. 1983;40:620–625.
6. mertens jr, weisner cm. predictors of substance abuse treatment
retention among women and men in an hmo. alcohol clin exp res.
2000;24:1525–1533.
7. compton wm, cottler lb, jacobs jl, et al. the role of psychiatric
disorders in predicting drug dependence treatment outcomes. am j
psychiatry. 2003;160:890–895.
8. charney da, palacios-boix j, negrete jc, et al. association between
concurrent depression and anxiety and six-month outcome of addiction treatment. psych serv. 2005;56:927–933.
9. cacciola js, rutherford mj, alterman ai, et al. personality disorders
and treatment outcome in methadone maintenance patients. j nerv
ment dis. 1996;184:234–239.
10. cacciola js, alterman ai, rutherford mj, et al. the relationship of
psychiatric comorbidity to treatment outcomes in methadone maintained patients. drug alcohol depend. 2001;61:271–280.
11. rounsaville bj, kosten tr, weissman mm, et al. prognostic significance of psychopathology in treated opiate addicts. arch gen psychiatry. 1986;43:739–745.
12. king vl, kidorf ms, stoller kb, et al. influence of antisocial personality subtypes on drug abuse treatment response. j nerv ment dis.
2001;189:593–601.
13. magura s, nwakeze pc, demsky s. pre- and in-treatment predictors
of retention in methadone treatment using survival analysis. addiction. 1998;93:51–60.
14. maremmani i, zolesi o, aglietti m, et al. methadone dose and retention during treatment of heroin addicts with axis i psychiatric
comorbidity. j addict dis. 2000;19:29–41.
15. milby jb, sims mk, khuder s, et al. psychiatric comorbidity: prevalence in methadone maintenance treatment. am j drug alcohol abuse.
1996;22:95–107.
16. gelkopf m, weizman t, melamed y, et al. does psychiatric comorbidity affect drug abuse treatment outcome? a prospective assessment of drug abuse, treatment tenure and infectious diseases in
an israeli methadone maintenance clinic. isr j psychiatry relat sci.
2006;43:126–136.
17. ouimette pc, brown pj, najavits lm. course and treatment of patients with both substance use and posttraumatic stress disorders.
addict behav. 1998;23:785–795.

176

18. hien da, nunes e, levin fr, et al. posttraumatic stress disorder
and short-term outcome in early methadone treatment. j subst abuse
treat. 2000;19:31–37.
19. mills kl, teesson m, ross j, et al. the impact of post-traumatic stress
disorder on treatment outcomes for heroin dependence. addiction.
2007;102:447–454.
20. trafton ja, minkel j, humphreys k. opioid substitution treatment
reduces substance use equivalently in patients with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. j stud alcohol. 2006;67:228–235.
21. najavits lm, harned ms, gallop rj, et al. six-month treatment
outcomes of cocaine-dependent patients with and without ptsd in a
multisite national trial. j stud alcohol drugs. 2007;68:353–361.
22. weinstock j, alessi sm, petry nm. regardless of psychiatric severity the addition of contingency management to standard treatment
improves retention and drug use outcomes. drug alcohol depend.
2007;87:288–296.
23. higgins st, budney aj, bickel wk. applying behavioral concepts
and principles to the treatment of cocaine dependence. drug alcohol
depend. 1994;34:87–97.
24. silverman k, higgins st, brooner rk, et al. sustained cocaine
abstinence in methadone maintenance patients through voucherbased reinforcement therapy. arch gen psychiatry. 1996;53:409–
415.
25. vocci fj, montoya id. psychological treatment for stimulant misuse,
comparing and contrasting those for amphetamine dependence and
those for cocaine dependence. curr opin psychiatry. 2009;22:263–268.
26. barry d, sullivan b, petry nm. comparable efficacy of contingency
management for cocaine dependence among african american, hispanic and white methadone maintenance clients. psychol addict behav. 2009;23:168–174.
27. preston kl, ghitza ue, scmittner jp, et al. randomized trial
comparing two treatment strategies using prize-based reinforcement in cocaine and opiate users. j appl behav anal. 2008;41:551–
563.
28. epstein dh, schmittner j, umbricht a, et al. promoting abstinence
from cocaine and heroin with a methadone dose increase and a novel
contingency. drug alcohol depend. 2009;101:92–100.
29. stitzer ml, vandrey r. contingency management: utility in
the treatment of drug abuse disorders. clin pharmcol ther.
2008;83:644–677.
30. oliveto a, poling j, sevarino ka, et al. efficacy of dose and contingency management procedures in laam-maintained cocaine dependent patients. drug alcohol depend. 2005;79:157–165.
31. higgins st, budney aj, bickel wk, et al. incentives improve outcome
in outpatient behavioral treatment of cocaine dependence. arch gen
psychiatry. 1994;51:568–576.
32. saxon aj, wells ea, fleming c, et al. pre-treatment characteristics, program philosophy and level of ancillary services as predictors of methadone maintenance treatment outcome. addiction.
1996;91:1197–1209.
33. ford jd, hawke j, alessi s, et al. psychological trauma and ptsd
symptoms as predictors of substance dependence treatment outcomes.
behav res ther. 2007;45:2417–2431.
34. higgins st, budney aj, bickel wk, et al. achieving cocaine abstinence with a behavioral approach. am j psychiatry.
1993;150:763–769.
35. higgins st, delaney dd, budney aj, et al. a behavioral approach to achieving initial cocaine abstinence. am j psychiatry.
1991;148:1218–1224.
36. kosten tr, oliveto a, feingold a, et al. desipramine and contingency management for cocaine and opiate dependence in buprenorphine maintained patients. drug alcohol depend. 2003;70:315–325.
37. oliveto a, feingold a, shottenfeld r, et al. desipramine in
opioid-dependent cocaine abusers maintained on buprenorphine vs.
methadone. arch gen psychiatry. 1999;56:812–820.
38. davidson jrt, smith rd. traumatic experiences in a psychiatric
outpatient population. j trauma stress. 1990;3:459–474.

ptsd/contingency management effects on cocaine use

march–april 2010

39. weiss d, marmar c. the impact of event scale-revised. in: wilson j,
keane t, eds. assessing psychological trauma and ptsd. new york:
guildford; 1997:399–411.
40. mclellan at, alterman ai, cacciola j, et al. a new measure of
substance abuse treatment. initial studies of the treatment services
review. j nerv ment dis. 1992;180:101–110.
41. bryk as, raudenbush sw. application of hierarchical linear models
to assessing change. psych bull. 1987;101:147–158.
42. gibbons rd, hedeker d, elkin i, et al. some conceptual and statistical issues in analyses of longitudinal psychiatric data. arch gen
psychiatry. 1983;50:739–750.
43. hedeker d, gibbons rd. mixor: a computer program for
mixed-effects ordinal regression analysis. comput methods programs
biomed. 1996;49:157–176.
44. clark hw, masson cl, delucchi kl, et al. violent traumatic events
and drug abuse severity. j subst abuse treat. 2001;20:121–127.

mancino et al.

45. villagomez re, meyer tj, lin mm, et al. posttraumatic stress disorder among inner city methadone maintenance patients. j subst abuse
treat. 1995;12:253–257.
46. creamer m, burgess p, mcfarlene c. post-traumatic stress disorder:
findings from the australian national survey of mental health and
well-being. psychol med. 2001;31:1237–1247.
47. helzer je, robins ln, mcevoy l. post-traumatic stress disorder in the general population: findings of the epidemiologic catchment area survey. n engl j med. 1987;317:1630–
1634.
48. kessler rc, sonnega a, bromet e, et al. posttraumatic stress disorder in the national comorbidity survey. arch gen psychiatry.
1995;52:1048–1060.
49. kessler rc, zhao s, katz sj, et al. past-year use of outpatient services
for psychiatric problems in the national comorbidity survey. am j
psychiatry. 1999;156: 115–223.

march–april 2010

177

