role of  xxxg836xxx -3-adrenoceptors in blood pressure control at rest and during tyramine-induced norepinephrine release in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  beta-adrenoceptors contribute to hypertension in spite of the fact that beta-adrenoceptor agonists lower blood pressure. we aimed to differentiate between these functions and to identify differences between spontaneously hypertensive and normotensive rats. beta-adrenoceptor antagonists with different subtype selectivity or the ability to cross the blood-brain barrier were used to demonstrate beta-adrenoceptor involvement in resting blood pressure and the response to tyramine-induced peripheral norepinephrine release. the centrally acting propranolol (beta(1+2[+3])), cgp20712a (beta(1)), ici-118551 (beta(2)), and sr59230a (beta(3)), as well as peripherally restricted  xxxd2689xxx  (beta(1+2)) and atenolol (beta(1)), were administered intravenously, separately, or in combinations. blood pressure, cardiac output, heart rate, total peripheral vascular resistance, and plasma catecholamine concentrations were evaluated. beta-adrenoceptor antagonists had little effect on cardiovascular baselines in normotensive rats. in hypertensive rats, antagonist-induced hypotension paralleled reductions in resistance, except for atenolol, which reduced cardiac output. the resistance reduction involved primarily neuronal catecholamine, central beta(1)-adrenoceptors, and peripheral beta(2)-adrenoceptors. tyramine induced a transient,  xxxd3000xxx -sensitive vascular resistance increase. inhibition of nerve-activated, peripheral beta(1/3)-adrenoceptors enhanced this alpha(1)-adrenoceptor-dependent vasoconstriction in normotensive but not hypertensive rats. in hypertensive rats, return to baseline was eliminated after inhibition of the central beta(1)-adrenoceptor, epinephrine release (acute adrenalectomy), and peripheral beta(2/3)-adrenoceptors. adrenalectomy eliminated beta-adrenoceptor-mediated vasodilation in hypertensive rats, and tyramine induced a  xxxd3000xxx -sensitive vasoconstriction, which was inhibited by combined blockade of central beta(1)- and peripheral beta(2)-adrenoceptors. in conclusion, nerve-activated beta(1)- and beta(3)-adrenoceptor-mediated vasodilation was not present in hypertensive rats, whereas epinephrine-activated beta(2)- and beta(3)-adrenoceptor-mediated vasodilation was upregulated. there was also a hypertensive, nerve-activated vasoconstrictory mechanism present in hypertensive rats, involving central beta(1)- and peripheral beta(2)-adrenoceptors combined.