am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 298: r1475–r1484, 2010.
first published february 10, 2010; doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00703.2009.

review

the role of amylin in the control of energy homeostasis
thomas a. lutz
institute of veterinary physiology, university of zurich, zurich, switzerland; and zurich center for integrative human
physiology, university of zurich
submitted 27 october 2009; accepted in final form 30 march 2010

lutz ta. the role of amylin in the control of energy homeostasis. am j physiol
regul integr comp physiol 298: r1475–r1484, 2010. first published february 10,
2010; doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00703.2009.—amylin is an important player in the
control of nutrient fluxes. amylin reduces eating via a meal size effect by
promoting meal-ending satiation. this effect seems to depend on a direct action in
the area postrema (ap), which is an area rich in amylin receptors. subsequent to the
activation of ap neurons, the neural signal is conveyed to the forebrain via relays
involving the nucleus of the solitary tract (nts) and the lateral parabrachial nucleus
(lpbn) to the lateral hypothalamic area (lha) and other hypothalamic nuclei.
while the nts and lpbn seem to be necessary for amylin’s eating inhibitory effect,
the role of the lha has not yet been fully investigated. amylin may also act as an
adiposity signal. plasma levels of amylin are higher in obese individuals, and
chronic infusion of amylin into the brain reduces body weight gain and adiposity;
chronic infusion of an amylin receptor antagonist into the brain increases body
adiposity. amylin increases energy expenditure in rats; this effect occurs under
various experimental conditions after peripheral and central administration. together, these animal data, but also clinical data in humans, indicate that amylin is
a promising candidate for the treatment of obesity; effects are most pronounced
when amylin is combined with leptin. finally, recent findings indicate that amylin
acts as a  xxxg1614xxx  in specific brain stem areas. whether this effect may
be relevant under physiological conditions requires further studies.
energy expenditure; hindbrain; area postrema; trophic effect; leptin

this review covers several aspects of amylin’s roles in the
control of eating and energy homeostasis. amylin controls
nutrient fluxes by a reduction in eating, gastric acid secretion,
and pancreatic glucagon secretion, and by a limitation of the
rate of gastric emptying (81). in particular, amylin’s effects on
gastric emptying and glucagon secretion are the basis for the
use of amylin analogues to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus (14,
26, 30).
pancreatic ␤-cells are the major source of circulating amylin. changes in circulating amylin levels are thought to reflect
mainly changes in ␤-cell secretion, and it is generally believed
that these fluctuations are the physiological basis for amylin’s
effect on eating and energy homeostasis (82). whether centrally synthesized amylin also contributes to this control is still
a matter of debate. in fact, it is not entirely clear whether there
is amylin synthesis in the mammalian brain at all. of note,
most studies have been performed in male rats; a recent study
in females suggested that central amylin production in female
rats may contribute to the control of maternal regulations
because amylin was specifically upregulated in the preoptic
area of the hypothalamus in the early postpartum period (18).
for the remainder of this article, the major focus will be on the
role of pancreatic amylin and its effects on eating and energy
metabolism.

address for reprint requests and other correspondence: t. a. lutz, inst. of
veterinary physiology, vetsuisse faculty univ. of zurich, winterthurerstrasse
260, 8057 zurich, switzerland (e-mail: tomlutz@vetphys.uzh.ch).
http://www.ajpregu.org

in respect to its effect on eating, the general understanding is
that peripheral amylin acts directly in the brain, where it
activates distinct brain areas. the techniques used to delineate
these pathways and major findings of these experiments will be
briefly summarized. second, amylin is an interesting peptide in
the control of eating because of its potential role as an adiposity
signal in addition to the well-described satiating action (30,
79). evidence for the less recognized amylin action as a
potential adiposity signal will be reported. this includes recent
studies that indicate that amylin may also play a role in the
control of energy expenditure.
the multiple signals in the control of eating interact (e.g.,
cck and amylin; 10,38), and it is a generally acknowledged
concept that the various controls of eating can be classified as
adiposity, or tonic, signals that enhance the effect of satiation,
or episodic/phasic, signals (6, 54, 77, 78). whether this concept
also holds up in the case of amylin in respect to its supposed
dual role as satiating and adiposity signal is at present unknown. in other words, it is not known whether tonic levels of
amylin affect the satiating effect of phasic, meal-associated
changes in amylin levels. of note, adult amylin-deficient mice1
1
some of the studies reviewed here were performed with amylin-deficient
mice and their wild-type controls. amylin-deficient mice show a discreet
phenotype of unaltered food intake, combined with a slightly higher rate of
body weight gain compared to wild-type controls (17, 30, 38). the relevance
of these findings will be discussed. interestingly, endogenous amylin may have
a facilitating role for other controls of eating. amylin seems to mediate, in part,
the central anorectic effect of cck because cck’s anorectic effect was

0363-6119/10 copyright © 2010 the american physiological society

r1475

review
r1476

amylin and energy homeostasis

eat less after acute peripheral amylin. in a recent experiment,
we showed that an acute injection of amylin (50 ␮g/kg ip)
significantly reduced eating in ad libitum-fed, amylin-deficient,
and wild-type control mice to a similar extent [4-h food intake:
wild-type nacl 1.63 ⫾ 0.13 g vs. amylin 1.25 ⫾ 0.09 (76% of
controls); amylin-deficient 1.45 ⫾ 0.10 vs. 0.95 ⫾ 0.23 (66%
of controls)]. hence, at least the acute eating inhibitory effect
of amylin does not require an underlying tone of endogenous
amylin. whether high tonic amylin levels increase the episodic
effect of amylin on eating has not been tested.
further, i will discuss recent data that suggest a role for
amylin in brain development, specifically, in the development
of hindbrain projections that are considered important to mediate amylin’s action on eating. finally, i will address recent
animal and early-stage human data in respect to amylin’s
therapeutic potential in antiobesity therapy; in particular, its
interaction with leptin to lower food intake, body weight, and
adiposity is of high interest.
amylin acts as a satiation signal
in the complex system that controls eating, amylin functions
as a potent satiation signal and is believed to be a physiological
control of meal size (30, 31, 81). certain criteria need to be
fulfilled so that an endocrine factor is considered to be of
physiological relevance (22); this requirement seems to be met
by amylin for its satiation action. eating (5-g test meal given to
overnight fasted rats) leads to an immediate rise in endogenous
plasma amylin levels from about 3–5 pmol/l to 15–20 pmol/l.
exogenous amylin has an acute onset of action and decreases
eating in rats within a few minutes (31). amylin’s effect relies
on an amylin-induced reduction in meal size; this reduction
occurs without signs of a conditioned taste aversion or without
an increase in kaolin consumption (31, 34). administration of
the amylin receptor antagonist ac187 stimulates eating by
increasing meal size, presumably by a blockade of endogenous
amylin action (40, 50). the satiating effect of peripheral
amylin seems to be mediated by direct action on area postrema
(ap) neurons; neither subdiaphragmatic vagotomy nor capsaicin-induced lesions of peripheral neural afferents that project
to the brain reduced amylin’s effect, but this effect was abolished in rats with specific ap lesions. further, local injection of
amylin into the ap inhibited eating by reducing meal size, and
ap injections of the amylin receptor antagonist ac187 had the
opposite effect. the in vivo behavioral data are consistent with
electrophysiological and immunohistochemical studies that
confirmed a direct influence of amylin on the ap (30, 32, 40,
51, 52).
amylin binds strongly to the ap (63), and all identified
components of the specific amylin receptor complex, i.e., the
calcitonin core receptor ( xxxg321xxx ), together with several receptoractivity modifying proteins (ramps) that confer amylin affinity and selectivity, are expressed in the ap. the ramps
regulate the transport of the core receptors to the cell surface
abolished in amylin-deficient mice; cck’s effect could be rescued by lowdose amylin replacement (38). other features of the specific phenotype of
amylin-deficient mice that are not related to amylin’s role in the control of
eating have been reviewed elsewhere (42). these include lower bone mass due
to a higher number of osteoclasts and reduced late-phase nociception in the
paw formalin test; the latter implies that endogenous amylin increases the
perception of chemical pain.

and their glycosylation state which determines ligand specificity (21, 36, 42, 71). the amylin receptor arises from the
interaction of ramp 1 or ramp 3 with the  xxxg321xxx , and both
 xxxg1926xxx  and  xxxg1928xxx  mrna have been discovered in the
mouse ap (71). further, amylin-induced c-fos mrna and
 xxxg1928xxx  mrna expression colocalize in the rat ap (7), and
amylin-sensitive ap neurons carry the  xxxg321xxx  (8). one critical
experiment still needs to be done, i.e., to test whether the  xxxg321xxx 
and pertinent ramps colocalize on the same, amylin-activated
ap neurons.
central processing of the amylin signal and neural
pathways originating in the ap
amylin primarily targets ap neurons. cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cgmp) may be the second messenger mediating amylin’s effect in ap neurons because peripheral amylin
markedly increased cgmp formation in the ap about 30 min
after administration (51). further, cgmp formation may be
functionally relevant for amylin’s eating inhibitory effect because local ap injection of a membrane-permeable analogon of cgmp decreased eating by a meal size effect, similar
to amylin (40).
ap activation is synaptically transmitted to the forebrain via
the nucleus of the solitary tract (nts) and the lateral parabrachial nucleus (lpbn) (52). lesions of the ap, the nts, or the
lpbn blocked the eating-inhibitory effect of peripheral amylin;
these lesions also blocked the amylin-induced c-fos expression
in areas rostral to the site of lesion, specifically, in the nts,
lpbn, and central nucleus of the amygdala (cea) in aplesioned rats and in the cea in lpbn-lesioned rats. hence,
evidence for the functional role of these pathways was defined
by independent in vivo and in situ tests, including site-specific
brain lesions, c-fos immunocytochemistry as a marker of
neuronal activation and retrograde and anterograde neuronal
tracing studies (9, 47, 52, 59). according to our recent neuronal
tracing studies, the lpbn, in particular, appears to act as an
important relay station between the hindbrain and the lateral
hypothalamic area (lha), where amylin reduces the fastinginduced c-fos expression (47, 52). the tracing studies also
revealed ascending projections from the lpbn to other hypothalamic nuclei, such as the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (47; see also ref. 39). so far, the role of these hypothalamic projection areas in respect to amylin’s inhibitory effect
on eating has been investigated only incompletely. the same
holds true for the motor circuitry that eventually connects the
incoming amylin signal to motor controls of ingestion.
interestingly, the central pathway of other gastrointestinal
peptides that also inhibit eating seems to overlap widely with
that of amylin, at least when characterized with the frequently
used technique of c-fos protein expression as a marker of
neuronal activation. this is true for cck,  xxxg873xxx , or  xxxd1348xxx  3–36 (2, 30, 52, 55, 59). it is so far
unclear how a specific behavioral response may be initiated
despite similar central activation patterns.
of note, and despite its common use, c-fos immunocytochemistry bears some inherent weaknesses. c-fos expression is
typically studied after single, acute administration of the hormones. the c-fos activation pattern only mirrors a snapshot
image at one specific time point; further, because of the time
required for c-fos expression, there is usually a long delay

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
amylin and energy homeostasis

between the time when a stimulus-induced behavior occurs
(typically within minutes for satiation signals) and when c-fos
protein can be detected (typically done between 60 and 120
min after the stimulus). a further shortcoming of this technique
is that it only depicts neuronal activation but not neuronal
inhibition. hence, overall, the functional implications of c-fos
expression for hormonal action on eating behavior are unknown, and there may, in fact, be none in respect to satiating
signals.
more recently used techniques to study brain activation
patterns may circumvent some of the inherent problems of
c-fos immunocytochemistry. for example, the phosphorylated
form of erk 1/2 (perk) can be used as a marker for neuronal
activation. it has not only been shown that cck induced erk
phosphorylation, but also that perk formation appears to be
necessary for the satiating effect of cck (67). recent pilot
studies indicated that amylin increases perk formation in a
time- and dose-dependent manner (c. potes, unpublished observation). interestingly, the peak of perk was observed about
15 min after peripheral administration of an anorectic dose (5
␮g/kg) of amylin, hence, at a time when amylin’s satiating
effect is fully developed (31). whether perk formation is
required for amylin action and whether amylin-induced cgmp
formation (40, 51), and erk phosphorylation are linked has
not yet been studied.
another alternative to c-fos immunocytochemistry may be
extensive in vivo imaging, such as functional magnetic resonance (fmri). while the spatial resolution of the fmri signal
cannot compete with c-fos or perk immunocytochemistry,
fmri allows studying specific brain pathways repeatedly in the
same animal, including the temporal component of signal
transmission.
amylin as an adiposity signal
characteristics of amylin. it was already briefly mentioned
that amylin shares characteristics of satiation signals, like
cck, but also of adiposity signals, like leptin or insulin (25,
62, 77, 78). several lines of evidence provide plausible arguments for such a role of amylin as a potential adiposity signal.
first, the basal plasma levels of amylin are higher in obese
vs. lean individuals, but the comparisons were interindividual
comparisons, and amylin levels had not been measured in
individual animals throughout the development of obesity (28,
46). basal and glucose-stimulated plasma amylin levels are
also elevated in obese humans (20, 24), and our own recent
data indicate that this is also true in cats (35); lean and obese
cats in that study were of similar age and body weight (4.6 ⫾
0.8 kg vs. 4.7 ⫾ 0.8), but adiposity differed significantly (29 ⫾
1 vs. 37 ⫾ 2% body fat per body weight); lean cats had
significantly lower baseline amylin levels than obese cats
(41 ⫾ 9 vs. 56 ⫾ 4 pmol/l).2
these findings support an association between body adiposity and plasma amylin, but several very important issues
remain to be clarified. to mention just a few, it will be
interesting to test whether changes in body adiposity result
directly in changing amylin levels, whether these follow the
2
because of different assays, the absolute concentrations cannot be compared across species; hence, amylin concentrations in cats should not be
compared to amylin levels measured in rats by rat-specific tests.

r1477

same temporal pattern, and how short-term meal-related fluctuations of amylin may interact and overlap with an adipositydriven pattern of plasma amylin levels.
second, a number of studies showed that chronic peripheral
(34, 56) or central (60) amylin infusion decreases body weight
gain, specifically, by reducing fat mass. these effects may also
be mediated by an action of amylin in the ap (33).
third, chronic third ventricular administration of the amylin
antagonist ac187 increased body adiposity without altering
body weight (61). and finally, the amylin knockout mouse is
heavier than wild-type controls (30); of note, crucial experiments, such as to test whether amylin replacement reverses this
phenotype, have yet to be performed.
on the basis of these observations and with the reservation
that some of the open questions will be answered in a way
consistent with this idea, it appears plausible to consider
amylin a potential adiposity signal. this idea was tested further
in recent experiments (75). rats were infused with amylin
centrally into the third cerebral ventricle, and body weight was
manipulated before amylin administration. in the first test,
body weight manipulation consisted in a two-day total food
deprivation. in this case of an acute decrease in body weight by
short-term fasting, chronic central amylin infusion reduced
food intake and body weight gain in a way similar to that in ad
libitum-fed controls, i.e. irrespective of prior manipulation
(75). this is, in principle, in line with a study performed in
female rats receiving chronic peripheral amylin infusion; this
study showed that both previously food-restricted rats (75% of
baseline food intake for 10 days) and ad libitum-fed controls
ate less and gained less body weight when receiving amylin
(57). in our second test (75), body weight manipulation consisted in voluntary overfeeding by offering rats access to a
highly palatable, energy-rich diet. we found that in the case of
this marked increase in body adiposity by voluntary overfeeding, chronic central amylin infusion again reduced food intake
and body weight gain, irrespective of prior manipulation (75).
in fact, in both tests, amylin-infused animals appeared to reach
a body weight that was similar to that of amylin-infused
animals that were not manipulated before amylin administration (75). in other words, the central amylin level appeared to
be an important determinant for the body weight to be reached.
these results are, in principle, comparable to what has been
reported for leptin or insulin (15, 78), and the data are compatible with the idea that amylin, like leptin or insulin, may
encode the regulated level of body weight and hence may
contribute to the relative constancy of body weight throughout
adult life.
resistance to adiposity signals. it is a well-known phenomenon that most cases of obesity in humans and in animal
models of obesity, with the exception of leptin-deficient ob/ob
mice, are typically associated with the development of resistance to the central effects of leptin and insulin. leptin and
insulin resistance is reflected by a reduced eating-inhibitory
response to exogenous leptin and insulin administration, and
by a shift in the respective dose-response curves. the suggested causes of this resistance phenomenon are numerous and
seem to involve changes at the level of the blood-brain barrier
because transport of leptin and insulin through the blood-brain
barrier is reduced in obesity (3–5). further, the cellular responses of hypothalamic neurons, which are one central target
for leptin and insulin, are altered in obesity (43).

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
r1478

amylin and energy homeostasis

it has not yet been well investigated in detail whether obesity
per se is also associated with a specific insensitivity toward the
eating inhibitory and body weight-lowering effects of amylin.
at least in some obesity models, amylin or its agonist salmon
calcitonin (sct) effectively reduced eating. this was, for
example, observed in the ob/ob mouse, which, however, also
reacts to leptin, the obese zucker fa/fa rat, and the melanocortin-4 receptor knockout mouse (19, 23, 41). antagonism to
endogenous amylin with peripheral ac187 also increased
eating in zucker rats (23). further, at least using high doses,
recent reports in humans indicated that the acute administration
of the amylin analogue  xxxd2994xxx  decreased the size of test
meals by about 20% in nondiabetic obese individuals (14, 26).
hence, there is clear evidence that amylin is, at least, partly
effective in obesity. however, no systematic studies have been
performed so far to test whether the development of obesity or
concomitant phenomena are paralleled by a reduction in amylin sensitivity; there is no evidence that hyperleptinemia or
leptin resistance leads to amylin resistance.
assuming that future studies suggest that amylin sensitivity
may be reduced in obesity, it will be important to find out the
potential mechanisms. it is well accepted that amylin is also
transported across the blood-brain barrier (3), but it is unclear
whether this transport, similar to leptin or insulin, is altered in
obesity. such transport may actually not be required for amylin
action because the primary site of peripheral amylin action is
supposed to be in the ap (32, 33). the ap is devoid of a
blood-brain barrier, so that amylin has easy access to its
receptive neurons. hence, other mechanisms would be more
likely to explain any potential obesity-related amylin resistance. this may involve resistance at the cellular level such as
reduced expression of the  xxxg321xxx  or one of the critical ramps,
disturbed  xxxg321xxx /ramp interactions, or postreceptor defects
that lower the sensitivity of the amylin-signaling system.
dual role of amylin as satiation and adiposity signal
the two postulated roles of amylin as satiation and adiposity
signals have been discussed (see amylin acts as a satiation
signal and amylin as an adiposity signal). this distinguishes
amylin from the “classical” satiation hormone cck. continuous infusion of rats with cck does not result in a sustained
reduction in food intake and body weight (16); further, timed
cck infusions before spontaneous meals that reduce meal size
are soon paralleled by a compensatory increase in meal frequency
(72). hence, an initial decrease in eating and body weight was
rapidly counteracted by an increase in meal number that resulted
in no net change of total food intake. in contrast, chronic amylin
infusions reduce average meal size without this compensatory
increase (1, 33). it is unknown whether the roles of amylin as
satiating and as adiposity signals are processed differently by the
central nervous system. one could imagine processing of the
signals in different brain sites or by different neuronal populations
in a given brain site. similar questions may also be asked with
respect to other controls of eating, like insulin or ghrelin (66, 76).
at least with respect to the primary site of action, it is known
that the acute satiating effect and the chronic effect of peripheral amylin to decrease eating and body weight seem to require
an intact ap (32, 33). we also know that the acute effect of
amylin on eating is mediated by catecholaminergic neurons in
the hindbrain (48). whether the same neurons are necessary for

the more long-term, body weight-lowering effect of amylin has
not been tested.
amylin increases energy expenditure
over recent years, several studies investigated the effect of
enhanced amylin receptor signaling on energy expenditure.
body weight and body fat loss in fasted rats treated with
repeated peripheral injections of the amylin receptor agonist
sct were more pronounced than in saline-treated controls,
indicating that sct most likely increased energy expenditure
(29). further, body fat loss in rats centrally infused with amylin
was more pronounced than in pair-fed controls, again indicating a possible effect on energy expenditure, in addition to a
reduction in food intake.
these findings are corroborated by independent and consistent reports that indicate that both acute and chronic amylin
administration seems to influence energy balance by increasing
energy expenditure as assessed by indirect calorimetry (27, 34,
44, 56). chronic peripheral amylin administration increased
total energy expenditure (34, 56). this effect may be secondary
to the reduction in adiposity by amylin and hence, the relative
increase in metabolically more active lean body mass (56). in
a recent study, we showed that rats infused chronically via
osmotic minipumps with peripheral amylin (6 ␮g·kg⫺1·h⫺1 sc)
had a total energy expenditure that was comparable to control
animals. despite lower average food intake and lower body
weight at the end of the experiment, the average dark-phase
energy expenditure over the 1-wk infusion period was 67.2 ⫾
0.6 kcal/kg in amylin-treated rats vs. 66.5 ⫾ 0.5 kcal/kg in
saline controls (n ⫽ 8). importantly, energy expenditure in
control yoke-fed to amylin-treated rats was significantly lower
(62.3 ⫾ 0.5 kcal/kg). in other words, amylin prevented the
expected decrease in energy expenditure.
the results in regard to the effects of acute amylin administration on energy expenditure are less clear. for example,
acute peripheral injection of an anorectic dose of amylin failed
to increase energy expenditure in rats, while the long-acting
amylin agonist sct increased it (74). we presume that the lack
of effect of peripheral amylin may be due to its short half-life
in the peripheral circulation; after acute central administration
when amylin presumably has a longer half-life at the site of
action, low doses of both sct and amylin increased energy
expenditure by about 25%. on the basis of our findings and
reports that central amylin specifically lowers body adiposity
(60), we presume that amylin increases lipid metabolism, as
indicated by a lower respiratory quotient.
data about the central neural targets that may mediate the
effect of exogenous amylin on energy expenditure are scarce.
it has not been tested whether the ap, which seems to mediate
most of amylin’s known effects, also plays a role in this regard.
further, the exact mechanisms that may underlie amylin’s
effect on energy expenditure are also unknown. most studies
do not report a major effect of amylin on physical activity;
hence, it is unlikely that this factor plays an important role (74).
further, an effect of amylin to raise body temperature was not
seen consistently through all studies (44; see also ref. 74 for
effect of sct). in some but not all studies, the effect of amylin
on the expression of uncoupling protein was tested, but no
major effect was reported (56). of note, maintained body
temperature at a given level of energy expenditure in animals

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
amylin and energy homeostasis

that weigh less may indicate that amylin affected heat dissipation. however, this has not been tested.
finally, it is important to mention that the physiological
relevance of amylin’s effects on energy expenditure is still
unsettled. it cannot be excluded that the effects summarized
above only occur under pharmacological conditions because
most of the criteria that are considered necessary requirements
for physiological endocrine controls (e.g., 22) have not yet
been tested in this respect. in other words, critical experiments
investigating the role of endogenous amylin in the control of
energy expenditure still need to be done; this may include
experiments based on the use of amylin antagonists or amylindeficient mice.
nonetheless, we believe that the data reported above are
consistent with the idea that amylin affects energy balance not
only via an effect on food intake but also by increasing energy
expenditure. at least according to some studies, this effect has
to be seen in light of amylin’s body weight-lowering effect.
hence, we consider the effect of amylin to prevent the compensatory decrease in energy expenditure that is typically seen
in weight-reduced animals or fasted humans (73) as indicative
of a physiologically relevant effect on energy balance.
trophic effect of amylin for the normal neural
development of the brain stem
recent studies at our institute indicated that amylin may
exert trophic effects for the normal development of brain stem
neuronal pathways, specifically, for projections from the ap to
the nts. this phenomenon may be comparable to the effect of
leptin in the hypothalamus that has been extensively investigated by bouret and his colleagues (11–13). they showed that
leptin seems to be required for the normal neuronal development of the neonatal mouse brain, specifically, in the hypothalamus. the implicated neural pathways are critical for the
control of energy balance.
bouret and colleagues (11, 12) specifically showed that
genetically leptin-deficient lepob/ob mice and leptin-resistant
diet-induced obese rats have deficient projections from the
hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (arc) to the paraventricular
nucleus (pvn). interestingly, normal mice that are not leptin
deficient have an early postnatal surge of leptin secretion. this
surge is obviously not present in lepob/ob mice, but this surge
may be required for the normal development of the brain
because peripheral leptin replacement in lepob/ob mice within
the first few postnatal days appeared to restore the normal
anatomical pattern of these arc to pvn projections.
our recent experiments were based on reports that amylin
exerts trophic effects in a variety of tissues and organs. it had,
for example, been shown that amylin influences the development of the kidneys, of bone, and of the pancreas (80). using
a similar methodology as bouret and colleagues (11–13) with
the dii neuronal tracing technique, we tested whether amylin
may also be an important trophic factor for the normal development of the mouse brain. because of the primary action of
amylin on ap neurons, we were specifically interested in the
potential effect on hindbrain projections, namely, from the ap
to the nts in the early postnatal period.
we found evidence that amylin may be necessary for the
development of ap-nts projections in the mouse because
genetically amylin-deficient mice had a markedly reduced

r1479

density of ap-nts projections compared with controls when
tested on postnatal day 10 (53). whether other brain areas are
affected has not yet been tested in detail; however, first pilot
studies indicated that amylin-deficient mice may also have a lower
density of arc to pvn projections, similar to lepob/ob mice.
clearly, further experiments are warranted; for example, it
will be important to find out whether amylin replacement
therapy, similar to leptin (11), restores the normal pattern of
ap to nts projections and whether the effect of amylin on the
development of these projections occurs prenatally or postnatally. it is, in principle, plausible that the effect of amylin
occurs prenatally because maturation of feeding circuits in the
hindbrain appears to precede that in the hypothalamus (64).
further, despite the obvious neuroanatomical defect in the
brain of early postnatal amylin-deficient mice, it is currently
unknown whether these projections are also deficient in adult
amylin-deficient mice and whether they play a specific functional role in amylin’s inhibitory effect on eating or in other
ap-mediated effects of amylin.
interestingly, adult amylin-deficient mice do show an anorectic response to exogenous amylin administration (see characteristics of amylin). further, the amylin-induced neuronal
activation in the ap and in the nts, as gauged by c-fos
expression, is at least as prominent in amylin-deficient as in
wild-type control mice [number of c-fos-positive cells in the
ap 2 h after amylin (20 ␮g/kg ip): wild-type saline 3 ⫾ 1 vs.
amylin 42 ⫾ 11 (p ⬍ 0.01); amylin-deficient 3 ⫾ 1 vs. 68 ⫾
7 (p ⬍ 0.01)]. this could mean that there is some structural or
functional compensation for the defective ap to nts connections that we observed in early postnatal amylin-deficient mice.
further, it is possible that the lack of endogenous amylin in
amylin-deficient mice leads to a compensatory upregulation of
amylin receptors in the ap that may increase the overall
sensitivity of the system and hence may overcome the (relative) paucity of ap to nts connections in these animals; both
alternatives are interesting topics to be studied in the future.
finally, we cannot exclude that these specific neural connections from the ap to the nts are, in fact, not necessary for
amylin’s acute anorectic effect or amylin’s effect to increase
c-fos expression in adulthood. because our recent results
indicate that catecholaminergic projections are necessary for
the full eating inhibitory effect of amylin (48), it will be
interesting to phenotype the ap to nts projections that are
developed to a lesser degree in amylin-deficient mice.
as mentioned before, the trophic effect of amylin in the
hindbrain is also interesting because it shows parallels with
comparable effects of leptin in the hypothalamus; in both
cases, extensive experiments in other brain areas have not been
performed yet. both hormones are examples of integrative
actions of signals that seem to influence both the brain structure
(e.g., ap to nts and arc to pvn connections, respectively)
and function. whether leptin and amylin interact in the structural aspect of their action and whether the (mal)function of
these systems is linked to metabolic diseases later in life
remain to be studied (see e.g., ref. 65).
interactions of amylin with leptin: animal studies
behavioral and metabolic effects—interaction of exogenous
amylin and leptin. because of the complexity of the system
controlling energy balance and because of the multitude of

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
r1480

amylin and energy homeostasis

signals involved in this system, research on the potential
interactions among these signals clearly is warranted. the
interactions between amylin and leptin have been a special
focus of research by several groups; results are encouraging in
respect to the usefulness of this combination of signals in
antiobesity therapy. of note, we believe that this interaction is
functional, i.e., not based on a direct effect of amylin at leptin
receptors or vice versa, and that the neuroanatomical basis for
this interaction, as well as intracellular signaling mechanisms,
still need to be defined in detail. however, some light has been
shed on the potential mechanisms that will be discussed here.
our own recent studies showed that upon acute administration, central leptin increased the acute eating-inhibitory effect
of peripheral amylin in rats (45). several more chronic studies
yielded results that are, in principle, consistent with our acute
experiment. one of these studies (58) describes the effects on
eating and body weight of combined two-week peripheral
infusions of amylin and leptin in rats. rats with diet-induced
obesity were included; in these rats, exogenous leptin alone
had no effect on food intake or on the development of body
weight (of note, the same dose of leptin was effective in lean
animals). amylin alone reduced eating significantly in obese
rats; this led to a decrease in body weight by about 5%. when
the same dose of leptin was combined with amylin, both food
intake and body weight were decreased more than by amylin
alone; the body weight decrease was about double. importantly, the body weight loss in rats that were pair-fed to the
amylin-treated rats and that only received leptin was not more
pronounced than in rats that were infused with amylin alone. in
other words, additional exogenous amylin was necessary to
increase the potency of leptin and to increase the relative body
weight loss in obese rats. similar effects were observed with
respect to body adiposity because body fat was lower after
coadministration of leptin and amylin than if rats received only
amylin or if rats received leptin and were pair-fed to amylintreated rats. finally, dark-phase energy expenditure was highest in the rats that received both amylin and leptin. overall,
amylin infusion was necessary to enhance the leptin sensitivity
of obese rats to these catabolic effects of leptin (58).
the same research group performed additional experiments
with several dose combinations of amylin and leptin. these
studies confirmed that amylin and leptin have synergistic
effects on eating, body weight, and body adiposity. the strongest effect on body weight was a weight loss of about 15% (68,
70). this is a stronger decrease than is typically achieved with
other, nonsurgical antiobesity treatments. at least under the
conditions of one of these studies (68), the combination of
amylin and leptin did not seem to have a major effect on energy
expenditure because the body weight loss in rats that were
pair-fed to the amylin- and leptin-treated group was similar.
nonetheless, the decrease in energy expenditure in pair-fed rats
(compared to saline-treated ad libitum-fed controls) was not
seen in the amylin- and leptin-treated group. hence, similar to
our recent study with central amylin infusion (75), the decrease
in energy expenditure that might be expected due to lower
body weight was prevented by amylin and leptin.
interestingly, the loss of body fat was more pronounced in
rats that received amylin and leptin than in rats pair-fed to the
treated rats; in other words, the synergistic effects of coadministration of amylin and leptin on fat pad size were more
pronounced than the effects on body weight (58, 68). the

effect to lower body fat is consistent with the observed effects
of combined amylin and leptin treatment on nutrient metabolism; while the respiratory quotient was low during weight loss
in both the amylin- and leptin-treated and the pair-fed groups,
indicating preferential oxidation of fat, the respiratory quotient
increased again in the pair-fed but not in the amylin- and
leptin-treated rats when lower body weight was reached and
when the body weight stabilized at this lower level. gene
expression profiles were also consistent with these metabolic
effects in the amylin- and leptin-treated rats; the expression of
genes for hepatic lipogenesis was reduced, and the expression
of genes for lipid utilization was increased (68).
mechanism(s) of interaction
recent studies have elaborated on the potential mechanisms
of how amylin and leptin may interact; these studies indicate
that amylin influences the central processing of the leptin
signal (58,70). importantly, the studies indicate that amylin not
only reverses leptin resistance in obese rats (58) but also
increases leptin sensitivity in lean, leptin-responsive rats (70).
these studies also indicate that the ap, which presumably is
amylin’s primary target area, does not seem to be the major
converging site for this interaction. when lean rats received
single injections of leptin and amylin, leptin did not enhance
the amylin-induced activation of ap neurons as gauged by
c-fos expression (70). interestingly, rats that were pretreated
with amylin for 1 wk showed increased pstat3 formation—
the activated form of stat3—in the ap after acute leptin
(58). however, the effect was relatively weak, and a very large
dose of leptin had been used in that study using diet-induced
obese rats.
rather than in the hindbrain, the amylin-leptin interaction
appears to reside in the hypothalamus, possibly after polysynaptic input from the ap, which primarily senses the amylin
signal (32, 33, 70). when lean rats received acute injections of
a low dose of leptin and of amylin, amylin increased the effect
of leptin to induce pstat3 formation in the arc but not in
other brain areas (70). further, at least high doses of leptin
resulted in increased pstat3 signaling in the ventromedial
hypothalamus (vmh) in obese, amylin-pretreated rats (58); in
other words, amylin restored the leptin-induced immunoreactivity of pstat3 in the vmh of obese rats to a level that is
seen in leptin-treated lean rats. hence, amylin overcame leptin
resistance in obese rats at the cellular level.
these results are consistent with our unpublished pilot
studies in which we showed that acute amylin treatment upregulated  xxxg1320xxx  expression about three-fold in the rat
hypothalamus. further, leptin binding, as determined by receptor autoradiography, in the rat brain was increased in the arc
by combination treatment with amylin and leptin, and it was
increased by amylin alone in the vmh and the dorsomedial
hypothalamus (dmn). finally, these results are also consistent
with reduced  xxxg1320xxx  expression in the mediobasal
hypothalamus in amylin-deficient mice (see below; 70). it is
plausible that the effects of amylin on pstat3 expression and
on  xxxg1320xxx  expression are causally linked and are part of
a common neuromechanism, but this has not been investigated
yet.
the finding that amylin and leptin may, at least in part,
interact via the vmh is also interesting in the context of our

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
amylin and energy homeostasis

previous studies that had shown that amylin’s eating-inhibitory
effect in rats is reduced by administration of the histamine h1
receptor antagonists  xxxd3050xxx  or chlorpheniramine into the
ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus; further, the acute effects
of both amylin and leptin on eating were blunted in h1
receptor-deficient mice (37, 39). hence, the potential role of
histamine and of h1 receptors in the functional interaction of
amylin and leptin in the vmh clearly deserves to be studied.
overall, there is convincing evidence that the functional
interaction between amylin and leptin involves the hypothalamus, possibly the arc or the vmh. leptin-induced pstat3
immunoreactivity was also increased by amylin in the ap in
obese rats (58), but the effect was weak. finally, amylin
increased  xxxg1320xxx  expression in the dmn, but leptininduced pstat3 formation in the dmn was unaltered in
amylin-deficient mice (70). it is clear that more studies are
necessary to define the sites and mechanisms of amylin and
leptin interaction.
interaction of endogenous amylin and leptin. as outlined,
there is clear evidence to date of a pharmacological interaction
between amylin and leptin. a less investigated field is whether
this interaction is also of physiological relevance; in other
words, it is important to know whether endogenous amylin and
leptin also interact in respect to their effects on eating and body
weight. a recent study showed that amylin-deficient mice have
a reduction in the leptin-induced pstat3 formation in the
arc and vmh and in  xxxg1320xxx  expression in the
mediobasal hypothalamus. further, the body weight-lowering
effect of chronic leptin was less in these mice compared to
wild-type controls; similarly, the effect of leptin to decrease
body adiposity was less in amylin-deficient mice, in particular,
in male animals (70). finally, the amylin agonist sct seems to
be less effective at reducing eating in leptin-deficient ob/ob
mice (19), indicating that endogenous leptin may also be
required for a full action of amylin. overall, these experiments
indicate that the functional interaction between amylin and
leptin may also be of physiological relevance. further studies
with amylin-deficient and leptin-deficient mice that receive
specific hormone replacements at physiological doses will be
required to fully investigate the relevance of this interaction
under physiological conditions.

r1481

and most importantly, body weight did not yet stabilize at the
end of the observation period. in other words, lower body
weight was not only maintained, but body weight continued to
decrease even after 24 wk of treatment.
despite these promising results, there is no indication as yet
that lower body weight in previously overweight individuals
would be maintained on the cessation of amylin and leptin
therapy. recent experiments in diet-induced obese rats, in fact,
indicated that without continued amylin and leptin treatment,
body weight may increase again; the body weight loss was only
maintained in rats that received continued treatment (69).

therapeutic potential of amylin in antiobesity
therapy—human studies
clinical studies. the findings discussed on the interaction
between amylin and leptin in rodents are an interesting example of promising animal work and its translation into potential
applications in humans. preclinical tests in humans showed
that the coadministration of the amylin mimetic  xxxd2994xxx 
and the leptin mimetic  xxxd2630xxx  in overweight and obese
humans resulted in a markedly reduced body weight (49, 58).
this reduction was clinically relevant. the individuals were first
treated with  xxxd2994xxx  alone; 4-wk  xxxd2994xxx  treatment resulted in a body weight loss of about 5%. at this time, three
treatment groups were formed. treatment was either continued
with  xxxd2994xxx  alone or switched to  xxxd2630xxx  alone for another 20 wk. these individuals continued to lose body weight,
resulting in a total body weight loss of about 8%. a third group of
individuals received the combination of  xxxd2994xxx  and  xxxd2630xxx ; this treatment led to a weight loss of more than 12%,

fig. 1. schematic representation of our working model depicting the central
nervous system pathways that may be involved in amylin’s eating inhibitory
effect (see also refs. 8, 9, 32, 39, 47, 48, 52, 53, 70). amylin leads to the
formation of cyclic  xxxd1067xxx  (cgmp) in area postrema (ap)
neurons that carry the amylin receptor. because an analogon of cgmp
mimicked amylin’s effect to decrease meal size, formation of cgmp may be
necessary for amylin’s eating inhibitory action. ap neurons that release
noradrenaline (na) activate (lightning bolt) projections to the nucleus of the
solitary tract (nts) or directly to the lateral parabrachial nucleus (lpbn).
amylin also has a trophic effect on ap to nts projections (sun), but it is
unknown whether this effect is also mediated by the classical amylin receptor
and whether this effect is a necessary requirement for amylin’s inhibitory
action on eating. forebrain areas that are involved in amylin’s feeding effect
include the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (arc), the ventromedial hypothalamus (vmh), and possibly the lateral hypothalamic area (lha). histamine h1
receptors ( xxxg1078xxx ) in the vmh seem to play a necessary role in amylin’s (and
leptin’s) effect on eating. potential sites of amylin and leptin interaction reside
in the arc and vmh, but the primary sites of amylin and leptin action for this
interaction remain unknown. the functional role of activation of the central
nucleus of the amygdala (cea) is unknown. 3v, third ventricle.

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
r1482

amylin and energy homeostasis

it should not be overlooked that despite the promising
outcome of pharmacotherapy with amylin or its analogue
 xxxd2994xxx  in the treatment of obesity, this effect has not yet
been clearly linked to one or several of amylin’s potential
physiological functions described above. in other words, while
reduced eating (perhaps by an enhanced satiation effect) is
involved (14, 26, 58), it is not yet clear whether the body
weight-lowering effect of chronic pharmacotherapy with  xxxd2994xxx  in humans is also based on higher energy expenditure,
enhanced adiposity signaling (which may be mediated by other
brain areas than the satiating effect), or a structural trophic
effect that may underlie the increase in leptin sensitivity. none
of these issues has been tested so far.
outlook. both the animal and the human work suggest that
the combination treatment with amylin and leptin (or their
analogues) is a promising approach in the treatment of human
obesity. in fact, the body weight loss induced by this combination approached that of bariatric surgery, which is still the
most effective body weight-lowering treatment for obesity
available to date. hence, the combination of amylin and leptin
may be the best nonsurgical approach available so far. whether
lower doses of amylin or leptin (or their mimetics, respectively), can be used to maintain lower body weight once
marked body weight loss has been achieved, is not known yet.
further, potential long-term side effects of this combination
treatment still need to be explored.
as discussed in amylin acts as a satiation signal, the
amylin receptor consists of a heterodimer of the  xxxg321xxx  core
receptor and  xxxg1926xxx  or  xxxg1928xxx  (36, 42). these ramps may
be another interesting potential avenue to develop antiobesity
therapy that involves modification of the amylin signaling
system. in fact, ramp-based therapy may potentially have
only little side effects because of the relatively specific role of
ramps. the only well-characterized role of ramps so far is
that they are key components for receptors of the amylin family
of peptides. theoretically, drugs that enhance the formation of
functional  xxxg321xxx  and ramp complexes or that specifically
enhance the effect of ramp signaling may enhance the action
of amylin without producing unspecific side effects.
summary
amylin is a physiological satiating signal that controls meal
size. experimental evidence clearly indicates that this action is
triggered by amylin receptors in the ap; subsequent activation
involves the nts, lpbn, and other brain areas (see figure 1 for
our current working model). chronic amylin treatment decreases eating and body weight gain in both experimental
animals and humans. amylin antagonists increase eating and
body weight gain in rats. these and other data suggest that
amylin may also function as an adiposity signal. recently, we
showed that amylin may influence the brain structure because
amylin may be required for the early postnatal development of
the hindbrain due to its positive neurotrophic effect. finally,
animal and human studies with amylin and leptin (or synthetic
mimetics) suggest that this combination therapy may be an
effective treatment for obesity.
acknowledgments
the input of all members of my research group is gratefully acknowledged;
the help of c. soares potes to prepare figure 1 is gratefully acknowledged.

finally, i want to express my special gratitude to profs. scharrer, langhans,
geary, and woods for their continued help and support.
grants
our work has been financially supported for many years by the swiss
national science foundation; this is gratefully acknowledged. further, the
support of the zurich center of integrative human physiology, the novartis
foundation, the olga mayenfisch foundation, the vontobel foundation, and
the ciba-geigy jubilee foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
disclosures
no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.
references
1. arnelo u, permert j, adrian te, larsson j, westermark p, reidelberger rd. chronic infusion of iapp causes anorexia in rats. am j
physiol regul integr comp physiol 271: r1654 –r1659, 1996.
2. asarian l. loss of cholecystokinin and glucagon-like peptide-1 induced
satiation in mice lacking the serotonin 2c receptors. am j physiol regul
integr comp physiol 296: r51–r56, 2009.
3. banks wa, kastin aj. differential permeability of the blood-brain
barrier to two pancreatic peptides: insulin and amylin. peptides 19:
883–889, 1998.
4. banks wa. the blood-brain barrier: connecting the gut and the brain.
regul pept 149: 11–14, 2008.
5. banks wa. blood-brain barrier as a regulatory interface. forum nutr 63:
102–110, 2010.
6. barrachina md, martinez v, wang lx, wei jy, tachè y. synergistic
interaction between leptin and cholecystokinin to reduce short-term food
intake in lean mice. proc natl acad sci usa 94: 10455–10460, 1997.
7. barth sw, riediger t, lutz ta, rechkemmer g. peripheral amylin
activates circumventricular organs expressing  xxxg321xxx  a/b subtypes and receptor activity modifying proteins in the rat. brain res 997:
97–102, 2004.
8. becskei c, riediger t, zünd d, wookey p, lutz ta. immunohistochemical mapping of calcitonin receptors in the adult rat brain. brain res
1030: 221–233, 2004.
9. becskei c, grabler v, edwards gl, riediger t, lutz ta. lesion of
the lateral parabrachial nucleus attenuates the anorectic effect of peripheral
amylin and cck. brain res 1162: 76 –84, 2007.
10. bhavsar s, watkins j, young a. synergy between amylin and cholecystokinin for inhibition of food intake in mice. physiol behav 64:
557–561, 1998.
11. bouret sg, draper sj, simerly rb. trophic action of leptin on hypothalamic neurons that regulate feeding. science 304: 108 –110, 2004.
12. bouret sg, gorski jn, patterson cm, chen s, levin be, simerly rb.
hypothalamic neural projections are premanently disrupted in diet-induced obese rats. cell metab 7: 179 –185, 2008.
13. bouret sg. development of hypothalamic neural networks controlling
appetite. forum nutr 63: 84 –93, 2010.
14. chapman i, parker b, doran s, feinle-bisset c, wishart j, strobel s,
wang y, burns c, lush c, weyer c, horowitz m. effect of  xxxd2994xxx  on satiety and food intake in obese subjects. diabetologia 48: 838 –
848, 2005.
15. chavez m, kaiyala k, madden lj, schwartz mw, woods sc. intraventricular insulin and the level of maintained body weight in rats. behav
neurosci 109: 528 –531, 1995.
16. crawley jn, beinfeld mc. rapid development of tolerance to the
behavioural actions of cholecystokinin. nature 302: 703–706, 1983.
17. devine e, young aa. weight gain in male and female mice with amylin
knockout (abstract). diabetes 47: a317, 1998.
18. dobolyi a. central amylin expression and its induction in rat dams. j
neurochem 111: 1490 –1500, 2009.
19. eiden s, daniel c, steinbrück a, schmidt i, simon e.  xxxd407xxx —a potent inhibitor of food intake in states of impaired leptin
signaling in laboratory rodents. j physiol 541: 1041–1048, 2002.
20. enoki s, mitsukawa t, takemura j, nakazato m, aburaya j, toshimori h, matsukara s. plasma islet amyloid polypeptide levels in obesity,
impaired glucose tolerance and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
diabetes res clin pract 15: 97–102, 1992.
21. fischer ja, muff r, born w. functional relevance of g protein-coupledreceptor-associated proteins, exemplified by receptor-activity-modifying
proteins (ramps). biochem soc transact 30: 455–460, 2002.

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
amylin and energy homeostasis
22. geary n. endocrine controls of eating: cck, leptin, and ghrelin. physiol
behav 81: 719 –733, 2004.
23. grabler v, lutz ta. chronic infusion of the amylin antagonist ac 187
increases feeding in zucker fa/fa rats but not in lean controls. physiol
behav 81: 481–488, 2004.
24. hanabusa t, kubo k, oki c, nakano y, okai k, sanke t, nanjo k.
islet amyloid polypeptide (iapp) secretion from islet cells and its plasma
concentration in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
diabetes res clin pract 15: 89 –96, 1992.
25. hillebrand jj, geary n. do leptin and insulin signal adiposity? forum
nutr 63: 111–122, 2010.
26. hollander p, maggs dg, ruggles ja, fineman m, shen l, kolterman
og, weyer c. effect of  xxxd2994xxx  on weight in overweight and obese
insulin-treated type 2 diabetes patients. obes res 12: 661–668, 2004.
27. isaksson b, wang f, permert j, olsson m, fruin b, herrington mk,
enochsson l, erlanson-albertsson c, arnelo u. chronically administered islet amyloid polypeptide in rats serves as an adiposity inhibitor and
regulates energy homeostasis. pancreatology 5: 29 –36, 2005.
28. leckström a, lundquist i, ma z, westermark p. islet amyloid
polypeptide and insulin relationship in a longitudinal study of the genetically obese (ob/ob) mouse. pancreas 18: 266 –273, 1999.
29. lutz ta, riediger t, rushing pa, scharrer e. the anorectic effect of
amylin and its interaction with other anorectic signals. neuropeptide
interactions in the control of ingestive behavior, proceedings of the
international conference on the physiology of food and fluid intake,
2001.
30. lutz ta. amylinergic control of feeding. physiol behav 89: 465–471,
2006.
31. lutz ta, geary n, szabady mm, del prete e, scharrer e. amylin
decreases meal size in rats. physiol behav 58: 1197–1202, 1995.
32. lutz ta, senn m, althaus j, del prete e, ehrensperger f, scharrer
e. lesion of the area postrema/nucleus of the solitary tract (ap/nts)
attenuates the anorectic effects of amylin and calcitonin gene-related
peptide (cgrp) in rats. peptides 19: 309 –317, 1998.
33. lutz ta, mollet a, rushing pa, riediger t, scharrer e. the anorectic
effect of a chronic peripheral infusion of amylin is abolished in area
postrema/nucleus of the solitary tract (ap/nts) lesioned rats. int j obes
relat metab disord 25: 1005–1011, 2001.
34. mack c, wilson j, athanacio j, reynolds j, laugero k, guss s, vu
c, roth j, parkes d. pharmacological actions of the peptide hormone
amylin in the long-term regulation of food intake, food preference, and
body weight. am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 293: r1855–
r1863, 2007.
35. martin l, siliart b, lutz t, biourge v, nguyen p, dumon h. postprandial response of plasma insulin, amylin and acylated ghrelin to various
test meals in lean and obese cats. br j nutr 26: 1–10, 2010.
36. mclatchie lm, fraser nj, main mj, wise a, brown j, thompson n,
solari r, lee mg, foord sm. ramps regulate the transport and ligand
specificity of the calcitonin-receptor-like receptor. nature 393: 333–339,
1998.
37. mollet a, lutz ta, meier s, riediger t, rushing pa, scharrer e.
histamine h1 receptors mediate the anorectic action of the pancreatic
hormone amylin. am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 281: r1442–
r1448, 2001.
38. mollet a, meier s, grabler v, gilg s, scharrer e, lutz ta. endogenous amylin contributes to the anorectic effects of cholecystokinin and
 xxxg977xxx . peptides 24: 91–98, 2003.
39. mollet a, meier s, riediger t, lutz ta. histamine h1 receptors in the
ventromedial hypothalamus mediate the anorectic action of the pancreatic
hormone amylin. peptides 24: 155–158, 2003.
40. mollet a, gilg s, riediger t, lutz ta. infusion of the amylin antagonist
ac 187 into the area postrema increases food intake in rats. physiol behav
81: 149 –155, 2004.
41. morley je, flood jf, horowitz m, morley pm, walter mj. modulation of food intake by peripherally administered amylin. am j physiol 67:
r178 –r184, 1994.
42. muff r, born w, lutz ta, fischer ja. biological importance of the
peptides of the calcitonin family as revealed by disruption and transfer of
corresponding genes. peptides 25: 2027–2038, 2004.
43. münzberg h. leptin-signaling pathways and leptin resistance. forum
nutr 63: 123–132, 2010.
44. osaka t, tsukamoto a, koyama y, inoue s. central and peripheral
administration of amylin induces energy expenditure in anesthetized rats.
peptides 29: 1028 –1035, 2008.

r1483

45. osto m, wielinga py, alder b, walser n, lutz ta. modulation of the
satiating effect of amylin by central ghrelin, leptin and insulin. physiol
behav 91: 566 –572, 2007.
46. pieber tr, roitelman j, lee y, luskey kl, stein dt. direct plasma
radioimmunoassay for rat amylin-(1–37): concentrations with acquired
and genetic obesity. am j physiol endocrinol metab 267: e156 –e164,
1994.
47. potes cs, lutz ta, riediger t. identification of central projections from
amylin-activated neurons to the lateral hypothalamus. brain res in press.
48. potes cs, riediger t, lutz ta. noradrenergic neurons of the area
postrema mediate amylin’s anorectic action [online]. appetite 52: 853,
2009.
49. ravussin e, smith sr, mitchell ja, shringarpure r, shan k, maier
h, koda je, weyer c. enhanced weight loss with  xxxd2994xxx / xxxd2630xxx : an integrated neurohormonal approach to obesity pharmacotherapy.
obesity 17: 1736 –1743, 2009.
50. reidelberger rd, haver ac, arnelo u, smith dd, schaffert cs,
permert j. amylin receptor blockade stimulates food intake in rats. am j
physiol regul integr comp physiol 287: r568 –r574, 2004.
51. riediger t, schmid ha, lutz t, simon e. amylin potently activates ap
neurons possibly via formation of the excitatory second messenger cgmp.
am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 281: r1833–r1843, 2001.
52. riediger t, zünd d, becskei c, lutz ta. the anorectic hormone amylin
contributes to feeding-related changes of neuronal activity in key structures of the gut-brain axis. am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 286:
r114 –r122, 2004.
53. riediger t, hermann a, hehl a, bouret s, lutz ta. amylin-deficient
mice have decreased fiber density in ap-nts projections [online]. appetite 52: 854, 2009.
54. riedy ca, chavez m, figlewicz dp, woods sc. central insulin enhances sensitivity to cholecystokinin. physiol behav 58: 755–760, 1995.
55. rinaman l, verbalis jg, stricker em, hoffman ge. distribution and
neurochemical phenotypes of caudal medullary neurons activated to express c-fos following peripheral administration of cholecystokinin. j
comp  xxxd122xxx  338: 475–490, 1993.
56. roth jd, hughes h, kendall e, baron ad, anderson cm. antiobesity
effects of the beta-cell hormone amylin in diet-induced obese rats: effects
on food intake, body weight, composition, energy expenditure, and gene
expression. endocrinology 147: 5855–5864, 2006.
57. roth jd, hughes h, coffey t, maier h, trevaskis jl, anderson cm.
effects of prior or concurrent food restriction on amylin-induced changes
in body weight and body composition in high-fat-fed female rats. am j
physiol endocrinol metab 293: e1112–e1117, 2007.
58. roth jd, roland bl, cole rl, trevaskis jl, weyer c, koda je,
anderson cm, parkes dg, baron ad. leptin responsiveness restored
by amylin agonism in diet-induced obesity: evidence from nonclinical and
clinical studies. proc natl acad sci usa 105: 7257–7262, 2008.
59. rowland ne, richmond rm. area postrema and the anorectic actions of
dexfenfluramine and amylin. brain res 820: 86 –91, 1999.
60. rushing pa, hagan mm, seeley rj, lutz ta, woods sc. amylin: a
novel action in the brain to reduce body weight. endocrinology 141:
850 –853, 2000.
61. rushing pa, hagan mm, seeley rj, lutz ta, d’alessio da, air el,
woods sc. inhibition of central amylin signaling increases food intake
and body adiposity in rats. endocrinology 142: 5035–5038, 2001.
62. schwartz mw, woods sc, seeley rj, barsh gs, baskin dg, leibel
rl. is the energy homeostasis system inherently biased toward weight
gain? diabetes 52: 232–238, 2003.
63. sexton pm, paxinos g, kenney ma, wookey pj, beaumont k. in vitro
autoradiographic localization of amylin binding sites in rat brain. neuroscience 62: 553–567, 1994.
64. smith gp. ontogeny of ingestive behavior. dev psychobiol 48: 345–359,
2006.
65. sullivan el, grove kl. metabolic imprinting in obesity. forum nutr 63:
186 –194, 2010.
66. surina-baumgartner dm, langhans w, geary n. hepatic portal insulin antibody infusion increases, but insulin does not alter, spontaneous
meal size in rats. am j physiol regul integr comp physiol 269: r978 –
r982, 1995.
67. sutton gm, patterson lm, berthoud hr. extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 signaling pathway in solitary nucleus mediates cholecystokinininduced suppression of food intake in rats. j neurosci 24: 10240 –10247,
2004.

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

review
r1484

amylin and energy homeostasis

68. trevaskis jl, coffey t, cole r, lei c, wittmer c, walsh b, weyer c,
koda j, baron ad, parkes dg, roth jd. amylin-mediated restoration
of leptin responsiveness in diet-induced obesity: magnitude and mechanisms. endocrinology 149: 5679 –5687, 2008.
69. trevaskis jl, lei c, koda je, weyer c, parkes dg, roth jd.
interaction of leptin and amylin in the long-term maintenance of weight
loss in diet-induced obese rats. obesity 18: 21–26, 2010.
70. turek vf, trevaskis jl, levin be, dunn-meynell aa, irani b, gu g,
wittmer c, griffin ps, vu c, parkes dg, roth j. mechanisms of
amylin/leptin synergy in rodent models. endocrinology 151: 143–152,
2010.
71. ueda t, ugawa s, saishin y, shimada s. expression of receptor-activity
modifying protein (ramp) mrnas in the mouse brain. brain res mol
brain res 93: 36 –45, 2001.
72. west db, fey d, woods sc. cholecystokinin persistently suppresses
meal size but not food intake in free-feeding rats. am j physiol regul
integr comp physiol 246: r776 –r787, 1984.
73. weyer c, vozarova b, ravussin e, tataranni pa. changes in energy
metabolism in response to 48 h of overfeeding and fasting in caucasians
and pima indians. int j obes 25: 593–600, 2001.

74. wielinga py, alder b, lutz ta. the acute effect of amylin and salmon
calcitonin on energy expenditure. physiol behav 91: 212–217, 2007.
75. wielinga py, löwenstein c, muff s, munz m, woods sc, lutz ta.
central amylin acts as an adiposity signal to control body weight and
energy expenditure. physiol behav. in press.
76. williams dl, cummings de. regulation of ghrelin in physiologic and
pathophysiologic states. j nutr 135: 1320 –1325, 2005.
77. woods sc. gastrointestinal satiety signals. i. an overview of gastrointestinal signals that influence food intake. am j physiol gastrointest liver
physiol 286: g7–g13, 2004.
78. woods sc. signals that influence food intake and body weight. physiol
behav 86: 709 –716, 2005.
79. woods sc, lutz ta, geary n, langhans w. pancreatic signals controlling food intake; insulin, glucagon and amylin. philos trans r soc
lond b biol sci 361: 1219 –1235, 2006.
80. wookey pj, lutz ta, andrikopoulos s. amylin in the periphery ii. sci
world j 6: 1642–1655, 2007.
81. young a, denaro m. roles of amylin in diabetes and in regulation of
nutrient load. nutrition 14: 524 –527, 1998.
82. young a. amylin and the integrated control of nutrient flux. adv pharmacol 52: 67–77, 2005.

ajp-regul integr comp physiol • vol

298 • june 2010 •

www.ajpregu.org

