rheumatology 2010;49:2016–2023
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keq212
advance access publication 15 july 2010

rheumatology

review
the 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
enzymes—arbiters of the effects of
glucocorticoids in synovium and bone
karim raza1, rowan hardy2 and mark s. cooper2

ever since the first use of cortisone, glucocorticoids have had a controversial role in the treatment of ra.
there has been equally controversial research into the possible involvement of endogenous glucocorticoids, and their secretion via the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (hpa) axis, in the development and persistence of inflammatory arthritis. recently, our understanding of how glucocorticoids act has expanded
substantially with the characterization of glucocorticoid-metabolizing enzymes that regulate glucocorticoid
action at tissue level. these enzymes, the 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases, interconvert biologically
inactive glucocorticoids such as cortisone and prednisone with their active counterparts, cortisol (hydrocortisone) and prednisolone. without these enzymes, cortisone and prednisone would be therapeutically
useless. furthermore, in normal individuals, the activities of these enzymes influence the function of other
components of the hpa axis. these enzymes are expressed in human synovial tissue and bone and have
been implicated in the control of synovial inflammation, the development of periarticular bone loss and the
sensitivity of bone to therapeutic glucocorticoids. this article reviews recent findings in this area that
highlight the role of these enzymes in rheumatic diseases.
key words: rheumatoid arthritis, synovitis, bone, osteoporosis, steroid, 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1,
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2, fibroblast, macrophage, osteoblast.

introduction
ever since the first use of cortisone, therapeutic glucocorticoids have been widely used to treat ra though
their appropriate place in disease management remains
the subject of much debate. there has also been extensive research into the possible dysregulation of endogenous glucocorticoids and their secretion via the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (hpa) axis, and the role
of this in the development and persistence of inflammatory arthritis. recently, our understanding of how glucocorticoids act has expanded substantially with the
characterization of glucocorticoid-metabolizing enzymes
that regulate glucocorticoid action at tissue level. these
enzymes, the 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases
1
mrc centre for immune regulation, school of immunity and infection
and 2centre for endocrinology, diabetes and metabolism, institute of
biomedical research, university of birmingham, birmingham, uk.

submitted 18 march 2010; revised version accepted 9 june 2010.
correspondence to: karim raza, mrc centre for immune regulation,
school of immunity and infection, institute of biomedical research,
university of birmingham, edgbaston, birmingham b15  xxxd1253xxx , uk.
e-mail: k.raza@bham.ac.uk.

(11b-hsds), are expressed in human synovial tissue and
bone and have been implicated in the control of synovial
inflammation, the development of periarticular bone loss
and the sensitivity of bone to therapeutic glucocorticoids.

the hpa axis in ra
on the basis of the initial success of cortisone in the treatment of inflammatory arthritis, it was postulated that patients with ra had a defect in the amount or effectiveness
of endogenously generated glucocorticoids [1, 2]. this
view was given great support by experiments with
animal models, which demonstrated that related histocompatible strains of rats had markedly different sensitivities to the induction of chronic experimental arthritis. the
defect in the arthritis-prone rats was linked to a failure of
the hpa axis to increase glucocorticoid output in response to an inflammatory insult [3]. the administration
of the  xxxg1601xxx  antagonist ru486, a drug
that blocks glucocorticoid action within tissues, rendered
arthritis-resistant rats more susceptible to experimental
arthritis, and the administration of the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone to arthritis-prone animals

! the author 2010. published by oxford university press on behalf of the british society for rheumatology. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

r ev i e w

abstract

local regulation of glucocorticoid action

changing view of the hpa axis
the hpa axis controls the secretion of cortisol from the
adrenal glands.  xxxd1752xxx -releasing hormone (crh),
released from the hypothalamus, stimulates the release of
 xxxg1801xxx  (acth) by the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn, stimulates the secretion of cortisol. crh secretion, with its characteristic diurnal rhythm,
is regulated by stress and inflammatory cytokines and is
inhibited by negative feedback from cortisol itself [8].
historically, it has been inferred that the level of cortisol
in the circulation is an accurate indicator of the amount of
action that cortisol will have in the tissues. it is now clear
that this is incorrect in several respects [8] (fig. 1).

approximately 80% of circulating cortisol is bound to
corticosteroid-binding globulin (cbg) and 10% is
bound to albumin [9]; only a small amount is present in
the free, unbound form. cortisol bound to cbg cannot
normally diffuse out of the intravascular space, so the
level of cortisol measured in the circulation is vastly
higher than the level in interstitial fluid. a further complicating factor is that cbg levels decrease during inflammation through reduced synthesis and cleavage by
 xxxg694xxx  [10]. additionally, an increase in endothelial permeability resulting from inflammation can allow
cbg-bound cortisol to enter the interstitial fluid. even if
bioavailable cortisol levels in the tissues could be measured accurately, there are multiple levels within the cell
that potentially regulate the action of cortisol [11, 12].
these include the number and binding affinity of the
 xxxg1601xxx . in addition, post-receptor mechanisms regulate glucocorticoid action within the cell.
perhaps of most significance, it is now known that there
is extensive metabolism of glucocorticoids in a range of
tissues [13]. this metabolism has local consequences for
the individual tissues (as discussed below) and also affects the hpa axis through both catabolism and regeneration of active glucocorticoid (fig. 2). the level of cortisol
within the circulation, therefore, cannot be assumed to be
equivalent to that acting in the tissue. furthermore, tissue
metabolism of synthetic glucocorticoids can be different
from that of endogenous glucocorticoids. this needs to
be taken into account when trying to understand the
action of various glucocorticoids on a tissue or disease
process and is likely to explain certain clinical observations made with therapeutic glucocorticoids.

tissue glucocorticoid metabolism
the importance of tissue metabolism is illustrated by the
finding that glucocorticoids such as cortisone or

fig. 1 schematic illustration of the various levels at which glucocorticoid action can be regulated. gr: glucocorticoid
receptor; mr:  xxxg1602xxx ; gc: glucocorticoid.
cytoplasm
activation /
inactivation

nucleus

receptor affinity
and number

co-activator/
co -repressor
recruitment

cbg cortisol
(active)
gc response
element
cortisone
(inactive)
circulatory

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

gralpha/grbeta

gene transcription
mr

pre-receptor

receptor

post-receptor

2017

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

rendered them resistant. these findings stimulated a
search for a similar defect in humans. however, such a
defect has been difficult to find. patients with established
ra who have not previously received therapeutic glucocorticoids have no consistent clinical or biochemical evidence of adrenal insufficiency when standard endocrine
tests are used [4]. the circulating levels of cortisol (the
main endogenous glucocorticoid in humans) in ra patients appear remarkably similar to, if not higher than,
those of healthy subjects [5, 6]. the possibility of a
subtle defect in cortisol secretion has been raised on
the basis of an impaired maximal adrenal response to
the insulin tolerance test [6]. however, in normal individuals, an inflammatory insult is a stimulus for the hpa axis,
and in patients with ra there may be relative corticosteroid insufficiency, with normal levels of cortisol in the circulation actually being inappropriately low for the degree
of inflammatory stress [7]. the major endpoint of these
experiments was generally the level of cortisol in the circulation. however, it is now clear that the hpa axis extends into the tissues and is influenced by changes
occurring at this level.

karim raza et al.

fig. 2 contemporary view of the hpa axis. the level of cortisol in the circulation is regulated by the production of acth
from the pituitary but the level of cortisol is also impacted upon by peripheral metabolism of cortisol and cortisone.
hypothalamus
pituitary
+ve

pro-inflammatory
cytokines

acth +ve
hepatic
11b-hsd1
adrenal

– ve

cortisone

(active)

(inactive)
renal
11b- xxxg1085xxx 

prednisone do not bind to or activate the glucocorticoid
receptor to any great extent [14]. the only reason these
drugs work therapeutically is that they are converted
within the body to active glucocorticoids by the intracellular 11b-hsd enzymes [13]. these enzymes interconvert
hormonally inactive cortisone with hormonally active cortisol (cortisol is referred to as hydrocortisone when given
therapeutically; fig. 2). they also interconvert inactive
prednisone with active prednisolone. there are two distinct 11b-hsd enzymes. the 11b-hsd1 enzyme is bidirectional, but primarily activates glucocorticoids, whereas
the 11b- xxxg1085xxx  enzyme is unidirectional and a powerful
glucocorticoid inactivator. 11b-hsd1 is expressed at
high levels in the liver and orally administered cortisone
and prednisone are normally extensively converted to
their active counterparts on first-pass metabolism through
this organ. the 11b-hsd1 enzyme is also expressed in
adipose tissue, muscle, gonadal tissue, decidua, ocular
tissues and within the cns. the importance of the
11b-hsd1 enzyme is illustrated in rare individuals who
lack it [13]. these individuals are unresponsive to highdose  xxxd1754xxx  or prednisone, but maintain sensitivity to hydrocortisone (i.e. cortisol) and prednisolone.
low activity of this enzyme also reduces the clinical manifestations of cushing’s disease in fat and muscle [15].
transgenic deletion of the 11b-hsd1 enzyme, or its
pharmacological inhibition, reduces glucocorticoid levels
within the liver causing insulin sensitization and protects
against diet-induced obesity [16, 17].
11b- xxxg1085xxx  is expressed primarily in the kidney where it
prevents cortisol binding to the  xxxg1602xxx 
(mr) by inactivating it to cortisone (which itself has a very
low affinity for the mr). the kidney is, thus, the principle
site of generation of cortisone within the body with smaller
contributions being made by other mineralocorticoid
target tissues (colon, pancreas and salivary glands).

2018

patients with genetic mutations that impair the activity of
11b- xxxg1085xxx  develop severe hypertension as a consequence of mr engagement by cortisol. although termed
the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess, it is
now known that cortisol itself is acting as the excess
mineralocorticoid in these patients [18]. this condition is
diagnosed on the basis of the absence of cortisone
metabolites in the urine. 11b- xxxg1085xxx  activity is inhibited
by liquorice, which explains why its excessive ingestion
can cause hypertension [19].
it is now clear that the cyclical inactivation and reactivation of cortisol has an impact on the hpa axis and thus
cortisol secretion [13]. a low level of 11b-hsd1 (and thus
low cortisol regeneration) needs to be compensated for by
an increase in acth and cortisol secretion. this can result
in adrenal hyperplasia with excessive adrenal androgen
production. in recent years it has become clear that
11b-hsds are expressed in synovial tissue and bone.

glucocorticoid metabolism in synovium
several decades ago it was established that synovial
tissue explants from patients with ra could interconvert
cortisone and cortisol [20, 21]. it was also observed that
cortisone and cortisol could be interconverted when injected into the joint [1]. however, these experiments
were performed before the enzymes responsible for
these reactions had been characterized. these early findings of glucocorticoid metabolism in synovial tissue have
now been extended by several groups and the results
summarized schematically in fig. 3. schmidt et al. [22]
examined 11b-hsd enzyme expression and activity in
mixed populations of synovial cells isolated by enzymatic
digestion from synovial tissue of patients with ra and oa.
they found that both 11b-hsd1 and 11b- xxxg1085xxx  enzymes
were expressed and that both activating and inactivating

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

cortisol

local regulation of glucocorticoid action

fig. 3 corticosteroid metabolism in synovial tissue and the cells that mediate this. various cell types present within the
synovium have the capacity to metabolize corticosteroids and metabolism can lead to either activation or inactivation.

rheumatoid
synovitis

macrophages
expressing 11 -hsd1

fibroblasts
expressing 11 -hsd1

capacities were present. they also observed that in ra
tissue, the capacity to activate glucocorticoid (a unique
feature of 11b-hsd1) increased with the degree of synovial inflammation, as assessed by synovial cellularity and
t-cell density. however, in ra synovium, expression of
11b- xxxg1085xxx  was increased and 11b-hsd1 reduced compared with oa synovium. this reduction in 11b-hsd1 was
felt to be especially prominent given the greater degree of
inflammation present in the ra samples and suggested a
state of relative glucocorticoid deficiency in ra synovial
tissue. a reduction in local activity of the sympathetic nervous system in ra as opposed to oa synovium, a consequence of loss of sympathetic nerve fibres, was
considered to be the basis for this change in local steroid
metabolism in ra. mechanistically, the authors showed
that treatment of synovial cells with adenosine or a
b-adrenergic receptor agonist (to mimic factors produced
by sympathetic nerve fibres), inhibited the conversion of
cortisol to cortisone. regulation of 11b-hsd1 enzyme activity by adenosine has been demonstrated in other tissues, where adenosine stimulates the activation of
glucocorticoids [23]. loss of sympathetic activity would
thus be expected to augment cortisol inactivation (or cortisol to cortisone conversion).
a similar analysis of synovial tissue was carried out by
hardy et al. [24] using tissue explants rather than enzymatically digested cells. this study also demonstrated that
bidirectional glucocorticoid metabolism occurred in oa
and ra tissue explants, and that both 11b-hsd1 and
11b- xxxg1085xxx  enzymes were expressed in these tissues. in
the ra patients, a strong positive correlation was
observed between 11b-hsd1 activity in the tissue and
inflammatory markers in the tissue donor (consistent
with the findings of schmidt et al. [22]), whereas no such
relationship was observed with 11b- xxxg1085xxx  activity.

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

despite this clear association of inflammation with
11b-hsd1 activity, the ability of ra tissue to generate
active glucocorticoid was no greater than that of oa samples. these data and those of schmidt et al. [22] suggested that, when compared with oa tissue, there was
a deficiency in glucocorticoid activation in ra tissue
given the degree of inflammation in ra. analysis of sf
corticosteroid concentrations in ra suggested that there
was, however, a net glucocorticoid-activating capacity
within the joint. immunohistochemistry demonstrated
that 11b-hsd1 was expressed primarily in the synovial
fibroblasts but was also seen in some lymphocytes and
macrophages. the 11b- xxxg1085xxx  expression appeared to be
restricted to macrophages.
the presence of 11b- xxxg1085xxx  within the joint was a surprise, given that this enzyme had been considered to be
expressed almost exclusively in mr-rich tissues.
however, data from two other studies suggest that
11b- xxxg1085xxx  may be involved in ra pathogenesis. in a
microarray study comparing expression of >4300 genes
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) from patients with recent-onset ra (<2 years’ duration) and patients with long-standing ra, 11b- xxxg1085xxx  was the most
up-regulated gene in patients with early disease [25].
furthermore, 11b- xxxg1085xxx  was one of three genes (out of
20 000 genes studied) significantly up-regulated in
pbmcs of the ra-affected twin when ra-discordant
monozygotic twins were studied [26]. in that study, immunohistochemistry on rheumatoid synovium demonstrated
expression of 11b- xxxg1085xxx  within synovium, again predominantly in macrophages and absent in fibroblasts.
additional work has been carried out on primary cultures of synovial fibroblasts derived from patients with
ra or oa [27]. this demonstrated the presence of
11b-hsd1 but not the 11b- xxxg1085xxx  enzyme. the activity of

2019

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

macrophages
expressing 11 - xxxg1085xxx 

karim raza et al.

11b-hsd1 was exclusively in the direction of activation. in
keeping with the finding described above that 11b-hsd1
activity in tissue explants correlated with the donor level of
inflammatory markers, enzyme expression in fibroblasts
(and thus the ability to convert cortisone to cortisol) was
increased substantially by the addition of either  xxxg2296xxx 
or il-1b and interestingly was further increased by the
addition of both  xxxg2296xxx  and glucocorticoids (cortisol or
dexamethasone) themselves [27, 28].

clinical consequences of 11b-hsd
activity in the inflamed joint

2020

one of the earliest recognized adverse effects of
long-term therapeutic glucocorticoid use was the development of fractures. the prevalence of osteoporosis in patients taking long-term oral glucocorticoids (>6 months)
has been estimated to be up to 50%. the mechanisms by
which glucocorticoids have a detrimental effect on bone
are complex and poorly understood [11]. however, it is
generally recognized that excess glucocorticoids primarily
affect the function of osteoblasts. the capacity of bone
itself to metabolize glucocorticoids has recently been
explored. chips of human bone, obtained at orthopaedic
surgery, were shown to interconvert cortisone and cortisol
[33]. this enzymatic activity was characteristic of the
11b-hsd1 enzyme and the presence of this enzyme was
confirmed by rt–pcr and immunohistochemistry. the
11b-hsd1 enzyme expression within bone, determined
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, was
restricted primarily to osteoblasts, the cells most sensitive
to glucocorticoids. the expression of 11b- xxxg1085xxx  in human
adult bone was very low.
the expression and activity of 11b-hsd1 in bone is
regulated by several factors including developmental
status. activity is low in immature osteoblasts but increases at a time coincident with the expression of specific markers of the osteoblast phenotype [34]. it has been
shown that the local generation of glucocorticoids by
osteoblasts is an important mechanism for the induction
of differentiation of these cells. enzyme expression slows
cellular proliferation and enhances differentiation [30].
enzyme activity in osteoblasts is also increased by
pro-inflammatory cytokines with glucocorticoids themselves having a synergistic effect; phenomena similar to
those seen in synovial fibroblasts [28, 35, 36]. these
changes with pro-inflammatory cytokines suggest that
the local exposure of bone, or more specifically osteoblasts, to active glucocorticoids will increase substantially
during inflammation through the induction of local glucocorticoid activation. such a sensitization of bone has been
hypothesized to contribute to the development of periarticular osteopenia and systemic osteoporosis in inflammatory arthritis [35].
in a study that characterized the 11b-hsd1 activity in
primary osteoblasts grown from human bone samples,
activity was found to increase substantially with the age
of the bone donor [36]. osteoblasts from patients in the
seventh and eighth decades of life generated several
times more cortisol than osteoblasts from younger
donors in their second and third decades. a similar
age-related increase in 11b-hsd1 expression within
osteoblasts has recently been reported in mice [37].
such an increase raises the possibility that bone tissue
in an elderly individual will be exposed to a substantially
higher level of active glucocorticoid than that of a younger
individual, even though the level of active glucocorticoid
in the circulation changes little. thus, in addition to oestrogen deficiency, skeletal ageing might also be due to
local glucocorticoid excess. in a cohort of elderly individuals, osteoblastic 11b-hsd1 activity had a significant

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

on the basis of these studies, it is likely that the level of
active glucocorticoid within the rheumatoid joint is higher
than that in the general circulation. this appears to be a
consequence of net glucocorticoid activation within the
synovium. this probably explains why prednisone/prednisolone has become the most widely used steroid for
the treatment of ra. tissues expressing the 11b-hsd1
enzyme can be affected directly by prednisolone, but
there will also be an additional anti-inflammatory effect
from prednisone that is locally converted to prednisolone
by 11b-hsd1. tissues that lack, or have less, 11b-hsd1
expression will be exposed to lower concentrations of
prednisolone than inflamed joints since they will have
less local regeneration of glucocorticoid. this glucocorticoid-sparing effect is not seen with more powerful synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone since these
glucocorticoids are not metabolized by 11b-hsd enzymes
in the same way. this probably explains why long-term
oral use of these drugs is associated with greater adverse
effects on skin and fat tissue relative to prednisone for the
same degree of suppression of inflammation [29].
an important consequence of 11b- xxxg1085xxx  expression is
that any cell expressing this enzyme at high levels will be
protected against the effects of cortisol or prednisolone
[30]. expression of 11b- xxxg1085xxx  in macrophages/monocytes
in ra patients could lead to selective glucocorticoid
resistance in these cells. the exact origin and nature of
the macrophages that express 11b- xxxg1085xxx  are still to be
determined.
a number of questions remain about the role of
11b-hsds in ra. in the same way that defects in the
hpa axis have been proposed to play a role in ra development and progression, abnormal glucocorticoid metabolism in the tissue in response to inflammation is equally
likely to be important. glucocorticoid metabolism has only
been studied cross-sectionally in patients with established ra so longitudinal studies in patients at an earlier
stage of disease will be required to address these questions. in addition, differences in glucocorticoid metabolism may impact on individual responsiveness to
glucocorticoid therapy. it is known, for example, that
one-quarter of ra patients respond poorly to oral prednisolone [31, 32]; further studies are required to determine
whether differences in local activity of 11b-hsds within
the synovial environment explain these differences in
response.

glucocorticoid metabolism in bone

local regulation of glucocorticoid action

anti-inflammatory mechanism but when it continues in
the presence of long-term inflammation there are likely
to be detrimental consequences, particularly on adjacent
bone tissue. the extent of glucocorticoid activation correlates with the sensitivity of bone to glucocorticoids. it
remains to be determined whether local glucocorticoid
metabolism influences the development or the clinical expression of synovial inflammation. the recent development and use of therapeutic inhibitors of the 11b-hsd1
enzyme will clarify some of these issues [41]. on the basis
of the studies described in this review, it would be predicted that these drugs would have a useful role in
age-related bone loss, but there would be a risk of exacerbating synovial inflammation in patients with ra.

interaction between synovial tissue and
osteoblastic glucocorticoid metabolism

funding: work by the authors reported in this review was
funded by arthritis research uk project grants 17730 and
18081. m.s.c. is supported by an unrestricted clinician
scientist fellowship from glaxosmithkline plc.

given that both synovial tissue and bone have the capacity to metabolize glucocorticoids, it is possible that metabolism in one tissue will affect the function of the other.
this is particularly likely given their proximity—inflammation in the synovium may well increase 11b-hsd1 expression in osteoblasts through an increase in local
pro-inflammatory cytokine levels and the net production
of active glucocorticoids, which could diffuse into adjacent bone. it is also possible that glucocorticoid metabolism in bone could impact on synovial pathology. a recent
report described the effect of selective over-expression of
the 11b- xxxg1085xxx  enzyme in osteoblasts on the development
of experimental arthritis [40]. it was found that using this
experimental strategy to block glucocorticoid signalling in
osteoblasts reduced the extent of arthritis. the mechanism underlying this glucocorticoid-dependent antiinflammatory action is currently being explored. these
studies suggest that the interaction between synovium
and bone in their metabolism of glucocorticoids are
likely to be bidirectional and complex.

conclusion
the presence of glucocorticoid-metabolizing enzymes in
both synovium and bone needs to be considered when
interpreting the effect of endogenous and exogenous
glucocorticoids on these tissues. the strong induction of
glucocorticoid activation in the synovium in the presence
of inflammation suggests that this may be a natural

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

rheumatology key messages
glucocorticoids are activated and inactivated in
tissues by 11b-hsd enzymes.
. glucocorticoids are activated in bone and bidirectional interconversion is seen in the synovium.
. variation in local glucocorticoid interconversion may
influence the outcome of diseases of synovium and
bone.
.

acknowledgements

disclosure statement: k.r. holds unrestricted research
and educational grants from wyeth, ucb and cellzome
for work on the pathobiology of ra. all other authors have
declared no conflicts of interest.

references
1 wilson h, fairbanks r, scialabba d, mcewan c, ziff m.
metabolites of hydrocortisone and cortisone in synovial
fluid in rheumatoid arthritis. j clin endocrinol metab 1956;
16:86–113.
2 panayi gs. hormonal control of rheumatoid inflammation.
br med bull 1995;51:462–71.
3 sternberg em, hill jm, chrousos gp et al. inflammatory
mediator-induced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activation is defective in streptococcal cell wall
arthritis-susceptible lewis rats. proc natl acad sci usa
1989;86:2374–8.
4 jessop ds, harbuz ms. a defect in cortisol production in
rheumatoid arthritis: why are we still looking?
rheumatology 2005;44:1097–100.
5 sternberg em, silverman mn, cizza g. the neuroendocrine system and rheumatoid arthritis: insights from
anti- xxxg2296xxx -alpha therapy. j rheumatol
2007;34:1443–5.
6 eijsbouts am, van den hoogen fh, laan rf, hermus ar,
sweep cg, van de putte lb.
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity in patients

2021

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

impact on the level of oc, a glucocorticoid-sensitive bone
marker produced by osteoblasts [38]. a significant negative correlation was observed between the level of circulating cortisone and serum oc, a relationship independent
of the circulating level of cortisol.
osteoblastic 11b-hsd1 can effectively convert prednisone to active prednisolone with kinetics similar to cortisone to cortisol conversion [35]. this suggests that
osteoblastic 11b-hsd1 may influence the sensitivity of
bone to therapeutic glucocorticoids. this is supported
by a study in healthy individuals that examined the determinants of bone sensitivity to prednisolone treatment [39].
baseline level of total body 11b-hsd1 activity, measured
in a 24-h urinary collection, was significantly associated
with the change in the bone formation markers, oc and
n-terminal propeptide of type i collagen. high 11b-hsd1
activity (and thus high glucocorticoid reactivation) was
associated with the greatest fall in these markers. these
changes occurred independently of the circulating level of
glucocorticoid. although this work suggested that measurement of 11b-hsd1 activity might be clinically useful in
predicting glucocorticoid sensitivity in an individual, it remains unclear whether these associations will persist in a
patient with inflammatory disease. it is possible that these
relationships will be obscured by the tissue-specific alterations of 11b-hsd1 activity in response to inflammation
described above.

karim raza et al.

with rheumatoid arthritis. clin exp rheumatol 2005;23:
658–64.
7 straub rh, paimela l, peltomaa r, scholmerich j,
leirisalo-repo m. inadequately low serum levels of steroid
hormones in relation to interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis
factor in untreated patients with early rheumatoid arthritis
and reactive arthritis. arthritis rheum 2002;46:654–62.
8 cooper ms, stewart pm. corticosteroid insufficiency in
acutely ill patients. n engl j med 2003;348:727–34.
9 cooper ms, stewart pm. adrenal insufficiency in critical
illness. j intensive care med 2007;22:348–62.
10 hammond gl, smith cl, paterson na, sibbald wj. a role
for corticosteroid-binding globulin in delivery of cortisol to
activated neutrophils. j clin endocrinol metab 1990;71:
34–9.

12 rhen t, cidlowski ja. antiinflammatory action of glucocorticoids – new mechanisms for old drugs. n engl j med
2005;353:1711–23.
13 cooper ms, stewart pm. 11beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 and its role in the
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, metabolic syndrome,
and inflammation. j clin endocrinol metab 2009;94:
4645–54.
14 funder jw, pearce pt, smith r, smith ai.
mineralocorticoid action: target tissue specificity is
enzyme, not receptor, mediated. science 1988;242:
583–5.
15 tomlinson jw, draper n, mackie j et al. absence of
cushingoid phenotype in a patient with cushing’s disease
due to defective cortisone to cortisol conversion. j clin
endocrinol metab 2002;87:57–62.
16 kotelevtsev y, holmes mc, burchell a et al.
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 knockout mice
show attenuated glucocorticoid-inducible responses and
resist hyperglycemia on obesity or stress. proc natl acad
sci usa 1997;94:14924–9.
17 hermanowski-vosatka a, balkovec jm, cheng k et al.
11beta-hsd1 inhibition ameliorates metabolic syndrome
and prevents progression of atherosclerosis in mice. j exp
med 2005;202:517–27.
18 cooper m, stewart pm. the syndrome of apparent
mineralocorticoid excess. q j med 1998;91:453–5.
19 stewart pm, wallace am, valentino r, burt d,
shackleton ch, edwards cr. mineralocorticoid activity of
liquorice: 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency
comes of age. lancet 1987;2:821–4.
20 bailey e, greaves ms, murphy d, west hf. corticosteroid
metabolism and rheumatoid arthritis. ann rheum dis
1966;25:516–24.
21 murphy d, west hf. catabolism and interconversion of
cortisol and cortisone in human synovial tissue in vitro.
ann rheum dis 1969;28:637–43.
22 schmidt m, weidler c, naumann h, anders s,
scholmerich j, straub rh. reduced capacity for the reactivation of glucocorticoids in rheumatoid arthritis synovial cells: possible role of the sympathetic nervous
system? arthritis rheum 2005;52:1711–20.
23 ferguson se, pallikaros z, michael ae, cooke ba. the
effects of different culture media, glucose, pyridine
nucleotides and adenosine on the activity of

2022

24 hardy r, rabbitt eh, filer a et al. local and systemic
glucocorticoid metabolism in inflammatory arthritis. ann
rheum dis 2008;67:1204–10.
25 olsen n, sokka t, seehorn cl et al. a gene expression
signature for recent onset rheumatoid arthritis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. ann rheum dis 2004;63:
1387–92.
26 haas cs, creighton cj, pi x et al. identification of genes
modulated in rheumatoid arthritis using complementary
dna microarray analysis of lymphoblastoid b cell lines
from disease-discordant monozygotic twins. arthritis
rheum 2006;54:2047–60.
27 hardy rs, filer a, cooper ms et al. differential expression,
function and response to inflammatory stimuli of
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 in human
fibroblasts: a mechanism for tissue-specific regulation of
inflammation. arthritis res ther 2006;8:r108.
28 kaur k, hardy r, ahasan mm et al. synergistic induction
of local glucocorticoid generation by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids: implications for inflammation
associated bone loss. ann rheum dis 2010;69:1185–90.
29 boland e. clinical comparison of the newer
anti-inflammatory corticosteroids. ann rheum dis 1962;
21:176–87.
30 rabbitt e, lavery gg, walker ea, cooper ms,
stewart pm, hewison m. pre-receptor regulation of
glucocorticoid action by 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: a novel determinant of cell proliferation. faseb j
2002;16:36–44.
31 sliwinska-stanczyk p, pazdur j, ziolkowska m,
jaworski j, kaminska-tchorzewska e, lacki jk. the
effect of methylprednisolone on proliferation of pbmcs
obtained from steroid-sensitive and steroid-resistant
rheumatoid arthritis patients. scand j rheumatol 2007;36:
167–71.
32 kirwan jr. glucocorticoid resistance in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis. scand j rheumatol 2007;36:
165–6.
33 cooper ms, walker ea, bland r, fraser wd, hewison m,
stewart pm. expression and functional consequences of
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity in human
bone. bone 2000;27:375–81.
34 eijken m, hewison m, cooper ms et al.
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase expression and
glucocorticoid synthesis are directed by a molecular
switch during osteoblast differentiation. mol endocrinol
2005;19:621–31.
35 cooper ms, bujalska i, rabbitt e et al. modulation of
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isozymes by proinflammatory cytokines in osteoblasts: an autocrine switch
from glucocorticoid inactivation to activation. j bone
miner res 2001;16:1037–44.
36 cooper ms, rabbitt eh, goddard pe, bartlett wa,
hewison m, stewart pm. osteoblastic 11b-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 activity increases with age and
glucocorticoid exposure. j bone miner res 2002;17:
979–86.
37 weinstein rs, wan c, liu q et al. endogenous glucocorticoids decrease skeletal angiogenesis, vascularity,
hydration, and strength in aged mice. aging cell 2010;9:
147–61.

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

11 cooper ms. sensitivity of bone to glucocorticoids. clin sci
2004;107:111–23.

11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in rat leydig cells.
mol cell endocrinol 1999;158:37–44.

local regulation of glucocorticoid action

38 cooper ms, syddall he, fall ch et al. circulating cortisone levels are associated with biochemical markers of
bone formation and lumbar spine bmd: the hertfordshire
cohort study. clin endocrinol 2005;62:692–7.
39 cooper ms, blumsohn a, goddard pe et al.
11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 activity predicts the effects of glucocorticoids on bone. j clin
endocrinol metab 2003;88:3874–7.

40 buttgereit f, zhou h, kalak r et al. transgenic
disruption of glucocorticoid signaling in mature
osteoblasts and osteocytes attenuates k/bxn mouse
serum-induced arthritis in vivo. arthritis rheum 2009;60:
1998–2007.
41 boyle cd, kowalski tj. 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitors: a review of recent patents.
expert opin ther pat 2009;19:801–25.

downloaded from http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/ at d h hill library - acquis s on may 6, 2015

www.rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org

2023

