translational medicine

dopamine d2 receptors as treatment
targets in schizophrenia
philip seeman 1

abstract
the antipsychotic effectiveness of chlorpromazine and haloperidol started a search for their therapeutic targets. the
antipsychotic receptor target turned out to be a dopamine receptor, now cloned as the dopamine  xxxg656xxx . the d2
receptor is the common target for antipsychotics. antipsychotic clinical doses correlate with their affinities for this
receptor. therapeutic doses of antipsychotics occupy 60 to 80% of brain d2 receptors in patients, but aripiprazole occupies up to 90%. while antipsychotics may take up to six hours to occupy d2 receptors, much clinical improvement
occurs within a few days. the receptor has high- and low-affinity states. the d2high state is functional for dopaminelike agonists such as aripiprazole. most individuals with schizophrenia are supersensitive to dopamine. animal models
of psychosis show that a variety of risk factors, genetic and nongenetic, are associated with behavioral supersensitivity
to dopamine, reflected in elevated levels of dopamine d2high receptors. although antipsychotics such as haloperidol alleviate psychosis and reverse the elevation of d2high receptors, long-term use of traditional antipsychotics can
further enhance dopamine supersensitivity in patients. therefore, switching from a traditional antipsychotic to an
agonist antipsychotic such as aripiprazole can result in the emergence of psychotic signs and symptoms. clozapine and
quetiapine do not elicit parkinsonism and rarely result in tardive dyskinesia because they are released from d2 within
12 to 24 hours. traditional antipsychotics remain attached to d2 receptors for days, preventing relapse, but allowing
accumulation that can lead to tardive dyskinesia. future goals include imaging d2high receptors and desensitizing
them in early-stage psychosis.

key words: schizophrenia, dopamine  xxxg656xxx , d2high, dopamine supersensitivity,
d2 polymorphisms, d3, antipsychotics, parkinsonism

introduction

this review is an update to an earlier perspective on the
role of dopamine receptors in the psychotic process (1). this
review suggests that current knowledge about dopamine
receptors supports the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia; the final section of the review addresses criticisms
and limitations of the hypothesis.
pharmacology department, faculty of medicine, university of toronto

1

address for correspondence: philip seeman, md, phd,
260 heath st., west, suite 605, toronto, ontario, m5p 3l6, canada
phone: 1-416-486-3456; e-mail: philip.seeman@utoronto.ca
submitted: august 14, 2009; revised: september 30, 2009;
accepted: november 17, 2009

56 •

seeman2.indd 1

the history of dopamine receptors is intertwined with
the history of psychosis and antipsychotics. the research
path starts with the development of antihistamines after
world war ii, especially with h. laborit using these compounds to enhance analgesia during surgery and obstetrics (2). when patients received one of these medications,
compound 4560, laborit observed a “euphoric quietude;”
the patients were “calm and somnolent, with a relaxed and
detached expression” (2). compound 4560, now known as
chlorpromazine, was tested by many french physicians for
a variety of medical illnesses. the 1952 report by delay et al.
(2) showed that, within three days, chlorpromazine stopped
internal “voices” in eight patients, a dramatic finding in
terms of both efficacy and speed of action (see also 3-5; cf. 6).

clinical schizophrenia & related psychoses april 2010

3/12/10 11:06 am

