0026-895x/10/7804-631–638$20.00
molecular pharmacology
copyright © 2010 the american society for pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
mol pharmacol 78:631–638, 2010

vol. 78, no. 4
64683/3627717
printed in u.s.a.

molecular model of anticonvulsant drug binding to the
voltage-gated sodium channel inner pore
gregory m. lipkind and harry a. fozzard
the cardiac electrophysiology laboratories, department of medicine, the university of chicago, chicago, illinois
received march 12, 2010; accepted july 19, 2010

abstract
the tricyclic anticonvulsant drugs phenytoin, carbamazepine,
and lamotrigine block neuronal voltage-gated na⫹ channels,
and their binding sites to domain iv-s6 in the channel’s inner
pore overlap with those of local anesthetic drugs. these anticonvulsants are neutral, in contrast to the mostly positively
charged local anesthetics, but their open/inactivated-state
blocking affinities are similar. using a model of the open pore of
the na⫹ channel that we developed by homology with the
crystal structures of potassium channels, we have docked
these three anticonvulsants with residues identified by mutagenesis as important for their binding energy. the three drugs
show a common pharmacophore, including an aromatic ring
that has an aromatic-aromatic interaction with tyr-1771 of
 xxxg2022xxx  and a polar amide or imide that interacts with the

introduction
voltage-gated sodium channels are the molecular targets
for several important commonly used classes of drugs: local
anesthetic and antiarrhythmic drugs, anticonvulsant drugs
(antiepileptics), and antidepressants, even though the therapeutic goals for these drugs are quite different. all three
types of drugs block sodium currents with noticeable voltage
dependence, showing low affinity at resting states and strong
block for open-inactivated states. the mechanisms of action
of local anesthetic drugs have been studied extensively, and
previously we have modeled their interactions (etidocaine,
lidocaine, and  xxxd383xxx ) with the inner pore of na⫹ channels (lipkind and fozzard, 2005). local anesthetics have a
characteristic bipolar structure with an aromatic ring at one
end and a tertiary amine at the other. anticonvulsant drugs
typically have a tricyclic structure, with a polar amide in the
middle (fig. 1). these molecules are wider and more rigid
than local anesthetics. although structurally different, antithis work was supported by the national institutes of health national
heart, blood, and lung institute [grant hl065661].
article, publication date, and citation information can be found at
http://molpharm.aspetjournals.org.
doi:10.1124/mol.110.064683.

aromatic ring of phe-1764 by a low-energy amino-aromatic
hydrogen bond. the second aromatic ring is nearly at a right
angle to the pharmacophore and fills the pore lumen, probably
interacting with the other s6 segments and physically occluding the inner pore to block na⫹ permeation. hydrophobic interactions with this second aromatic ring may contribute an
important component to binding for anticonvulsants, which
compensates energetically for the absence of positive charge
in their structures. voltage dependence of block, their important therapeutic property, results from their interaction with
phe-1764, which connects them to the voltage sensors. their
use dependence is modest and this results from being neutral,
with a fast drug off-rate after repolarization, allowing a normal
action potential rate in the presence of the drugs.

convulsant drugs interact with some of the same amino acid
residues in the na⫹ channel’s inner pore and have similar
overall open/inactivated state affinity (ragsdale et al., 1996;
ragsdale and avoli, 1998; clare et al., 2000; liu et al., 2003;
tarnawa et al., 2007). most local anesthetic drugs with high
affinity for the open/inactivated state are tertiary amines
that are easily protonated at physiological ph, and the positive charge is thought to contribute importantly to their
binding (hille, 2001; mcnulty et al., 2007; ahern et al.,
2008). in contrast, the anticonvulsant drugs with similar
affinity are neutral (fig. 1). it is unclear how these larger,
neutral molecules can bind to the same site in the pore with
similar affinity, yet have different therapeutic effects.
anticonvulsants are characterized by their ability to block
seizures in patients with epilepsy, mediated by their interaction and inhibition of brain na⫹ channels (rogawski and
löscher, 2004: mcnamara, 2006). anticonvulsant drugs have
little effect on normal brain activity, and they block na⫹
channels poorly at slower firing rates from normal resting
potentials. seizures, however, are characterized by depolarized resting potentials and high frequency trains of action
potentials. the drugs are thought to suppress seizures by
inhibiting this high frequency repetitive firing, allowing the

abbreviations:  xxxg2022xxx , one of the three brain isoforms of the na⫹ channel; kcsa and mthk, two isoforms of the  xxxg1232xxx ; s6, the
sixth transmembrane helix of a domain of the na channel.
631

632

lipkind and fozzard

drugs to have selective action on hyperactive rather than
normal neurons (macdonald and kelly, 1993; mcnamara,
2006). the functional factors that could underlie this voltage
and use dependence are a higher affinity for depolarized cells
and an off-rate slower than the repetition frequency of the
action potentials. for local anesthetics and antiarrhythmic
drugs interacting with the heart na⫹ channel, this results
from a higher affinity to the open/inactivated conformation of
the channel.  xxxd305xxx , a neutral local anesthetic, also has
a voltage-dependent affinity, but it does not show use dependence, partly because the increase in affinity to the open/
inactivated state is modest and the drug off-rate is rapid
(wang et al., 1998). neutral anticonvulsant drugs also seem
to have rapid off-rates because they show little frequencydependent block at moderate concentrations (xie et al., 2001;
liu et al., 2003) and allow normal neuronal firing rates in the
presence of the drugs. anticonvulsants have little effect on
skeletal muscle or heart, even though excitation in those
tissues depends on na⫹ channels with similar structures.
three typical anticonvulsant drugs, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine, share a common binding site in
neuronal na⫹ channels (kuo, 1998). despite the differences in their chemical structure, it is likely that their
mechanisms of block and pharmacological action are similar (xie and garthwaite, 1996). although much evidence
favors overlap between the local anesthetic drug binding
site and that for these three anticonvulsants (ragsdale et
al., 1996; liu et al., 2003), anticonvulsant drug action is
from outside the cell, rather than from the intracellular
compartment, and this has raised doubts about a common
binding site (kuo, 1998). here we explore the interactions
of these three drugs with our homology model of the na⫹
channel’s inner pore to test the idea of a common binding
site and to characterize their binding interactions. although the model constructed by homology with potassium
channel structures was reasonably successful in accounting for inner pore residue interactions with local anesthetics, anticonvulsant drug interactions further test the
model. insight into the structural basis of their block of
neuronal na⫹ channels may help to explain their target
specificity and assist in a rational search for new anticonvulsant drugs.

materials and methods
methods similar to those employed for modeling of local anesthetic
drug binding to the na⫹ channel were used (lipkind and fozzard,
2005). the model of the open (activated) na⫹ channel pore was based
on homology with the ca2⫹-gated mthk channel (jiang et al., 2002).
for the closed channel, we used the kcsa structure (doyle et al.,
1998) as a template. modeling was accomplished in the insight and
discover graphical environment (msi, inc., san diego, ca). molecular mechanics energetic calculations used the consistent valence
force field approximation. for minimization procedures, the steepest
descents and conjugate gradients were used.

results
phenytoin. phenytoin ( xxxd2924xxx ) contains a hydantoin ring and two phenyl substitutions at c5 of the hydantoin (fig. 1). however, the second aromatic ring is not
obligatory; 5-alkyl-5-phenyl-hydantoins also have a comparable affinity for na⫹ channels (brown et al., 1997, 1999),
with an optimal length of the aliphatic chain corresponding
to pentyl, hexyl, and heptyl. most likely, this aliphatic chain
and the corresponding aromatic ring participate in less specific hydrophobic interactions, whereas the second aromatic
ring has specific aromatic-aromatic interactions. methyl (or
alkyl) substitutions of the amide nitrogens of the hydantoin
ring reduced binding significantly (brown et al., 1997), which
underlines the importance of these hydrogens for binding. it
has been proposed that one aromatic ring and one amide
group of the hydantoin form the pharmacophore core of phenytoin (unverferth et al., 1998; brown et al., 1999).
there are several estimates of binding affinity for phenytoin with the open/inactivated states of the neuronal na⫹
channels ranging from ⬃9 to 19 ␮m (kuo and bean, 1994;
ragsdale et al., 1996; kuo, 1998), whereas binding to the
resting state was at least 100-fold weaker. alanine scanning
mutagenesis of the transmembrane helix of domain iv (ivs6)
has identified two highly conserved amino acid residues crucial for the binding of local anesthetic drugs: phe-1764 and
tyr-1771 (rnav1.2 numbering) (ragsdale et al., 1994). in
subsequent studies, ragsdale et al. (1996) showed that the
same two residues are crucial for the action of phenytoin. it
is noteworthy that the affinity of binding of both drugs with
the inactivated state of the brain na⫹ channel, estimated

fig. 1. structural formulae of anticonvulsants and optimized three-dimensional
molecular structures of anticonvulsants.
the essential pharmacophore elements
are indicated by rectangles.

anticonvulsant drug binding site model

from concentration-block relationships at depolarized holding potentials (⫺35 or ⫺40 mv) were similar (11 ⫾ 2.7 ␮m,
lidocaine; 19 ⫾ 4.2 ␮m for phenytoin) (ragsdale et al., 1996).
both the f1764a and y1771a mutations reduced affinities of
binding of both lidocaine and phenytoin. however, the ic50
for lidocaine increased 25- and 13-fold for the two mutations,
respectively, whereas the ic50 increases for phenytoin were
only 8- and 3-fold, respectively. although both domain iv s6
side chains were important determinants for binding of phenytoin, the interactions were weaker than for lidocaine, implying that other sites of interaction are more important for
phenytoin than for lidocaine. phenytoin did not show noticeable use-dependent block (ragsdale et al., 1996; xie et al.,
2001; lenkowski et al., 2007). two obvious structural factors
that could be responsible for these differences are the geometrical fit of the structures and the presence of a positive
charge on lidocaine.
using the evidence provided by ragsdale et al. (1996),
we examine the docking of phenytoin in the same site as
that for local anesthetics in the na⫹ channel open state
(lipkind and fozzard, 2005). the spacial structure of phenytoin was energy-minimized with the discovery module
of insight ii (fig. 1) (accelrys, san diego, ca) for this docking interaction. in the open conformation of the inner pore
model, the c-ends of the s6 ␣-helices of domains i to iv form
a wide opening, and the side chains of phe-1764 and tyr1771 face the pore. we recognize that in the complex structure of the pore, the aromatic rings may be oriented differently in different states, but this represents the most logical
starting point. phenytoin was arranged between the two
aromatic side chains of phe-1764 and tyr-1771, with one of
its aromatic rings in the proximity of tyr-1771 in the position
to form a nonpolar aromatic-aromatic interaction, similar to
that found for local anesthetics (lipkind and fozzard, 2005).
this placed the amino groups of the hydantoin ring in position for a polar interaction with the aromatic ring of phe1764. the hydrogen atoms of these amino groups within
peptide bonds bear partial positive charges (⫹0.2–0.3;
creighton, 1993). neutral polar amino groups in proteins (for
example, inside amide groups of asn and gln side chains)
have a high tendency to interact with the partial negative
charges of a ␲-electron system of an aromatic ring, and the
hydrogen atoms of these amino groups are located closer to
the centers of aromatic rings. burley and petsko (1986) call
this an amino-aromatic interaction, and levitt and perutz
(1988) further propose that these interactions are an aromatic-hydrogen bond (-n-h. . . aromatic ring). therefore, we propose that the hydantoin ring of phenytoin behaves similarly
to the tertiary amine of local anesthetics in their interactions
with the side chain of domain iv phe-1764. the complex
conformations of both side chains were optimized in the next
step.
we can consider two possibilities for binding of phenytoin—either the right or the left aromatic ring in the immediate proximity of the side chain of tyr-1771. the two
possibilities in principle correspond to the binding of two
stereoisomers of 5-alkyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin, where the rconfiguration has an upper location of the 5-phenyl ring
and a lower location of the 5-alkyl chain relative to the
plane n1-c5-c4 of the hydantoin ring, and the converse is
true for the s-configuration (fig. 2). optimization of location of phenytoin inside the inner pore with the flexible

633

side chains of phe-1764 and tyr-1771 showed that the two
modes of binding are energetically indistinguishable; optimal interaction of the hydantoin ring with the side chain of
phe-1764 is achieved in both cases (figs. 3 and 4). the
5-phenyl ring participates in the perpendicular aromaticaromatic interaction with tyr-1771, whereas the n3-h3
amino group at n3 is directed to the center of the aromatic
ring of phe-1764 by formation of an optimal aromatic hydrogen bond. however, this interaction is energetically
weak; its experimental value, estimated from the f1764a
mutation, is only approximately ⫺1 kcal/mol (ragsdale et
al., 1996). in the modeled interaction, the calculated estimate of weak electrostatic interactions of the hydantoin
ring with the aromatic ring of this side chain (bearing the
partial charges of ⫺0.1 on its carbons; levitt and perutz,
1988) is also ⫺1 kcal/mol.
in contrast to local anesthetic molecules, in which pharmacologically important groups are located on opposite
ends of an approximately planar structure, phenytoin contains the polar hydantoin ring in the middle of the molecule, with the two aromatic rings occupying approximately
perpendicular locations. consequently, with binding of one
5-phenyl ring and one amino group of the hydantoin by the
div-s6 helix, the second 5-phenyl ring (or its 5-alkyl substituent) is directed into the inner pore, closer to dii-s6
and diii-s6 helices and physically occluding the pore lumen (figs. 3 and 4). in this configuration, the second
5-phenyl ring is in contact with the side chain of leu-1465
of diii-s6, making this a candidate for hydrophobic interaction. this diii-s6 leu-1465 also contributes to local
anesthetic interaction, and it also interacts with lamotrigine (yarov-yarovoy et al., 2001). because phenytoin
has an affinity almost as great as that of charged local
anesthetics, but mutation of its close packing with div-s6
reduces its affinity less than local anesthetics, there must
be additional interactions for neutral phenytoin. although
local anesthetics are located in the interface between
diii-s6 and div-s6 and do not contact dii-s6 (yarovyarovoy et al., 2002; lipkind and fozzard, 2005; hanck et
al., 2009), the almost perpendicular location of the second
5-phenyl ring of phenytoin approaches dii-s6. because
interactions of phenytoin with di-s6 and dii-s6 have not
been studied, such interactions would be worth investigating. in addition, the perpendicular 5-phenyl ring almost
occludes the pore lumen, in contrast to our modeling results with local anesthetics, which are docked eccentrically, leaving the inner pore open but creating a high

fig. 2. r- and s-configurations of 5-alkyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin.

634

lipkind and fozzard

electrostatic barrier for na⫹ permeation (mcnulty et al.,
2007). consequently, their mechanism of current reduction may be different.
substitutions of the second aromatic ring of phenytoin by
aliphatic hydrophobic chains produced derivatives with high
affinity of binding with the na⫹ channel (brown et al., 1999).
figure 5 presents the complex of 5-hexyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin
with the open pore, showing the interactions of the n-hexyl

fig. 3. phenytoin inside the inner pore of the na⫹ channel ( xxxg2022xxx ) (top
view). optimal location of phenytoin (r-) shown by space-filled images.
the backbones of s6 ␣-helices of domains i-iv are shown by yellow, red,
blue, and green ribbons, correspondingly. the same colors are used for
amino acid residues in proximity to phenytoin, also shown by space-filled
images. one aromatic ring of phenytoin is closer to the side chain of
tyr-1771, whereas another is located in the central part of the pore,
occluding the pore and blocking na⫹ permeation.

fig. 4. phenytoin in the inner pore of the na⫹ channel (side view). the
amino group n-h at n3 of the hydantoin ring makes immediate van der
waals contacts, interacts with the center of the aromatic ring of phe1764, and participates in weak electrostatic interactions with its ␲-electron system (“the amino-aromatic bond”). the outer vestibule forming p
loops of domains i, iii, and iv are also shown (pink ribbons), including
asp(i) and lys(iii) (shown by balls and sticks) of the selectivity filter. iip
and iis6 are omitted.

chain with nonpolar side chains of s6 helices of domains i to
iii. the energy estimates for nonbonded interactions for both
phenytoin and 5-hexyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin are practically
equal.
improvement of binding of the derivatives of phenytoin with
increase in size of the 5-alkyl chains (from n-propyl to n-nonyl;
brown et al., 1999) certainly reinforces the hydrophobic nature
of their interactions with the inner pore in the open/inactivated
state, where the wide opening fills the pore with bulky water.
lenkowski et al. (2007) determined the affinity of binding of
5-heptyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin to the  xxxg2022xxx  channel more precisely with ic50 ⫽ 2.5 ␮m for the fast inactivated state. if the
ic50 of phenytoin is ⬃20 ␮m (ragsdale et al., 1996), then
5-heptyl-5-phenyl-hydantoin has shown an improvement of
binding by ⬃8- to 10-fold or ⬃1 to 1.2 kcal/mol. this estimate
approximately corresponds to the differences in hydrophobicities of the aromatic side chain of phenylalanine (⫺2.5 kcal/mol)
and the hypothetical side chain including n-heptyl (-3.5 kcal/
mol), if we accept the idea that hydrophobicity of one methylene
group is equal to the hydrophobicity of the side chain of alanine
(⫺0.5 kcal/mol) (tanford, 1980). therefore, with the inside the
open inner pore filled by bulk water, hydrophobic interactions
can play an important role in the binding of phenytoin.
in the closed state the four s6 ␣-helices at their c-ends
form the so-called s6-crossing (doyle et al., 1998), producing
an inner cavity of restricted size below the selectivity filter.
voluminous phenytoin practically fills this space in the
closed channel, excluding water and making direct contacts
with the walls of this cavity. such low-affinity interactions
would likely be only nonbonded van der waals interactions.
in this case the interface between nonpolar surfaces of the
drug and bulk water is lacking, and therefore the additional
stabilizing effect of hydrophobic interactions is absent. this
comparative analysis by binding of phenytoin in the open and
closed states could explain why even neutral molecules of
anticonvulsants show low affinities of binding in the rested

fig. 5. 5-hexyl-5-phenyl-hydandoin inside the inner pore (top view). the
5-hexyl alkyl chain participates in hydrophobic interactions with the
nonpolar side chains of is6 –iiis6 helices.

anticonvulsant drug binding site model

state relative to the high affinity with the open/inactivated
state of the na⫹ channel.
carbamazepine. carbamazepine also limits repetitive
firing of nerve action potentials (mcnamara, 2006), and it
shows neuronal na⫹ channel blocking characteristics similar
to those of phenytoin (brown et al., 1999): low-affinity resting
block, high affinity for the inactivated state (ki ⬃ 25 ␮m;
kuo, 1998) and weak use-dependent block. both drugs belong
to the family of tricyclic anticonvulsants, and contain practically the same pharmacophore segment—the aromatic ring
and the amide group in the middle. for carbamazepine, the
amide group is part of the carbamyl at the central iminostilbene ring, which is flanked by two aromatic rings (fig. 1). as
in the case of phenytoin, where the pharmacologically important amine at n3 is divided by three chemical bonds from its
aromatic ring, the amino group of carbamazepine is also
divided from each aromatic ring by three chemical bonds. for
this analysis the spacial structure of carbmazepine was energy-minimized with the discover module of insight ii (fig.
1). this optimal structure is very close to the x-ray determined structure of carbamazepine (lowes et al., 1987). in
both cases the side-chain carbamyl group at the n-5 position
is almost perpendicular to the plane of the central 7-member
ring. superposition of two aromatic rings—one from phenytoin and the other from carbamazepine—leads to the near
superposition of two important amino groups: the n3-h3
bond of the hydantoin ring of phenytoin and the n-h bond of
the side-chain carbamyl of carbamazepine (fig. 6).
assuming that the pharmacophore segments of carbamazepine and phenytoin are similar, our initial location of carbamazepine inside the pore was by superimposition with the
location of phenytoin (fig. 4) by fitting the corresponding
aromatic rings and amide groups. from two possible superpositions of aromatic rings of carbamazepine with the aromatic ring of phenytoin that interacts with tyr-1771 of div-

fig. 6. superposition of molecular structures of phenytoin (thin lines)
and carbamazepine (thick lines). superposition of one aromatic ring from
each structure leads to the coincidence of the amino groups of phenytoin
(n3-h3) and carbamazepine (its amide) with separation not more than
0.5 å.

635

s6, we have chosen the one with optimal superposition of
n3-h3 of phenytoin and n-h of carbamazepine, including
also both c-␤ atoms of the two aromatic rings (figs. 7 and 8).
as in the case of phenytoin, one aromatic ring interacts with
the side chain of tyr-1771, whereas the other ring, at an
approximately 120o angle with the first, is located in the
center of the pore, closer to iii-s6 and its leu-1465, and to
dii-s6 (phe-978), practically occluding the pore lumen. the
energies of van der waals interactions with each of these side
chains (and also asn-418) are approximately ⫺1 to 2 kcal/
mol. at the same time, the amino group of the carbamyl is
directed to the center of the aromatic ring of phe-1764, where
it can form an “amino-aromatic hydrogen bond.” the energy
of electrostatic interactions with this side chain, taking into
account the partial charges of the amino group (creighton,
1993), is ⬃ ⫺1 kcal/mol. according to this structural analysis, the presence of similar pharmacophore segments causes
similar binding of carbamazepine and phenytoin and probably the same mechanism of block of na⫹ permeation, despite
very different chemical structures,
very low resting state block (kuo, 1998) implies that the
drug binds poorly to the closed pore. when we attempted to
dock carbamazepine into the inner pore of our model of the
closed channel (lipkind and fozzard, 2000), it was apparent that the wide and bulky tricyclic carbamazepine fits
closely to the size of the inner cavity and participates in
van der waals repulsion with the walls. consequently, the
rigid structure of the drug effectively prevented its binding
in the energy-minimized form seen in binding to the open
state. this fit required transformation of carbamazepine to
a more energetically strained structure (approximately 1.5
kcal/mol).
lamotrigine. the binding affinity of lamotrigine for the
inactivated state of  xxxg2022xxx  is reported to be 31.9 ␮m (liu et
al., 2003). alanine scanning mutagenesis of div-s6 identified f1764a and y1771a as important to the binding affinity

fig. 7. carbamazepine. optimal location of carbamazepine inside the
inner pore of the  xxxg2022xxx  channel (top view).

636

lipkind and fozzard

of lamotrigine—reducing ic50 values for the wt channel by
7- and 12-fold, respectively (liu et al., 2003). therefore, lamotrigine binding to phe-1764, so crucial in local anesthetic
binding and action, is only approximately 1 kcal/mol, consistent with our suggestion of an amino-aromatic interaction. in
contrast, its interaction with tyr-1771 is stronger (⬃1.5 kcal/
mol). in addition, lamotrigine interacts with leu-1465 and is
consequently bound in the interface between div-s6 and
diii-s6, because l1465a also decreased its binding 6-fold
(yarov-yarovoy et al., 2001). drug affinity for the resting
state is very low (kd ⫽ 641 ␮m) (xie et al., 2001).
lamotrigine contains a triazine ring connected to another
aromatic ring (a dichlorophenyl in this case). the triazine
ring (fig. 1) is substituted by two amino groups in the 3- and
5-positions (para- and ortho-, correspondingly), a structure
maintained for all effective analogs of lamotrigine (clare et
al., 2000). although both amino groups are important, only
the 5-amino group is obligatory (clare et al., 2000). the
asymmetric heteroaromatic nature of the triazine ring is
likely to confer high levels of polarity of its atoms, with
partial negative charges on n1, n2, and n4, whereas hydrogen atoms the amino groups will bear partial positive charges
(janes, 1999). energetic optimization of lamotrigine led to a
structure with almost perpendicular arrangement of the triazine and phenyl rings (⬃70°; fig. 1), as found in the crystal
structure of lamotrigine (janes, 1999).
in principle, either the 3- or the 5-amino group could participate in the amino-aromatic hydrogen bond with the side chain
of phe-1764. however, using the common pharmacophore concept for phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine with superposition of the essential structural elements (fig. 1), we designate the 5-amino group, which is also divided from the phenyl
ring by 3 chemical bonds. this is the amino group that is
experimentally obligatory for block. if we assume the adequate
location of their aromatic rings at the side chain of tyr-1771,
the best fit for interaction of the aromatic ring of phe-1764 with
the n3-h3 group of the hydantoin of phenytoin corresponds to
direct interaction of the amino group of lamotrigine at the

5-position. optimization of localization of lamotrigine inside the
pore based on this initial approximation is shown in fig. 9. in
this location, the phenyl ring interacts with the side chain of
tyr-1771, the 5-amino group makes immediate contact with the
center of the aromatic ring of phe-1764, whereas the triazine
ring itself, like the second aromatic rings in phenytoin and
carbamazepine, is directed to the center of the pore and physically occludes the lumen. the same role could be played by the
two voluminous chloro atoms of the dichlorophenyl ring (fig. 9).
it is also possible that the partial positive charge of the 3-amino
group, now located closer to the center of the pore, could contribute an electrostatic barrier to na⫹ permeation. figure 10,
top, illustrates the way in which the somewhat different bulky
structures of carbamazepine and lamotrigine extend into the
lumen of the channel in such a way that they could block
permeation.

fig. 8. carbamazepine in the interface between iiis6 –ivs6 of the inner
pore of the na⫹ channel (side view). the amide group of carbamazepine
interacts with the side chain of phe-1764, whereas the approximately
perpendicular location of the two aromatic rings provides physical occlusion of the pore.

fig. 10. superposition of structures of carbamazepine (pink color) and
lamotrigine (blue color) inside of the inner pore (top view). different bulky
anticonvulsants interact with the common receptor of the na⫹ channel
and extend into the lumen of the pore in such a way that they could block
conductance.

fig. 9. lamotrigine. optimal location of lamotrigine inside the inner pore
(side view). in accordance with the common pharmacophore core of anticonvulsants, the amino group in the 5-position of the triazine ring interacts with phe-1764.

anticonvulsant drug binding site model

discussion
energetic analysis of binding of representative members of
the anticonvulsant drugs - phenytoin, carbamazepine, and
lamotrigine- has led us to similar structures for their complexes with the two domain iv s6 residues in the open inner
pore of the na⫹ channel that are known from mutagenesis
studies to be critical for their blocking action. anticonvulsants are too wide and rigid to fit optimally into the modeled
closed state, but they do fit easily into the open/inactivated
state. all anticonvulsants of this family contain a common
pharmacophore core— one obligatory aromatic ring available
for an aromatic-aromatic interaction with the side chain of
tyr-1771 and a very special amine, located such that it could
interact with ␲-electrons of the aromatic ring of div-s6
phe-1764. it is important for this interaction that the amine
is located in the molecular fragments of anticonvulsants with
a high level of polarity, connected with electronegative atoms
(or groups) co-nh, co-nh2, cn-nh2 (fig. 1), specifically
raising the high partial positive charges on the hydrogen
atoms of their amino groups. the electron donor groups in
the anticonvulsant structures play only a subsidiary role
and do not participate in direct interactions with the channels, contrary to the proposition by unverferth et al.
(1998). in the crystal structure of phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine, these amines form hydrogen bonds
(nh. . . o or nh. . . n). however, in the inner pore of the
na⫹ channel, the tendency of the amino groups to form
hydrogen bonds is transformed to interactions with the
aromatic ring of phe-1764 to form an amino-aromatic hydrogen bond. anticonvulsants, in contrast to local anesthetics and antiarrhythmics, are neutral, but this high
permanent polarity of the pharmacophore amino groups
compensates partially for the local anesthetic equilibrium
between uncharged and charged forms. the positive
charge per se is not obligatory for the block of na⫹ permeation.
the energies of interaction of anticonvulsants with the side
chains of phe-1764, tyr-1771, and leu-1465 are not high.
nevertheless, alanine-scanning mutagenesis has clearly
shown that these three amino acid residues are important,
allowing us to propose that they are essential to the channel’s
recognition of the anticonvulsant structures and that they
orient the rigid drug structures at the interface cleft between
domains iii and iv. hydrophobic interactions also undoubtedly contribute an important energetic component to the
anticonvulsant interaction energy in the open/inactivated
state. for example, the 5-alkyl-5-phenyl-hydantoins are as
effective as phenytoin itself. this suggests that the second
aromatic rings of the tricyclic phenytoin, carbamazepine, and
lamotrigine are positioned so that they participate in hydrophobic interactions with other segments of the inner pore:
di-s6 and dii-s6. hydrophobic interactions by dense packing with the walls of the inner pore play a crucial role for
binding of anticonvulsants, compensating for lower energy
interactions resulting from the absence of a positive charge
that is so important for the local anesthetics. the drug structures are so bulky and wide that they could easily occlude the
central part of the inner pore and obstruct na⫹ permeation
sterically. on the other hand, in the resting closed inner pore,
the bulky drugs can neither interact normally with phe, tyr,

637

and leu on domains iii and iv nor use hydrophobic forces,
reducing their affinity.
the prediction of our modeling suggests that scanning
study of anticonvulsant interaction with the inner segments
of di-s6 and dii-s6 helices would identify additional residue
interactions. the high aromaticity of anticonvulsants suggests a strategy other than alanine scanning. substitutions
by aromatic residues (phe and trp) in domain iid6 (val-974
and leu-975) and domain is6 (asn-418 and leu-421) might
be expected to improve drug binding. in this context, we note
that substitutions of asn-434 of  xxxg2026xxx , homologous to asn418 of  xxxg2022xxx , by phenylalanine increased the binding of the
local anesthetic  xxxd383xxx  by 6-fold (nau et al., 1999).
molecular modeling of this interaction has shown that one
side of the aromatic ring of anticonvulsants located at the
interface of iii-s6 and iv-s6 interacts with the side chain of
tyr-1771, whereas the flat side of the ring can interact with
a phenylalanine substituted for asn-418 by forming a perpendicular stack and thereby stabilize the interaction. therefore, our models are compatible with the n418f/y mutations.
analysis of mutational data and molecular modeling of the
interaction and binding of local anesthetics (lipkind and
fozzard, 2005) and this model of anticonvulsant binding
reinforce the idea that the  xxxg1232xxx  structures
provide a reasonable structural template for location of the
s6 ␣-helices of domains iii, iv, and i of na⫹ channels. however, it is still unclear whether dii-s6 can also be modeled in
this way. alanine-scanning mutagenesis of dii-s6 did not
change binding of either etidocaine or lamotrigine (yarovyarovoy et al., 2002). consequently, modulation of binding of
the rigid structures of phenytoin and carbamazepine, which
should protrude into the inner pore closer to di-s6 and
dii-s6, by substitution with bulky neutral aromatic amino
acid residues (phe, trp) and even arg could provide useful
information on possible asymmetry of the s6 segments in the
inner pore of the na⫹ channel.
the amino-aromatic interaction with the side chain of phe1764 is probably key to the voltage dependence of highaffinity block by the anticonvulsants. we have previously
shown that local anesthetic affinity is greatly reduced, and
use dependence is abolished when the equivalent phenylalanine in  xxxg2028xxx  is mutated to a nonaromatic residue (mcnulty
et al., 2007), and the characteristic immobilization of gating
charge by the charged lidocaine is abolished by mutation of
the phenylalanine (sheets et al., 2008; hanck et al., 2009).
furthermore, replacement of the aromatic ring of the equivalent phe-1579 (rnav1.4, equivalent to phe-1759 in hnav1.5)
by cyclohexane reduced local anesthetic use-dependent block
(ahern et al., 2008).
the structural differences between anticonvulsants and
local anesthetics determine the differences in inhibition of
the neuronal na⫹ channels: local anesthetics have a high
tendency for use-dependent block at modest stimulus rates,
whereas neutral anticonvulsants show a low level of usedependent block. anticonvulsants have high off-rate upon
repolarization, similar to the local anesthetic  xxxd305xxx , but
still enough to suppress very high action potential rates.
anticonvulsant drug binding is clearly voltage-dependent,
not as a result of charge movement directly associated with
entry of the drug into its binding site in the pore, but as
consequence of the higher affinity for the open/inactivated
configuration of the channel, probably through their interac-

638

lipkind and fozzard

tion with div-s6 phe-1764, which is lost upon repolarization.
on balance, depolarization of the resting potential may be
more important to their effectiveness in na⫹ channel block,
rather than frequency of action potentials. these different
functional profiles allow the drugs to distinguish their target
organs. treatment of cardiac tachyarrhythmias benefits from
high use dependence of local anesthetics, whereas their use
dependence in the central nervous system is an undesirable
side effect. in contrast, anticonvulsants do not interfere with
normal rapid action potential rates in the central nervous
system because of their poor use dependence, but they have
a preferential high affinity for block in depolarized regions
that characterize epilepsy.
acknowledgments

we thank dr. dorothy hanck for helpful discussions during this
work.
references
ahern ca, eastwood al, dougherty da, and horn r (2008) electrostatic contributions of aromatic residues in the local anesthetic receptor of voltage-gated sodium
channels. circulation res 102:86 –94.
brouillette wj, jestkov vp, brown ml, akhtar ms, delorey tm, and brown gb
(1997) effects of log p and phenyl ring conformation on the binding of 5-phenylhydantoins to the voltage-gated sodium channel. j med chem 37:3289 –3293.
brown ml, brown gb, and brouillette wj (1999) comparative molecular field
analysis of hydantoin binding to the neuronal voltage-dependent sodium channel.
j med chem 40:602– 607.
burley sk and petsko ga (1986) amino-aromatic interactions in proteins. febs
lett 203:139 –143.
clare jj, tate sn, nobbs m, and romanos ma (2000) voltage-gated sodium channels as therapeutic targets. drug discov today 5:506 –520.
creighton te (1993) proteins: structures and molecular properties, wh freeman
and co, new york.
doyle da, morais cabral j, pfuetzner ra, kuo a, gulbis jm, cohen sl, chait bt,
and mackinnon r (1998) the structure of the  xxxg1232xxx : molecular basis
of k⫹ conduction and selectivity. science 280:69 –77.
hanck da, nikitina e, mcnulty mm, fozzard ha, lipkind gm, and sheets mf
(2009) using lidocaine and  xxxd305xxx  to link sodium channel molecular conformations to state-dependent antiarrhythmic affinity. circulation res 105:492– 499.
hille b (2001) ion channels in excitable membranes, sinauer associates, inc, sunderland, ma.
janes rw (1999) crystal structure of an analog of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine,
3,5-diamino-6-(2,3,5-trichlrophenyl)-1,2,4-triazine 䡠 dimethanolate, and structure
comparisons with related analogs. j chem crystallogr 29:163–167.
jiang y, lee a, chen j, cadene m, chait bt, and mackinnon r (2002) crystal
structure and mechanism of a calcium-gated  xxxg1232xxx . nature 417:515–
522.
kuo cc (1998) a common anticonvulsant binding site for phenytoin, carbamazepine,
and lamotrigine in neuronal na⫹ channels. mol pharmacol 54:712–721.
kuo cc and bean bp (1994) slow binding of phenytoin to inactivated sodium
channels in rat hippocampal neurons. mol pharmacol 46:716 –25.
lenkowski pw, batts tw, smith md, ko sh, jones pj, taylor ch, mccusker ak,
davis gc, hartmann ha, white hs, et al. (2007) a pharmacophore derived
phenytoin analogue with increased affinity for slow inactivated sodium channels
exhibits a desired anticonvulsant profile. neuropharmacology 52:1044 –1054.

levitt m and perutz mf (1988) aromatic rings as hydrogen bond acceptors. j mol
biol 201:751–754.
lipkind gm and fozzard ha (2000) kcsa crystal structure as a framework for a
molecular model of the na⫹ channel pore. biochemistry 39:8161– 8170.
lipkind gm and fozzard ha (2005) molecular modeling of local anesthetic drug
binding by voltage-gated sodium channels. mol pharmacol 68:1611–1622.
liu g, yarov-yarovoy v, nobbs m, clare jj, scheuer t, and catterall wa (2003)
differential interactions of lamotrigine and related drugs with transmembrane
segment ivs6 of voltage-gated sodium channels. neuropharmacology 44:413– 422.
lowes mm, caira mr, lötter ap, and van der watt jg (1987) physiochemical
properties and x-ray structural studies of the trigonal polymorph of carbamazepine. j pharm sci 76:744 –752.
macdonald rl and kelly km (1993) antiepileptic drug mechanisms of action.
epilepsia 34 (suppl 5):s1–s8.
mcnamara jo (2006) pharmacotherapy of the epilepsies, in goodman & gilman’s
pharmacological basis of therapeutics, 11th ed (brtunton ll, lazo js, parker kl
eds) pp 501–526, mcgraw-hill, new york.
mcnulty mm, edgerton gb, shah rd, hanck da, fozzard ha, and lipkind gm
(2007) charge at the lidocaine binding site residue phe-1759 affects permeation in
human cardiac voltage-gated sodium channels. j physiol 581:741–755.
nau c, wang sy, strichartz gr, and wang gk (1999) point mutations at n434 in
d1–s6 of mu1 na⫹ channels modulate binding affinity and stereoselectivity of
local anesthetic enantiomers. mol pharmacol 56:404 – 413.
ragsdale ds, mcphee jc, scheuer t, and catterall wa (1994) molecular determinants of state-dependent block of na⫹ channels by local anesthetics. science
265:1724 –1728.
ragsdale ds, mcphee jc, scheuer t, and catterall wa (1996) common molecular
determinants of local anesthetic, antiarrhythmic, and anticonvulsant block of
voltage-gated na⫹ channels. proc natl acad sci usa 93:9270 –9275.
ragsdale ds and avoli m (1998) sodium channels as molecular targets for antiepileptic drugs. brain res rev 26:16 –28.
rogawski ma and löscher w (2004) the neurobiology of antiepileptic drugs. nat rev
neurosci 5:553–564.
sheets mf, mcnulty mm, chen t, and hanck da (2008) modification of gating
differentiates rested state block from use-dependent block for lidocaine interactions with na⫹ channels (abstract). biophys j 94:3085.
tanford c (1980) the hydrophobic effect. john wiley and sons, new york.
tarnawa i, bölcskei h, and kocsis p (2007) blockers of voltage-gated sodium channels for the treatment of central nervous system diseases. recent pat cns drug
discov 2:57–78.
unverferth k, engel j, höfgen n, rostock a, günther r, lankau hj, menzer m,
rolfs a, liebscher j, müller b, et al. (1998) synthesis, anticonvulsant activity, and
structure-activity relationships of sodium channel blocking 3-aminopyrroles.
j med chem 41:63–73.
wang gk, quan c, and wang s (1998) a common local anesthetic receptor for
 xxxd305xxx  and etidocaine in voltage-gated ␮1 na⫹ channels. pflugers arch 435:
293–302.
yarov-yarovoy v, brown j, sharp em, clare jj, scheuer t, and catterall wa (2001)
molecular determinants of voltage-dependent gating and binding of pore-blocking
drugs in transmembrane segment iiis6 of the na⫹ channel ␣-subunit. j biol
chem 276:20 –27.
yarov-yarovoy v, mcphee jc, idsvoog d, pate c, scheuer t, and catterall wa
(2002) role of amino acid residues in transmembrane segments is6 and iis6 of the
na⫹ channel ␣-subunit in voltage-dependent gating and drug block. j biol chem
277:35393–35401.
xie xm and garthwaite j (1996) state-dependent inhibition of na⫹ currents by the
neuroprotective agent 619c89 in rat hippocampal neurons and in a mammalian
cell line expressing rat brain type iia na⫹ channels. neuroscience 73:951–962.
xie x, dale tj, john vh, cater hl, peakman tc, and clare jj (2001) electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of the human brain type iia na⫹ channel
expressed in a stable mammalian line. pflugers arch 441:425– 433.

address correspondence to: dr. harry a. fozzard, po box 574, dana, nc
20724. e-mail: hafozzar@uchicago.edu

