st segment elevation by current-to-load mismatch:
an experimental and computational study
mark g. hoogendijk, md,* mark potse, phd,*† alain vinet, phd,‡§ jacques m.t. de bakker, phd,*¶
ruben coronel, md, phd*
*from the department of experimental cardiology, heart failure research center, academic medical center, university
of amsterdam, amsterdam, and †cardiovascular research institute maastricht, maastricht university, maastricht, the
netherlands, ‡research center, sacré-coeur hospital, and §institute of biomedical engineering, université de montréal,
montreal, quebec, canada, and ¶interuniversity cardiology institute of the netherlands, utrecht, the netherlands.
background recently, we demonstrated that  xxxd96xxx  caused
st segment elevation in the heart of an  xxxg2028xxx  mutation carrier by
excitation failure in structurally discontinuous myocardium. in
patients with brugada syndrome, st segment elevation is modulated by cardiac sodium (ina), transient outward (ito), and l-type
calcium currents (ical).
objective to establish experimentally whether excitation failure
by current-to-load mismatch causes st segment elevation and is
modulated by ito and ical.
methods in porcine epicardial shavings, isthmuses of 0.9, 1.1,
or 1.3 mm in width were created parallel to the fiber orientation.
local activation was recorded electrically or optically (di-4anepps) simultaneously with a pseudo-electrocardiogram (ecg)
before and after  xxxd96xxx  application. intra- and extracellular potentials and ecgs were simulated in a computer model of the heart
and thorax before and after introduction of right ventricular structural discontinuities and during varying levels of ina, ito, and ical.
results in epicardial shavings, conduction blocked after  xxxd96xxx  in a frequency-dependent manner in all preparations with
isthmuses ⱕ1.1 mm width. total conduction block occurred in
three of four preparations with isthmuses of 0.9 mm versus one of

introduction
coved st segment elevation followed by a negative t wave
in the right precordial leads is the electrocardiographic
(ecg) hallmark of the brugada syndrome.1 thus far, no
mechanism of this so-called brugada ecg pattern has been
demonstrated in patients.2
a reduced function of the cardiac sodium channel plays
an important role in the mechanism of the brugada synthe first two authors contributed equally to this work. this study was
supported by the netherlands heart foundation (2008b062 to rc) and by
the interuniversity cardiology institute of the netherlands. computational
resources were provided by the réseau québécois de calcul de haute
performance. address reprint requests and correspondence: mark
hoogendijk, m.d., heart failure research center, academic medical
center, meibergdreef 9, 1105 az, amsterdam, the netherlands. e-mail
address: m.g.hoogendijk@amc.uva.nl. (received august 3, 2010; accepted
september 15, 2010.)

seven with isthmuses ⱖ1.1 mm (p⬍.05). excitation failure resulted in st segment elevation on the pseudo-ecg. in computer
simulations, subepicardial structural discontinuities caused local
activation delay and made the success of conduction sensitive to
ina, ito, and ical. reduction of ito and increase of ical resulted in
a higher excitatory current, overcame subepicardial excitation
failure, and reduced the st segment elevation.
conclusions excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch
causes st segment elevation and, like st segment elevation in
brugada patients, is modulated by ito and ical.
keywords brugada syndrome; structure; st segment elevation
abbreviations ecg ⫽ electrocardiogram;  xxxg304xxx  ⫽ gene
encoding the ␣1 subunit of the l-type calcium channel;
cacnb2b ⫽ gene encoding the ␤2b subunit of the l-type calcium channel; gna ⫽ sodium channel conductivity; gcal ⫽ ltype calcium channel conductivity; gto ⫽ transient outward
conductivity; ina ⫽ sodium current; ical ⫽ l-type calcium current; ito ⫽ transient outward current;  xxxg2028xxx  ⫽ gene encoding
the ␣ subunit of the cardiac sodium channel
(heart rhythm 2011;8:111–118) © 2011 heart rhythm society.
published by elsevier inc. all rights reserved.

drome: sodium channel blockers can provoke or augment
the brugada ecg pattern,3 and loss-of-function mutations
in  xxxg2028xxx , the gene encoding the ␣-subunit of the cardiac
sodium channel, are identified in ⬃20% of patients.4 additionally, structural discontinuities appear to play a role because subtle signs of right ventricular structural discontinuities are common in patients with brugada syndrome.2,5– 8
recently, we demonstrated in the explanted heart of an
 xxxg2028xxx  mutation carrier that sodium channel blockade caused
excitation failure in discontinuous myocardium, which showed
as st segment elevation on a pseudo-ecg.9 at sites at which
structural discontinuities cause sudden expansion of the myocardium, more depolarizing current is required for cells to
reach threshold potential, and conduction can fail especially if
available excitatory current is reduced (current-to-load mismatch).10,11 in addition, we demonstrated in a computer model
that excitation failure and activation delay by current-to-load

1547-5271/$ -see front matter © 2011 heart rhythm society. published by elsevier inc. all rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2010.09.066

112
mismatch can result in the brugada ecg pattern and concluded that current-to-load mismatch may underlie the brugada ecg pattern.9 however, a direct experimental proof that
excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch results in st
segment elevation is still lacking.
the brugada ecg pattern is modulated not only by
cardiac sodium current (ina) but also by transient outward
(ito) and l-type calcium current (ical). quinidine, a class
1a sodium channel blocker that also blocks ito,12 can ameliorate the st segment elevation of the brugada ecg pattern13 and reduces inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias.14
likewise, pharmacological enhancement of ical by  xxxd2401xxx  can reduce the brugada ecg pattern3 and is applied
to treat electrical storms.15 furthermore, mutations in
 xxxg304xxx  and cacnb2b that reduce ical were recently
associated with the brugada syndrome in concurrence with
a short qt duration.16
at sites of local activation delay, the current available for
excitation is modulated by currents activated after the upstroke of the action potential such as ito17 and ical.11,18,19
therefore, we established experimentally whether excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch results in st segment elevation on a pseudo-ecg in porcine epicardial shavings with introduced structural discontinuities. second, we
determined whether the brugada ecg pattern by currentto-load mismatch is modulated by ito and ical in a computer
model encompassing the heart and thorax.

methods
the experimental protocol complied with the guide for the
care and use of laboratory animals published by the u.s.
national institutes of health and was approved by the institutional animal experiments committee.

epicardial shavings
eight male pigs (25–35 kg) were premedicated with an
intramuscular injection of ketamine (10 –15 mg/kg, animal
health bv, bladel, the netherlands) and midazolam (1.0
mg/kg, f. hoffmann, la roche ltd., basel, switzerland).
after induction of anesthesia with pentobarbital (20 mg/kg
iv, ceva santé animale, la ballastière, france) and heparin (leo pharma bv, breda, the netherlands), vf was
induced by a dc current, and the heart was removed and
rapidly placed in ice-cold modified tyrode’s solution (nacl
128 mmol/l, kcl 4.7 mmol/l, cacl2 1.5 mmol/l, mgcl2
0.7 mmol/l, nahco3 28 mmol/l, nah2po4 0.5 mmol/l,
glucose 11.0 mmol/l). epicardial shavings (⬃30 ⫻ 20 ⫻
0.5 mm) were cut with a dermatome parallel to the epicardial surface, while carefully avoiding regions containing the
main coronary vasculature. suitable preparations were immediately transferred to the superfusion setup and pinned to
the wax floor of the perfusion chamber. the preparations
were superfused (100 ml/min) with 0.5 l of recirculating
modified tyrode’s solution at 37oc. the superfusate was
gassed with 95% o2/5% co2. eleven preparations were
used in this study. three preparations were derived from the
right ventricular free wall, and eight from the left ventricle.

heart rhythm, vol 8, no 1, january 2011
after determination of the fiber direction, isthmuses were
created in a line parallel to the fiber orientation at ⬃6 mm
intervals by puncturing of the epicardial shaving with two
needles positioned at a fixed distance (either 0.9, 1.1, or 1.3
mm). after puncturing of the epicardial shavings, cuts were
made parallel to the fiber direction away from the needles
using an opthalmic scalpel. this technique allowed precise
control over isthmus width (0.9, 1.1, or 1.3 mm). the
preparations were then allowed to equilibrate for 1 hour.

experimental setup
preparations were stimulated at twice the diastolic threshold. a pseudo-ecg was recorded at 2 khz from electrodes
placed 5 mm from the epicardial shaving in the superfusion
solution at either side of the preparation in a line perpendicular to the line of the isthmuses. the ecg electrode at
the side of stimulation was the negative pole. local activation was recorded either electrically (n ⫽ 4) or optically (n ⫽
7). for electrical activation recording, two electrodes containing two silver wires were positioned on the epicardial
surface of the epicardial shaving, one proximal and one
distal to the isthmus. for the optical mapping, epicardial
shavings were stained with di-4-anepps 20 ␮mol/l (invitrogen corp., carlsbad, ca) during 7.5 minutes and ⫾
blebbistatin 10 ␮mol/l (tocris bioscience, bristol, uk)
was added to the modified tyrode’s solution to avoid mechanical artifacts caused by contraction. fluorescence was
obtained by exciting the stained tissue with a 5-w light
emitting diode (cyan, 505 nm) reflected by a dichroic mirror
and focused at the preparation through a tandem lens set.
the emitted fluorescent light was transmitted through the
tandem lens setup, filtered (⬎610 nm) and projected on a
micam ultima optical camera (scimedia usa ltd., costa
mesa, ca). the camera had 100 ⫻ 100 pixels and 1-khz
sampling frequency. the viewing window of the optical
setup was 9 ⫻ 9 mm.
recordings were made at varying basic cycle lengths
(2000 –200 ms) before and after addition of  xxxd96xxx  5
␮mol/l (solvay pharmaceuticals gmbh, hannover, germany), a rate-dependent blocker of the cardiac sodium
channel.20 at baseline, the conduction velocity of the epicardial shavings was determined using activation maps during central stimulation at a cycle length of 500 ms. preparations with successful conduction at baseline over the
isthmuses at all tested frequencies were included in this
study.

data analysis
data were analyzed using custom-made software based on
matlab r2006b (mathsworks inc., natick, ma).21 local electrograms or optical mapping data were aligned with
the pseudo-ecg on the stimulation artifact.
the modulation of current-to-load mismatch by ito and
ical in addition to  xxxd96xxx  could not be tested in epicardial
shavings because porcine ventricular cardiomyocytes do not
express ito1.22 furthermore, reduction of ical reduces the
action potential duration,23 and this will increase the dia-

hoogendijk et al

st segment elevation by current-to-load mismatch

113

figure 1
optical map and pseudo-ecg of a porcine epicardial shaving after the introduction of isthmuses during stimulation from below. colors
correspond with local activation times, lines are 2.5-ms isochrones, viewing window is 9 ⫻ 9 mm. tracing shows qrs complex and st-t segment of the
pseudo-ecg.

stolic interval during steady state pacing, which will affect
the use-dependent blockade of the sodium channel by  xxxd96xxx . therefore, we studied the effects of ito and ical in
computer simulations.

computer simulations
as before,9 propagating action potentials were simulated
with a whole-heart reaction-diffusion model containing 90
million nodes, each represented by a membrane model of
the human ventricular myocyte.24 membrane ionic currents
were computed with a human membrane model that included the differential characteristics of subendocardial,
midmyocardial, and subepicardial myocytes.25 transmural
fiber rotation was represented in the model. the ecg was
computed using a bidomain model of the human heart and
torso, including lungs and intracavitary blood volumes.26
structural discontinuities were simulated by the introduction of barriers (thickness 0.4 – 0.6 mm) in the outer 50% of
the right ventricular wall. in these barriers, no intercellular
coupling was present, but the interstitium was unaffected.
the barriers contained gaps of 0.2 mm width in which the
intercellular coupling was reduced to 30% of normal to
mimic smaller gaps. sodium channel conductivity (gna)
was simulated at 100% or 30% of normal in the entire heart.
the conductivity of the l-type calcium channels (gcal) was
modified in steps from 50% to 400% of normal, and the
conductivity of the transient outward channels (gto) from
0% to 400% of normal in the entire heart. simulation of a
single cardiac beats in this model required 7–12 hours (sgi
altix computer, 128 processors).

results
epicardial shavings
at baseline, the conduction velocity of the epicardial shavings was 60.7 ⫾ 5.7 cm/s longitudinal and 15.2 ⫾ 3.7 cm/s
(mean ⫾ sd) transversal to the fiber direction. a typical
example of an activation map and pseudo-ecg of an epicardial shaving after creation of an isthmus is shown in
figure 1.
after  xxxd96xxx , conduction blocked at the isthmuses in
most of the preparations. the fraction of blocked beats was
greater at shorter cycle lengths and in preparations with the
smallest isthmus width (figure 2). total conduction block
occurred in three of four preparations with isthmuses of 0.9
mm versus one of seven with isthmuses ⱖ1.1 mm (p⬍.05).

statistical analysis
the occurrence of conduction block after  xxxd96xxx  was
compared between groups of preparations with similar isthmus width using a fisher’s exact test. the level of statistical
significance was set to p⬍.05.

figure 2
graph showing the portion of beats conducted over the isthmuses in epicardial shavings at increasing pacing rates after  xxxd96xxx  (5
␮mol/l). the conduction block depended on the width of the isthmuses
and on the pacing rate; n ⫽ no. of preparations.

114
no blocked beats at any cycle length were observed in two
of three preparations with isthmuses of 1.3 mm versus eight
of eight with isthmuses ⱕ1.1 mm (p ⫽ .055).
figure 3 shows the activation maps, optically recorded
action potentials, and pseudo-ecgs of two consecutive beats
of an epicardial shaving containing three isthmuses (one outside the recording area) of 1.1 mm after  xxxd96xxx  during stimulation at a cycle length of 300 ms. in the upper panel, conduction over one of the isthmuses is successful and the
myocardium distal of the isthmuses was activated with a long
delay. this resulted in a long fractionated qrs complex followed by a negative t wave on the pseudo-ecg. in the lower
panel, conduction fails at both isthmuses, resulting in excitation failure of the myocardium distal of the isthmuses. activation at the proximal site of the barrier gives rise to a potential
gradient over the isthmuses and current flow toward the posi-

heart rhythm, vol 8, no 1, january 2011
tive ecg electrode, which is seen as st segment elevation on
the pseudo-ecg.

computer simulations
local activation
all simulations were run with a model of both ventricles.
three-dimensional activation maps of a subepicardial section
of this model after introduction of subepicardial structural
discontinuities are shown in figure 4. for clarity, the structural
discontinuities were made transparent. graphs below show
local action potentials; ina, ito, and ical; and the total current
given or received through the gap junctions at four different
locations indicated in the activation maps. at baseline (figure
4a), activation is delayed at the distal end of the isthmuses, but
all myocardium distal from the isthmuses reached threshold
potential and was activated. as shown before,9 reduction of the

figure 3
activation maps showing two out of three isthmuses of 1.1 mm width of an epicardial shaving, optically recorded action potentials, and
pseudo-ecgs of two consecutive beats after  xxxd96xxx  during stimulation at a cycle length of 300 ms. in the upper panel, conduction over the right isthmus
was successful and the myocardium distal of the isthmus was activated late, resulting in a long qrs duration followed by a negative t wave on the
pseudo-ecg. in the lower panel, conduction failed at all isthmuses, resulting in excitation failure of the myocardium distal of the isthmuses and in a potential
gradient over the isthmuses, which is seen as st segment elevation on the pseudo-ecg. colors correspond with local activation; lines are 5-ms isochrones;
viewing window is 9 ⫻ 9 mm; and s1 indicates the stimulation artifact, qrs complex, and st-t segment of the pseudo-ecg.

hoogendijk et al

st segment elevation by current-to-load mismatch

115

figure 4
three-dimensional activation map of a subepicardial section of the computer model after introduction of subepicardial structural discontinuities
and graphs showing action potentials and ion currents at four locations, which are indicated by colored spheres in the activation map. at baseline (a),
activation is delayed at the distal end of the isthmuses. however, all distal myocardium is activated. after reduction to 30% of the conductance of the cardiac
sodium channel (b), activation is blocked at the isthmuses and subepicardial sites failed to excite. after reduction of the conductance of the transient outward
current to 0% of normal (c), the phase 1 repolarization at subepicardial locations is reduced (red) and more current is provided to sites distal of the isthmus
(green), and excitation threshold potential is reached. likewise, an increase in the l-type calcium current to 150% of normal (d) resulted in a higher
depolarizing current being provided to the location distal of the isthmuses (green) and prevented excitation failure. colors in the activation map correspond
with local activation time. endo indicates the endocardial side and epi the epicardial side of the section. in panels a and d, ito at the gray marker is small,
because it is located in endocardial tissue, where the expression of ito is relatively low.

conductance of the cardiac sodium channel to 30% of normal
(figure 4b) resulted in activation block at some of the isthmuses and in excitation failure in part of the subepicardial
tissue distal to the isthmuses. reduction of the conductance of
gto to 0% of normal (figure 4c) prevented subepicardial
excitation failure at some sites. phase 1 repolarization at subepicardial locations was reduced (see red action potential), and
more current was provided to sites distal to the isthmus (green),
which enabled it to reach threshold potential and prevented
subepicardial excitation failure. likewise, an increase in gcal
to 150% of normal (figure 4d) resulted in a higher depolarizing current being provided to the location distal of the isthmuses (green) and prevented excitation failure.

simulated ecgs
the subepicardial activation delay and excitation failure after
reduction of gna to 30% in structurally discontinuous heart
resulted in st segment elevation followed by a negative t

wave in the right precordial leads of the ecg. the percentage
of elements of the entire heart that failed to excite and the right
precordial st segment elevation after gna reduction were
modulated by gto and gcal. an increase of gto (figure 5) or
a reduction of gcal (figure 6) resulted in more sites that failed
to excite and in greater amplitude of the right precordial st
segment elevation. conversely, a reduction of gto or an increase of gcal improved the success of conduction, decreased
the number of sites that failed to excite, and reduced the
amplitude of the right precordial st segment elevation. the
same changes in gto and gcal did not result in st segment
deviation in the heart without structural discontinuities either at
normal gna or after reduction of gna to 30% of normal (data
not shown).

discussion
in this study, we directly demonstrated that excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch results in st segment ele-

116

heart rhythm, vol 8, no 1, january 2011

figure 5 simulated ecgs of the heart with structural discontinuities and reduced sodium current at different levels of conductivity of the channel
underlying the transient outward current (gto). the graphs on the right relate the corresponding percentage of excited elements of the whole heart with the
cumulative st segment elevation in the four right precordial leads. gto modulated success of conduction in structurally discontinuous right ventricular
subepicardium. reduction of gto prevented excitation failure at some subepicardial sites and decreased the right precordial st segment elevation on the ecg.
v1ics3 and v2ics3 indicate leads v1 and v2 positioned in the third intercostal space.

vation on the ecg. in porcine epicardial shavings, success
of conduction across an isthmus depended on the width of
the isthmus and on the available ina, which was varied by
addition of the rate-dependent sodium channel blocker  xxxd96xxx  and by changing the pacing frequency. small isthmuses (ⱕ 1.1 mm) in combination with reduced sodium
current resulted in excitation failure and st segment elevation on the pseudo-ecg. additionally, we demonstrated in
a computer model that ito and ical modulate the excitation
failure-induced brugada ecg pattern in discontinuous
myocardium. at sites of sudden expansion of the myocardium, a small source volume must activate a large sink
volume. this caused activation delay and made the success
of conduction sensitive to currents activated shortly after the
upstroke of the action potential, such as ito and ical. the
repolarizing ito reduced, and the depolarizing ical increased
the current available for downstream depolarization and
success of conduction.
these results are in line with clinical observations in
patients with brugada syndrome. subtle signs of structural
discontinuities in histological studies,8 imaging studies,5
and electrophysiological studies6,7 are common in patients
with brugada syndrome. additionally, enhancement of ical
by  xxxd2401xxx  can reduce the brugada ecg pattern3 and

can suppress electrical storms.15 likewise, blockade of ito
by quinidine can reduce the st segment elevation13 and
lower the inducibility of arrhythmias.14 in a case report,
watanabe et al. have demonstrated that quinidine reversibly
eliminated late potentials on the signal-averaged ecg of a
patient with brugada syndrome.27 therefore, the observation that the brugada syndrome is modulated by ito and ical
is consistent with the hypothesis that conduction disturbances by current-to-load mismatch cause the brugada ecg
pattern.
as shown schematically in figure 7, current-to-load mismatch can cause unidirectional conduction block depending
on the distribution of structural discontinuities and the depolarizing current available for conduction. the first observed extrasystole can be caused by reentrant activation.
the ventricular arrhythmias associated with the brugada
ecg pattern can therefore be explained by current-to-load
mismatch without the need for an extrasystole by a focal
mechanism.
the question remains whether excitation failure by currentto-load mismatch can also underlie the st segment elevation
and ventricular fibrillation in other patient groups. haïssaguerre et al. have demonstrated that elevation of the qrs-st

figure 6 simulated ecgs of the heart with right ventricular structural discontinuities and reduction of the cardiac sodium current at different levels of
conductivity of the l-type calcium channel (gcal). the graphs on the right relate the corresponding percentage of excited elements of the whole heart with
the cumulative st segment elevation in the four right precordial leads. gcal modulated success of conduction in structurally discontinuous right ventricular
subepicardium. increased gcal prevented excitation failure at some subepicardial sites and decreased the right precordial st segment elevation on the ecg.

hoogendijk et al

st segment elevation by current-to-load mismatch

117

shavings. however, others have provided ample demonstration of the effects of ito17 and ical11,19,32 on the success of
conduction in the setting of local activation delay. furthermore, the width of the isthmuses in epicardial shavings that
resulted in conduction block in the present study as well as
in previous reports33 was larger than those in the computer
model. to obtain conduction block by current-to-load mismatch in a computer model with isthmus sizes comparable
to those of the epicardial shavings, it may be necessary to
account for the discontinuities at the cellular level.34 with
the currently available computing power, this is not feasible
for a whole-heart model. in addition, the cutting of the
epicardial shavings may have changed the interstitial conductivity. because the nature and size of these changes are
unknown, they were not accounted for in the computer
model.

conclusions
excitation failure by current-to-load mismatch causes st
segment elevation and, like st segment elevation in brugada patients, is modulated by ina, ito, and ical . therefore,
current-to-load mismatch may underlie the brugada syndrome.

acknowledgments
figure 7
schematic drawings illustrating the induction of reentrant
arrhythmias by current-to-load mismatch in myocardium containing two
isthmuses. a: during normal conditions, the redundancy in excitatory
current makes conduction successful over both isthmuses and there is no
reentrant activation. b: a reduction of the cardiac sodium current or l-type
calcium current or an increase of the transient outward current lowers the
excitatory current and can cause unidirectional conduction block depending on the local geometry of the myocardium. in the top drawing, activation is blocked at the left but not at the right isthmus. the asymmetrical
distribution of the structural discontinuities at the left isthmus make conduction in the opposite direction successful, and activation reenters the
proximal myocardium. colors depict activation time; black indicates fibrous tissue between myocardium.

junction on the inferior and lateral leads (also termed inferolateral early-repolarization sign [ers]) is associated with idiopathic vf and that these patients are at high risk of recurrent
vf.28 as in the brugada syndrome, isoproterenol28,29 and
quinidine29 reduce or eliminate inferolateral ers and may
prevent arrhythmias in these patients.29,30 furthermore, inferolateral ers is a common feature in patients with brugada
syndrome,31 and sodium channel blockade can provoke the
brugada ecg pattern in inferior or lateral leads in ⬃5% of
patients with brugada syndrome.30 however, sodium channel
blockade, the most potent modulator of the brugada ecg
pattern, usually has no effect on inferolateral ers.30,31 despite
these similarities, the mechanisms of st segment elevation in
patients with the brugada syndrome and in those with inferolateral ers are therefore likely different but share modulation
by ito and ical.

study limitations
variation of ito and ical was only performed in the computer model of the brugada syndrome and not in epicardial

the authors thank charly belterman and goos huijzer for
invaluable assistance.

references
1. brugada p, brugada j. right bundle branch block, persistent st segment
elevation and sudden cardiac death: a distinct clinical and electrocardiographic
syndrome. a multicenter report. j am coll cardiol 1992;20:1391–1396.
2. hoogendijk mg, opthof t, postema pg, wilde aam, de bakker jmt, coronel
r. the brugada ecg pattern: a marker of channelopathy, structural heart
disease, or neither? toward a unifying mechanism of the brugada syndrome.
circ arrhythm electrophysiol 2010;3:283–290.
3. miyazaki t, mitamura h, miyoshi s, soejima k, ogawa s, aizawa y. autonomic and antiarrhythmic drug modulation of st segment elevation in patients
with brugada syndrome. j am coll cardiol 1996;27:1061–1070.
4. priori sg, napolitano c, gasparini m, et al. natural history of brugada syndrome: insights for risk stratification and management. circulation 2002;105:
1342–1347.
5. catalano o, antonaci s, moro g, et al. magnetic resonance investigations in
brugada syndrome reveal unexpectedly high rate of structural abnormalities. eur
heart j 2009;30:2241–2248.
6. ikeda t, sakurada h, sakabe k, et al. assessment of noninvasive markers in
identifying patients at risk in the brugada syndrome: insight into risk stratification. j am coll cardiol 2001;37:1628 –1634.
7. postema pg, van dessel pfhm, de bakker jmt, et al. slow and discontinuous
conduction conspire in brugada syndrome: a right ventricular mapping and
stimulation study. circ arrhythm electrophysiol 2008;1:379 –386.
8. zumhagen s, spieker t, rolinck j, et al. absence of pathognomonic or inflammatory patterns in cardiac biopsies from patients with brugada syndrome. circ
arrhythm electrophysiol 2009;2:16 –23.
9. hoogendijk mg, potse m, linnenbank ac, et al. mechanism of right precordial
st-segment elevation in structural heart disease: excitation failure by currentto-load mismatch. heart rhythm 2010;7:238 –248.
10. de la fuente d, sasyniuk b, moe gk. conduction through a narrow isthmus in
isolated canine atrial tissue: a model of the w-p-w syndrome. circulation 1971;
44:803– 809.
11. inoue h, zipes dp. conduction over an isthmus of atrial myocardium in vivo: a
possible model of wolff-parkinson-white syndrome. circulation 1987;76:637– 647.
12. stanton ms. class 1 antiarrhythmic drugs: quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide, lidocaine, mexiletine,  xxxd3387xxx , phenytoin, morcizine,  xxxd2113xxx ,
propafenone. in: zipes dp, jalife j, eds. cardiac electrophysiology: from cell to
bedside. philadelphia, pa: wb saunders company, 2000:890 –903.

118
13. alings m, dekker lrc, sadee a, wilde aam. quinidine induced electrocardiographic normalization in two patients with brugada syndrome. pacing clin
electrophysiol 2001;24:1420 –1422.
14. belhassen b, viskin s, fish r, glick a, setbon i, eldar m. effects of electrophysiologic-guided therapy with class ia antiarrhythmic drugs on the long-term
outcome of patients with idiopathic ventricular fibrillation with or without the
brugada syndrome. j cardiovasc electrophysiol 1999;10:1301–1312.
15. tanaka h, kinoshita o, uchikawa s, et al. successful prevention of recurrent
ventricular fibrillation by intravenous  xxxd2401xxx  in a patient with brugada
syndrome. pacing clin electrophysiol 2001;24:1293–1294.
16. antzelevitch c, pollevick gd, cordeiro jm, et al. loss-of-function mutations in the
cardiac calcium channel underlie a new clinical entity characterized by st-segment
elevation, short qt intervals, and sudden cardiac death. circulation 2007;115:442–449.
17. huelsing dj, spitzer kw, cordeiro jm, pollard ae. conduction between
isolated rabbit purkinje and ventricular myocytes coupled by a variable resistance. am j physiol heart circ physiol 1998;274:h1163–h1173.
18. joyner rw, kumar r, wilders r, et al. modulating l-type calcium current affects
discontinuous cardiac action potential conduction. biophys j 1996;71:237–245.
19. rohr s, kucera jp. involvement of the calcium inward current in cardiac
impulse propagation: induction of unidirectional conduction block by nifedipine
and reversal by bay k 8644. biophys j 1997;72:754 –766.
20. heistracher p. mechanism of action of antifibrillatory drugs. naunyn schmiedebergs arch pharmacol 1971;269:199 –212.
21. potse m, linnenbank ac, grimbergen ca. software design for analysis of
multichannel intracardial and body surface electrocardiograms. comput methods programs biomed 2002;69:225–236.
22. li gr, du xl, siow yl, o k, tse hf, lau cp. calcium-activated transient
outward chloride current and phase 1 repolarization of swine ventricular action
potential. cardiovasc res 2003;58:89 –98.
23. vitek m, trautwein w. slow inward current and action potential in cardiac
purkinje fibres. pflugers arch 1971;323:204 –218.

heart rhythm, vol 8, no 1, january 2011
24. potse m, dubé b, richer j, vinet a, gulrajani rm. a comparison of monodomain and bidomain reaction-diffusion models for action potential propagation in
the human heart. ieee trans biomed eng 2006;53:2425–2435.
25. ten tusscher khwj, noble d, noble pj, panfilov av. a model for human
ventricular tissue. am j physiol heart circ physiol 2004;286:h1573–h1589.
26. potse m, dubé b, vinet a. cardiac anisotropy in boundary-element models for
the electrocardiogram. med biol eng comput 2009;47:719 –729.
27. watanabe h, chinushi m, osaki a, et al. elimination of late potentials by
quinidine in a patient with brugada syndrome. j electrocardiol 2006;39:63– 66.
28. haïssaguerre m, derval n, sacher f, et al. sudden cardiac arrest associated with
early repolarization. n engl j med 2008;358:2016 –2023.
29. haïssaguerre m, sacher f, nogami a, et al. characteristics of recurrent ventricular fibrillation associated with inferolateral early repolarization: role of drug
therapy. j am coll cardiol 2009;53:612– 619.
30. sarkozy a, chierchia gb, paparella g, et al. inferior and lateral electrocardiographic repolarization abnormalities in brugada syndrome. circ arrhythm electrophysiol 2009;2:154 –161.
31. letsas kp, sacher f, probst v, et al. prevalence of early repolarization pattern
in inferolateral leads in patients with brugada syndrome. heart rhythm 2008;
5:1685–1689.
32. shaw rm, rudy y. ionic mechanisms of propagation in cardiac tissue: roles of
the sodium and l-type calcium currents during reduced excitability and decreased gap junction coupling. circ res 1997;81:727–741.
33. cabo c, pertsov am, baxter wt, davidenko jm, gray ra, jalife j. wave-front
curvature as a cause of slow conduction and block in isolated cardiac muscle.
circ res 1994;75:1014 –1028.
34. spach ms, miller wt, iii, dolber pc, kootsey jm, sommer jr, mosher ce,
jr.the functional role of structural complexities in the propagation of depolarization in the atrium of the dog. cardiac conduction disturbances due to discontinuities of effective axial resistivity. circ res 1982;50:175–191.

