editorials & perspectives
key concepts and critical issues on epoetin and  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars.
a position paper from the italian society of hematology, italian society
of experimental hematology, and italian group for bone marrow transplantation
giovanni barosi,1 alberto bosi,2 maria p. abbracchio,3 romano danesi,4 armando genazzani,5 paolo corradini,6
fabrizio pane,7 and sante tura8
1

laboratory of clinical epidemiology and center for the study of myelofibrosis, irccs policlinico s. matteo foundation, pavia; 2bone
marrow transplantation unit, department of hematology, university of florence; 3department of pharmacological sciences laboratory of
molecular and cellular pharmacology of purinergic transmission, university of milan, milan; 4division of pharmacology, department of
internal medicine, university of pisa, pisa; 5discaff, università del piemonte orientale, novara; 6division of hematology, fondazione
irccs istituto nazionale dei tumori university of milan, milan; 7einge biotecnologie avanzate and hematology division, department
of biochemistry and medical biotechnology, university federico ii, naples; 8university of bologna, bologna, italy.;
e-mail: barosig@smatteo.pv.it doi:10.3324/haematol.2011.041210

t

he term “biosimilars” (“follow-on biologics” in the
usa) has been used by the european medicines
agency (ema) to describe officially-approved subsequent versions of innovator biotechnological products made
by a different competitor after the patent and exclusivity
rights have expired.1 biosimilars pose a problem to the clinician who is bound to require guidance on how best to capitalize on these new pharmacological opportunities. in its
mandate to promote the best hematologic care, the italian
society of hematology (sie) and the affiliate societies sies
(società italiana di ematologia sperimentale) and gitmo
(gruppo italiano trapianto di midollo osseo) convened an
expert panel to produce a position paper on the two marketed biosimilars in hematology, i.e. epoetin and  xxxd2106xxx . the
panel of 8 experts was selected according to the conceptual
framework elements of the nih consensus development
program.2 panel bias was minimized by eliminating from
consideration strong advocates for or against the use of
biosimilars. each panel member was asked to disclose any tie
he or she may have had with pharmaceutical companies
manufacturing the drugs considered in the paper in the last
five years. the project was conducted independently from
any pharmaceutical company which sold either conventional
drugs or biosimilars.

biotechnologicals (and biosimilars) as special drugs
most traditional low molecular weight drugs are relatively
simple molecules with well understood chemical structures
that can be synthesized by standardized protocols and methods, starting from commercially available reagents. these features make these medicines relatively simple to produce and
to analyze. therefore, when the intellectual property exclusivity period of the original drug expires, competitors wishing
to come on the market with the same product, i.e. “generics”,
will only need to develop formulations to achieve similar
(within ranges defined by authorities) pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic profiles. such a concept is the basis of the
bioequivalence studies required by european and american
regulatory agencies to grant authorization of generic drugs. in
contrast, biotechnological drugs are much larger (sometimes a
thousand-fold) molecules with complex three-dimensional
structures, whose integrity is critical for their biological
actions. moreover, biotechnological drugs are produced in
industrial laboratories via highly complex processes starting
from living prokaryotic or eukaryotic microorganisms that

haematologica | 2011 96(7)

have first been ‘engineered’ to fulfill the best possible production and delivery characteristics. it is extremely important to
note that such engineered cellular clones (the ‘production
clones’) are not commercially available but that each company has to produce its own in-house, which per se represents
an additional variability factor. finally, differently to small
molecular weight chemical drugs, depending upon specific
conditions and on the nature of the production clone, biotechnological molecules can undergo variable post-translational
modifications (e.g. glycosylation or sulphation), leading to the
existence of several ‘isoforms’ with distinct biological properties, which further complicates their in vivo profile.3 as a consequence of the complexity of the structure and the process,
both originator biotechnologicals and biosimilars are, at least
at present, impossible to characterize fully from a physicochemical viewpoint, as their size and tertiary structure are
beyond the limits of modern equipment.
it has been shown that several product-related factors, such
as amino-acid sequence variation, changes in the glycosylation state and production clone, presence of contaminants
and process-related impurities, as well as changes in formulation, handling and storage, may significantly increase the
probability of inducing immune effects.4,5 importantly, it
should be noted that there are no reliable methods to predict
immunogenicity in humans and that pre-marketing clinical
studies, which will be discussed below, do not have the statistical power to do so, as these events are usually extremely
rare. in this respect, recombinant human erythropoietins represent an example of how even small biopharmaceutical differences can have clinical consequences.
the use of  xxxd2012xxx  was associated with
excellent tolerability until 1998, when an unexpected burst of
pure red cell aplasia (prca) occurred in patients treated for
anemia of renal failure. complying with an ema request to
remove any proteins of human origin from the formulation in
order to minimize the risk of serious infections induced by
potentially lethal prions or viruses, the company replaced
 xxxd100xxx  with polisorbate 80. the new formulation
led to the development of neutralizing antibodies, resulting in
neutralization of both the recombinant protein and the native
hormone and, therefore, in prca.6 the thorough investigation carried out by the manufacturer on the immunogenic
reaction led to further modification of the final product and to
the solution of the problem. however, an important lesson
was learned: any change in the formulation of a biopharma-

937

editorials and perspectives

als, the ema still requires that, from a safety perspective,
active and passive pharmacovigilance should be put in
place for the first five years of commercialization, as
would be expected for a new biotechnological entity.

ceutical, even minimal, has the potential to induce an
immune response.

guidelines for approval of biosimilars
the regulatory policy for biosimilars in europe is governed by guidelines issued by the ema that illustrate what
requirements must be met to grant authorization.7 the
number and extent of comparability studies required for
granting a marketing authorization are detailed by ema’s
committee for medicinal products for human use
(chmp). these guidelines cover a range of issues including manufacturing, demonstration of comparability for
quality, non-clinical and clinical study reports, physicochemical and biological analysis, and clinical trial requirements. the purpose is to demonstrate the similar nature of
the biosimilar and the reference product in terms of quality, safety and efficacy. quality must be shown by testing
the new molecule by pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies, and it should be proven identical (in
defined ranges) to the originator compound. clinical efficacy and safety must be shown in general by testing the
new molecule in clinical trials (phase iii studies). besides
general guidelines addressing quality, non-clinical and clinical issues, additional product-class specific guidelines
have been developed and are continuously revised. when
a particular drug has more than one therapeutic indication,
ema requires that one indication be studied in depth, and
if comparability is demonstrated, then the biosimilar will
be able to acquire all the indications of the originator drug.
current ema guidelines for epoetin biosimilars, for
example, state that comparability studies should be performed in patients with anemia due to chronic kidney disease (ckd) and that at least two randomized clinical trials
are required.8 in addition, clinical comparability should be
shown for both intravenous and subcutaneous routes of
administration. in the case of  xxxd2106xxx , current ema
guidelines state that the clinical model for the demonstration of comparability of biosimilars to the reference product is the prophylaxis of severe cytotoxic chemotherapyinduced neutropenia.9 although in order to be approved
biosimilars will have shown comparability in clinical tri-

epoetin and  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars
the first biotechnological products in hematology were
recombinant human erythropoietin ( xxxd2011xxx , epoetin) and
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (rg-csf;  xxxd2106xxx ).
it is, therefore, not surprising that these are the first two
classes of biosimilars that hematologists are having to deal
with.
two biosimilar epoetins, marketed under five separate
names, have been approved by the ema (table 1) and
have both used eprex/erypo as reference. one  xxxd2011xxx 
biosimilar (substance hx575) has received ema approval
under the inn (international non-proprietary name)
‘‘epoietin alfa’’ while the other (substance sb309) has
received ema approval under the inn ‘‘ xxxd2013xxx ’’. in
2009, the ema granted a marketing authorization for a
novel cho cell-derived  xxxd2011xxx , epoetin theta, which has
been developed by merckle biotec (ulm, germany) using
 xxxd2012xxx  as a comparator. however, epoetin theta is
not a biosimilar but has been developed as a stand-alone
product.
biosimilar epoetins have received marketing authorization for intravenous (i.v.) administration in adult chronic
kidney disease (ckd) patients on peritoneal dialysis or
not yet undergoing dialysis, i.v. administration in pediatric
ckd patients on hemodialysis, i.v. or subcutaneous (s.c.)
administration in adult patients receiving chemotherapy
for malignancies, and patients prior to major elective
orthopedic surgery. recently,  xxxd2013xxx  has also
received marketing authorization for s.c. administration in
adult ckd patients on peritoneal dialysis or not yet undergoing dialysis.
both rg-csfs from e. coli ( xxxd2106xxx ; neupogen®,
amgen) and from cho cells (lenograstim; granocyte®,
chugai pharma, tokyo, japan) are analogs of the 174
amino acid isoform of human g-csf, noting that  xxxd2106xxx  has an additional n-terminal methionine with respect

table 1. biosimilar epoetins and  xxxd2106xxx  which received ema approval.

manufacturer of active substance

substance inn

substance name

biosimilar epoetins
rentschler biotechnologie gmbh®

epoetin alpha

hx575

norbitec gmbh

 xxxd2013xxx 

sb309

 xxxd2106xxx 
sandoz gmbh

 xxxd2106xxx 

ep2006

ct arzneimittel gmbh

 xxxd2106xxx 

xm02

hospira zagreb

 xxxd2106xxx 

pld108

938

brand name
 xxxd2011xxx ® (sandoz gmbh)
 xxxd2011xxx  hexal® (hexal ag)
abseamed® (medice arzneimittel pütter)
silapo® (stada arzneimittel ag)
 xxxd2013xxx ® (hospira enterprises)
 xxxd2106xxx  hexal® (hexal ag)
 xxxd2106xxx ® (sandoz gmbh)
biograstim® (ct arzneimittel gmbh)
 xxxd2106xxx  ratiopharm® (ratiopharm gmbh)
ratiograstim® (ratiopharm gmbh)
tevagrastim® (teva generics gmbh)
 xxxd2106xxx ® (hospira uk ltd)

haematologica | 2011; 96(7)

editorials and perspectives

to endogenous g-csf. three biosimilar filgrastims have
been launched in the eu, with neupogen® as the reference
product. they are all 175 amino acids non-glycosylated
methionyl rg-csfs expressed in e. coli, and are marketed
by different companies under different brand names
(table 1). the biosimilar filgrastims are approved for the
same indications as neupogen®, which include myelosuppressive chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, mobilization of peripheral blood progenitor cells, severe chronic
neutropenia (congenital, cyclic, or idiopathic) and persistent neutropenia associated with advanced hiv infection.

appropriateness of use of biosimilar epoetins in practice
evaluation of the appropriate use of a biosimilar in clinical practice, as for any new drug, should be based on a
critical appraisal of the benefit/cost ratio, grounded on the
evidence of efficacy and tolerability, in particular on the
documented equivalence between the biosimilar and the
reference product. since the experimentations presented
to the ema may be different for the different compounds,
the decisions should be based on the careful scrutiny of
the individual studies and on the specific european public
assessment reports (epars) published by the ema.
as far as epoetin biosimilars are concerned, comparable
efficacy and safety between intravenous administration of
hx575 and eprex® was demonstrated in a double blind
randomized, parallel-group, multicenter phase iii trial
involving 479 hemodialysis patients with renal anemia.10
comparable efficacy and safety between the sb309 and
eprex® was demonstrated in two randomized, doubleblind phase iii clinical trials with intravenous administration, a correction phase and a maintenance phase study,
involving 922 hemodialysis patients with renal anemia.11,12
an additional maintenance treatment follow-up study
was performed to obtain long-term safety data.13 for both
epoetins, there have been no reports of immunogenicity
with the intravenous use of the drug. a recent third trial
with sb309 ( xxxd2013xxx ) has documented the therapeutic
equivalence of  xxxd2013xxx  to  xxxd2011xxx  for the s.c.
route of administration in renal anemia.14 however, a clinical study into the efficacy and safety of s.c. application of
the biosimilar hx575 (epoetin alpha) had to be suspended
due to adverse events.15 the study was conducted because
in the initial approval procedure of epoetin biosimilars,
comparative studies were not possible in the s.c. route as
eprex had shown immunogenicity problems and had been
suspended for the s.c. route in nephrology. the german
federal institute for drugs and medical devices (bfarm)
reported on its website that the immediate cause for the
suspension of the clinical trial with subcutaneous hx575
was the occurrence of pure red cell aplasia in a patient as
well as proof of neutralizing antibodies against erythropoietin in another study participant. after suspension of
the clinical study, the bfarm stressed that epoetin alpha
hexal,  xxxd2011xxx  and abseamed for renal anemia were only
approved for endovenous application.
in summary, the head-to-head trials of epoetin biosimilars with the reference product have documented that
there are no differences in terms of efficacy between the
products in ckd. however, having an identical amino
acid sequence to that seen in humans does not guarantee
that an epoetin biosimilar will not have immunogenic

haematologica | 2011; 96(7)

effects. in the setting of ckd, the regulatory approval has
respected the evidence on safety derived from intravenous
administration. thus, in this setting, the least costly product among that approved could be chosen to benefit the
patients, and to offer cost savings to the health service.
namely, the use of biosimilar epoetins in epoetin-naïve
patients with ckd needing correction of anemia has been
almost unanimously accepted by scientific societies and
health organizations.16,17 the recommendation on postmarketing monitoring agrees on the crucial issue that
patient-years under treatment with these agents would
need to be orders of magnitude higher than they were in
the studies requested for regulatory approval to exclude
serious immune effects.
data from a study involving 114 cancer patients receiving chemotherapy were also submitted for approval of
hx575, but this study was not adequately powered to
demonstrate therapeutic equivalence to the reference
product.18 data were also presented from a study with
sb309 involving 261 cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, but this study was not designed to demonstrate therapeutic equivalence between products in this patient population.19 in an uncontrolled study, the efficacy and safety
of the biosimilar epoetin in the treatment of chemotherapy associated anemia was evaluated in 216 patients, of
which 208 were available for complete evaluation.20
however, the study was not aimed at investigating bioequivalence. thus, the approval of epoetin biosimilars for
the indication of anemia of cancer has been made mainly
via data extrapolation. as a matter of fact, the ema’s
guideline on the non-clinical and clinical development of
biosimilar epoetins indicated that “since the mechanism of
action of epoetin is the same for all currently approved
indications and there is only one known epoetin receptor,
demonstration of efficacy and safety in renal anemia will
allow extrapolation to other indications of the reference
medicinal product with the same route of administration”.8 however, there are concerns against the extrapolation of the results obtained in renal anemia to other therapeutic indications of the reference product.
the first concern is on the therapeutic equivalence of
the biosimilars in clinical settings, like in cancer, where, at
variance from renal anemia, there is only a relative defect
of erythropoietin production. this is due to the fact that
sensitivity to epoetin is higher in erythropoietin-deficient
than in non-erythropoietin-deficient conditions and is also
dependent on the responsiveness of the bone marrow.
the second concern is on safety, given the potential
impact of the dose of the biosimilar on toxicity and on the
immunogenicity risk. it should be noted that it is unlikely
that immunogenicity induced by epoetins will arise in this
setting, yet there are no sufficiently-powered studies available on the use of high dosage of epoetin biosimilars in
cancer. further studies are, therefore, required before therapeutic equivalence in this setting can be accepted unrestrictedly.
epoetin is also licensed for the treatment of anemic
patients who are at risk of perioperative blood loss from
elective, non-cardiac, non-vascular surgery, to reduce the
need for allogeneic blood transfusion. this use presents a
clinical dilemma since the limited experience with epoetin
biosimilars in this indication raises the concern that  xxxd1706xxx -

939

editorials and perspectives

pected toxicity might have a detrimental effect in nonanemic individuals administered high doses of epoetin to
support blood donation as a preventive measure. the use
of biosimilar epoetins for this indication requires greater
experience and adequate follow up.

appropriateness of the use of  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilar
in practice
the  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars have been granted marketing authorization on the basis of clinical trials aimed at
documenting the therapeutic equivalence with respect to
the reference biotechnological in the prevention of neutropenia due to chemotherapy for cancer. xm02 has
been tested for clinical equivalence in three clinical trials
with approximately 900 patients. the first study was a
multinational, multicenter, randomized, controlled study
in 350 patients with breast cancer who received
chemotherapy. comparable safety and efficacy profiles
for xm02 administered for up to a maximum of six
chemotherapy cycles versus neupogen was demonstrated.21 the incidence of observed or protocol defined
febrile neutropenia (fn) in cycle 1 was 15.0% and 8.8%
in the xm02 and neupogen groups, respectively. the
most often reported drug-related adverse effects in this
study were myalgia, back pain, anemia, and headache,
all known adverse drug reactions to g-csfs. of the
observed deaths, none was related to the study drug but
primarily to progression/refractoriness of the underlying
disease and, to a smaller extent, to adverse events of
chemotherapy.
the second study was in lung cancer patients.22
equivalence of xm02 versus neupogen and superiority versus placebo was clearly demonstrated with a duration of
severe neutropenia (dsn) in cycle 1 of 1.1, 1.1, and 3.8
days in the xm02, neupogen and placebo groups, respectively. in the same study, the incidence of fn in cycle 1
was 12.1%, 12.5%, and 38.1% under xm02, neupogen,
and placebo, respectively.
the third study in the same development program was
conducted in non-hodgkin’s lymphoma patients.23 in this
study, there was a trend to better efficacy results in the
xm02 group compared with the neupogen group with a
dsn of 0.5 days (xm02) and 0.9 days (neupogen) and an
incidence of fn of 11.1% (xm02) and 20.7% (neupogen)
in cycle 1.
the results on the incidence of fn in the three studies
have been further investigated in a meta-analysis.24
overall, 608 patients (363 under xm02 and 245 under
neupogen) were included in the meta-analysis. the incidence of fn in the first cycle of chemotherapy under primary g-csf prophylaxis was low (in the range of 12–
16%). xm02 was demonstrated to be non-inferior to
neupogen regarding the incidence of fn, irrespective of
the myelotoxicity of the chemotherapy regimen.
supportive evidence for  xxxd2106xxx  hexal was provided
by a phase iii study, the primary objective of which was
the evaluation of the safety, tolerability and immmunogenicity of the biosimilar.25 the study was designed as an
open, single arm, multicenter study in chemotherapynaïve breast cancer patients receiving doxorubicin and
docetaxel chemotherapy and  xxxd2106xxx  as primary prophylaxis of severe neutropenia. thus, the comparable effi-

940

cacy of  xxxd2106xxx  hexal was established on the basis of a
non-comparative study.
the therapeutic equivalence of amgen  xxxd2106xxx  and
the biosimilar  xxxd2106xxx  developed by hospira26 was
demonstrated in a phase iii study in breast cancer patients
treated with doxorubicin and docetaxel in the neoadjuvant/adjuvant or first-line metastatic setting, enrolled in 37
european centers. patients were randomized (2:1) to
receive hospira  xxxd2106xxx  or amgen  xxxd2106xxx , after the
end of chemotherapy.  xxxd2106xxx  (5 mug/kg/day) was
administered under double-blind conditions. primary endpoint to demonstrate bioequivalence was dsn in cycle 1:
184 patients were randomized to hospira  xxxd2106xxx  and
95 to amgen  xxxd2106xxx . mean dsn in cycle 1 was similar
with hospira  xxxd2106xxx  (1.6 days) and amgen  xxxd2106xxx 
(1.3 days), meeting pre-defined criteria for bioequivalence.
secondary end points supporting bioequivalence included
mean time to absolute neutrophil count recovery and incidence of fn. the most common treatment-related adverse
event with hospira  xxxd2106xxx  was grade 1-2 bone pain.
overall, the results of the studies presented for marketing authorization indicate therapeutic equivalence and
safety of the three  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars in the prophylaxis
of complications related to neutropenia caused by
chemotherapy.
on the basis of the results in cancer neutropenia, the
ema extrapolated the therapeutic equivalence of the
biosimilars also to the other indications of neupogen, as
for peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization and
transplantation, even though there are no data supporting
clinical equivalence. the only evidence in this domain is
the recovery of cd34 cells obtained in a phase i study in
144 healthy individuals, where xm02 was used at the
dose of 5 ug/kg and 10 ug/kg, reporting that the recovery
of hematopoietic stem cell is equivalent with the biosimilar and the originator.25 the european group for blood and
marrow transplantation (ebmt)27 and the world marrow
donor association (wmda)28 have stressed that the use
of biosimilars for stem cell mobilization in healthy donors
represents an ethical dilemma because the donors receive
no therapeutic benefit from the use of these drugs.
considering the detrimental effect that unexpected toxicity by  xxxd2106xxx  might have in normal individuals donating
their peripheral stem cells, careful long-term monitoring
with biosimilars should be mandatory with regards to side
effects such as immunogenicity and normal wbc function
and leukemogenesis.29
according to the east midlands g-csf guideline,30 the
same advice should also be considered for autologous
stem cell mobilization. in this setting, a preliminary report
comparing standard g-csf versus biosimilar (ratiograstim)
shows similar results in terms of days for collection and
cd34+ yield.31 for the austrian society of hematology
oncology32 the use of biosimilars cannot be recommended
without concerns regarding stem cell mobilization with
 xxxd2106xxx  for healthy persons, in the use of  xxxd2106xxx  for
non-therapy related neutropenias, in therapeutical use of
 xxxd2106xxx  for neutropenic fever and in the use of biosimilars for pediatric diseases. finally, as regards the immunogenicity of biosimilar  xxxd2106xxx , caution is needed in
mobilization in autoimmune diseases because of the
reported flares of the disease.33

haematologica | 2011; 96(7)

editorials and perspectives

substitution, tracing and monitoring
switching refers to the practice of rotating a single
patient already undergoing treatment from one medicine
to another that is considered equivalent while substitution
refers to the practice whereby a health profession, other
than the clinician, dispenses a drug which is considered
equivalent to that prescribed.
although, in the past, switching has been practised in
hospital and community settings, we feel that a patient
who is well treated with a particular epoetin or  xxxd2106xxx 
(independently of cost and whether it is an originator or a
biosimilar) should not undergo a change in treatment for
purely economic reasons. although there are no data on
this, the main concern about switching from one epoetin
to another is the issue of immunogenicity. in addition to
the possibility of clinical consequences, multiple switchings also affect pharmacovigilance efforts, making it more
difficult to trace back reported adverse events to the correct brand or manufacturer. it should be noted that there
have been some studies which have investigated switching from originators to biosimilars34,35 and which have
found no deleterious effects on efficacy and safety.
the standpoint against automatic substitution of
biosimilars has been issued by authorities in most
european countries.36 this is of particular importance in
patients already well-treated with a particular biological
drug, in whom therapeutic continuity should be guaranteed. on the other hand, automatic substitution should be
allowed in drug-naïve patients for those indications for
which the clinician accepts therapeutic equivalence (see
above), as this will promote attractive hospital tenders. the
clinician should have, nonetheless, the option of not
choosing automatic substitution for individual patients.
due to the limited clinical database on approval of
biosimilars epoetin and  xxxd2106xxx , collection of postapproval safety data for these drugs is required, and an
important component of post-approval data collection is
the ability to easily distinguish between different products.
the current international non-proprietary name (inn)
system, administered by the world health organization
(who), is an international mechanism essential to precisely identify each pharmaceutically active substance
and ensure the sale prescription and dispensation of medicines.37 currently, the naming of the epoetins and  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars is based on the current inn system
whereby drugs with the same active ingredient (irrespective of their productive process) are given the same name.
in some countries, physicians are obliged or encouraged
to prescribe by inn. we feel this should not apply to biologics.
in seeking traceability after the prescription of a biosimilar, it seems mandatory that epoetins and filgrastims are
not prescribed by inn, but that they should be identified
by brand names. this would allow pharmacovigilance and
ensure that adverse events are assigned to the correct
product. furthermore, in case of an adverse event, it is necessary to identify the drug responsible by reporting the
inn, the brand name and the relevant batch numbers.

information needs
the ema indicates that the final decision to treat a
patient with a biosimilar medicine should be taken by a

haematologica | 2011; 96(7)

qualified health professional. professionals can comply
with this indication if they are fully aware of the elements
of the decision. entry of biosimilars onto the market will
require transparent, unbiased dissemination of information to prescribers and other health care professionals.
thus, it is fundamental that hematologists be informed
about the key concepts and critical issues concerning
biosimilars. since the decision on prescription and substitutability is complex, with unanimous opinion unlikely
and sensitivity to numerous conflicts of interest common,
the availability of appropriate information should be a
prime duty of scientific societies. interventions to help
doctors make specific and deliberative choices among the
options available should be made, such as organizing ad
hoc meetings and producing guidelines on the use of
biosimilars. scientific societies should also help healthcare
providers gain access to all data regarding biosimilars, so
that they can make informed clinical decisions.
financial and other disclosures provided by the author using the
icmje (www.icmje.org) uniform format for disclosure of
competing interests are available with the full text of this paper at
www.haematologica.org.
editorial note: this article is a position paper on the use of epoetin and  xxxd2106xxx  biosimilars. as stated by kassirer and angell
[kassirer jp, angell m. financial conflicts of interest in biomedical
research. n engl j med. 1993 aug 19;329(8):570-1] "unlike
reports of original research, these articles represent the judgment of
their authors, based on their evaluation of the literature. what
studies they select to discuss and their analysis of them are necessarily subjective”. in accordance with haematologica policy, in the
process of manuscript submission the authors of this paper have
attested that it has not been sponsored and/or supported in any
way by a company whose product (epoetin and/or  xxxd2106xxx  either innovator products or biosimilars) is examined in the manuscript.

references
1. european medicines agency. questions and answers on biosimilar
medicines (similar biological medicinal products), 2006. available
from: www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/pcwp/7456206en.pdf
2. ferguson jh. the nih consensus development program. the evolution of guidelines. int j technol assess health care. 1996;12(3):460-74.
3. kuhlmann m, covic a. the protein science of biosimilars. nephrol
dial transplant. 2006;21(suppl 5):v4-8.
4. tamilvanan s, raja nl, sa b, basu sk. clinical concerns of immunogenicity produced at cellular levels by biopharmaceuticals following
their parenteral administration into human body. j drug target.
2010;18(17):489-98.
5. schellekens h. biosimilar therapeutics – what do we need to consider?
ndt plus. 2009;2(suppl_1):i27-i36.
6. casadevall n, eckardt ku, rossert j. epoetin-induced autoimmune
pure red cell aplasia. j am soc nephrol. 2005;16(suppl 1):s67-9.
7. looper yj. legislative initiatives in europe, canada and the us for
market authorization of follow-on biologics. curr opin drug disc dev
2010;13(2):247-56.
8. european medicines agency. guidance on similar medicinal products
containing recombinant erythropoietins, 2006. available from:
http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/biosimilar/9452605en.pdf
9. european medicines agency. guidance on similar medicinal products
containing recombinant granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, 2006.
available from: http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/biosimilar/3132905en.pdf.
10. haag-weber m, vetter a, thyroff-friesinger u; inj-study group.
therapeutic equivalence, long-term efficacy and safety of hx575 in
the treatment of anemia in chronic renal failure patients receiving
hemodialysis. clin nephrol. 2009;72(5):380-90.
11. baldamus c, krivoshiev s, wolf-pflugmann m, siebert-weigel m,

941

editorials and perspectives

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

koytchev r, bronn a. long-term safety and tolerability of epoetin
zeta, administered intravenously, for maintenance treatment of renal
anemia. adv ther. 2008;25(11):1215-28.
krivoshiev s, todorov vv, manitius j, czekalski s, scigalla p, koytchev
r. comparison of the therapeutic effects of  xxxd2013xxx  and epoetin
alpha in the correction of renal anaemia. curr med res opin.
2008;24(5):1407-15.
wizemann v, rutkowski b, baldamus c, scigalla p, koytchev r.
comparison of the therapeutic effects of  xxxd2013xxx  to  xxxd2011xxx  in
the maintenance phase of renal anaemia treatment. curr med res
opin. 2008;24(3):625-37.
krivoshiev s, wizemann v, czekalski s, schiller a, pljesa s, wolfpflugmann m, et al. therapeutic equivalence of  xxxd2013xxx  and alfa,
administered subcutaneously, for maintenance treatment of renal anemia. adv ther. 2010;27:105-17.
http://www.gabionline.net/biosimilars/news/safety-study-forsubcutaneous-epoetin-alfa-biosimilar- xxxd2011xxx -epoetin-alfa-hexalabseamed-suspended
bouchet jl, brunet p, canaud b, chanliau j, combe c, deray g, et al.
société de néphrologie, société francophone de dialyse, société de
néphrologie pédiatrique; société francophone de dialyse; société de
néphrologie pédiatrique. [position statements regarding usage of
biosimilars of epoetins. position paper of the société de néphrologie,
société francophone de dialyse, and société de néphrologie pédiatrique]. nephrol ther. 2009;5(1):61-6.
covic a, cannata-andia j, cancarini g, coppo r, frazão jm,
goldsmith d, et al. biosimilars and biopharmaceuticals: what the
nephrologists need to know—a position paper by the era-edta
council. nephrol dial transplant. 2008;23(12):3731-7.
european medicines agency. assessment report for  xxxd2011xxx 
 xxxd2011xxx . nonproprietary name:  xxxd2011xxx . available from:
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_gb/document_library/epar__scientific_discussion/human/000725/wc500053615.pdf
weigang-köhler k, vetter a, thyroff-friesinger u. hx575, recombinant human  xxxd2011xxx , for the treatment of chemotherapy-associated aymptomatic anaemia in patients with solid tumours. onkologie.
2009;32(4):168-74.
tzekova v, mihaylov g, elezovic i, koytchev r;  xxxd2013xxx 
oncology study group. therapeutic effects of  xxxd2013xxx  in the
treatment of chemotherapy-induced anaemia. curr med res opin.
2009;25(7):1689-97.
del giglio a, eniu a, ganea-motan d, topuzov e, lubenau h. xm02
is superior to placebo and equivalent to neupogen in reducing the
duration of severe neutropenia and the incidence of febrile neutropenia
in cycle 1 in breast cancer patients receiving docetaxel/doxorubicin
chemotherapy. bmc cancer. 2008;8:332.
gatzemeier u, ciuleanu t, dediu m, ganea-motan e, lubenau h,

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

del giglio a. xm02, the first biosimilar g-csf, is safe and effective
in reducing the duration of severe neutropenia and incidence of
febrile neutropenia in patients with small cell or non-small cell lung
cancer receiving platinum-based chemotherapy. j thorac oncol.
2009;4(6): 736-40.
engert a, griskevicius l, zyuzgin y, lubenau h, del giglio a. xm02,
the first granulocyte  xxxg526xxx  biosimilar, is safe and
effective in reducing the duration of severe neutropenia and incidence
of febrile neutropenia in patients with non-hodgkin lymphoma receiving chemotherapy. leuk lymphoma. 2009;50(3):374-9.
engert a, del giglio a, bias p, lubenau h, gatzemeier u, heigener d.
incidence of febrile neutropenia and myelotoxicity of chemotherapy:
a meta-analysis of biosimilar g-csf studies in breast cancer, lung
cancer, and non-hodgkin’s lymphoma. onkologie 2009;32:599-604
10.1159/000232580)
european medicines agency. assessment report for biograstim.
available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_gb/document_
library/epar_-_summary_for_the_public/human/000826/
wc500053902.pdf.
waller cf, semiglazov vf, tjulandin s, bentsion d, chan s, challand
r. a phase iii randomized equivalence study of biosimilar  xxxd2106xxx 
versus amgen  xxxd2106xxx  in patients receiving myelosuppressive
chemotherapy for breast cancer. onkologie. 2010;33(10):504-11.
www.gitmo.net/biosimilars_ in%20mobilization%20of%20unrelated%20and%20related%20donors.pdf.
ww.worldmarrow.org/fileadmin/.../cwg/.../cwg_minutes_032009.pdf
niederwieser-d, schmitz s. biosimilar agents in oncology/haematology: from approval to practice. eur j haematol. 2011;86(4):277-88.
east midlands guidelines, www.inrcancernetwork.nhs.uk
publicover a, richardson ds, hill k, et al. use of biosimilar  xxxd2106xxx  (gcsf) for peripheral blood progenitor
cell mobilisation prior to autologous stem cell transplant: a single centre experience. bone marrow transplant 2010;45(suppl 2): xxxd2777xxx .
gastl g, geissler d, geissler k, lang a, ludwig h, et al. asho position paper on biosimilars. memo 2009;2:232-233.
atkins h. hematopoietic sct for the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
bone marrow transplant. 2010;45(12):1671-81.
wiȩ xxxg791xxx  a, ahmed i, scigalla p, koytchev r. switching  xxxd2011xxx  and
 xxxd2013xxx  in patients with renal anemia on dialysis: posthoc analysis. adv ther. 2010;27(12):941-52.
lonnemann g, wrenger e. biosimilar  xxxd2013xxx  in nephrology - a
single-dialysis center experience. clin nephrol. 2011;75(1):59-62.
mellstedt h, niederwieser d, ludwig h. the challenge of biosimilars.
ann oncol. 2008;19(3):411-9.
who. guidance on inn. available from: http://www.who.int/medicines/services/inn/innquidance/en/index.htmlwho.

concerns about the use of biosimilar granulocyte colony-stimulating factors for
the mobilization of stem cells in normal donors: position of the world marrow
donor association
bronwen e. shaw,1,2 dennis l. confer,3 william y. hwang,4,5,6 derwood h. pamphilon,7
and michael a. pulsipher8,9
1

anthony nolan, ucl cancer centre, london, uk; 2haemato-oncology, royal marsden nhs foundation trust, london, uk;
national marrow donor program, minneapolis, mn usa; 4singapore general hospital, singapore; 5duke-nus graduate
medical school, singapore; 6singapore cord blood bank, singapore; 7nhs blood and transplant bristol centre, bristol, uk;
8
division of hematology, blood and marrow transplantation, university of utah, usa; 9primary children's medical center, salt
lake city, utah, usa. e-mail: bshaw@doctors.org.uk doi:10.3324/haematol.2011.045740
3

t

he world health organization (who) defines
biosimilars or similar biotherapeutic products
(sbps) as “a biotherapeutic product which is similar
in terms of quality, safety and efficacy to an already
licensed reference biotherapeutic product (rbp)”.1 as the
patents for several of the rbp have recently expired, there
has been a surge of interest in developing sbp to broaden
access to these drugs through increased global availability
and reduced cost. however, manufacturing processes for
rbp remain proprietary and, therefore, sbp are manufac-

942

tured using separately developed and similarly proprietary processes. thus, despite demonstration of similar
efficacy for primary licensing indications, there may be
differences in their ultimate clinical efficacy, adverse
event profile and immunogenicity. because of these possible differences, late-effects may also vary.
two ‘branded’ versions (rbp) of recombinant g-csf
are available internationally: granocyte (lenograstim,
chugai, tokyo, japan) and neupogen ( xxxd2106xxx , amgen,
vienna, austria). their licensed indications include:

haematologica | 2011; 96(7)

