glycogen phosphorylase activation by two different alpha 1-adrenergic receptor subtypes:  xxxd2601xxx  selectively stimulates a putative alpha 1-adre...  we compared the effects of  xxxd2601xxx  on alpha 1-adrenergic receptor-mediated phosphorylase activation in rat hepatocytes and rabbit aorta. although  xxxd2601xxx  is a potent agonist in activating phosphorylase of rabbit aorta, it had little effect in rat hepatocytes. using the phenoxybenzamine inactivation method, we found that the quantitative relationship between 125i-be2254 (125i-be) binding capacity and maximal norepinephrine-stimulated phosphorylase activation was nonlinear in rabbit aorta, whereas it was linear in rat hepatocytes. the potency of  xxxd2601xxx  in inhibiting specific 125i-be binding is significantly (p less than 0.05) higher in rabbit aorta (kd, 96.4 +/- 7.7 microm), compared with rat hepatocytes (kd, 283 +/- 16 microm). however, these quantitative differences could not fully explain the blunted [ca2+]c and phosphorylase responses to  xxxd2601xxx  in rat hepatocytes. treatment with chlorethylclonidine dose dependently suppressed 125i-be binding sites and norepinephrine-induced phosphorylase activation in rat hepatocytes, whereas in rabbit aorta it resulted in only a 31% decrease in 125i-be binding sites, with little effect on phosphorylase activation. furthermore, alpha 1-adrenergic receptor-mediated cellular events of phosphatidylinositol (pi) hydrolysis and phosphorylase activation were unaffected by the removal of extracellular ca2+ in rat hepatocytes, whereas both responses were markedly attenuated in rabbit aorta. the results indicate that two different alpha 1-adrenergic receptor subtypes activate glycogen phosphorylase, through different mechanisms for increasing [ca2+]c in the two systems. in rat hepatocytes, alpha 1 receptors are closely linked to pi hydrolysis and ca2+ release from intracellular stores and cause phosphorylase activation. in rabbit aorta, on the other hand, activation of alpha 1 receptors increases [ca2+]c by ca2+ influx from the extracellular fluid as well as by ca2+ release, and both pi hydrolysis and phosphorylase activation are caused mainly by the ca2+ entry.  xxxd2601xxx  interacts with both chlorethylclonidine-sensitive and -insensitive alpha 1 receptor subtypes but selectively stimulates the alpha 1 receptor subtype that closely couples with the ca2+ influx.