review article

the pharmacology

of  xxxd1870xxx 

peter w. stacpoole
 xxxd1870xxx 
(dca) exerts multiple effects on pathways of intermediary
metabolism. it stimulates peripheral glucose
utilization and inhibits gluconeogeneis, thereby reducing hyperglycemia in animals and humans with diabetes mellitus. it
inhibits lipogenesis and cholesterolgenesis,
thereby decreasing circulating lipid and lipoprotein levels in short-term studies
in patients with acquired or hereditary
disorders of lipoprotein metabolism.
by stimulating the activity of pyruvate
dehydrogenase,
dca facilitates oxidation of lactate and decreases morbidity in acquired and congenital forms of lactic
acidosis. the drug improves cardiac output and left ventricular
mechanical efficiency under conditions of myocardial
ischemia or failure, probably by facilitating myocardial metabolism of carbohydrate and lactate as opposed to fat. dca may
also enhance regional lactate removal and restoration of brain function in experimental
states of cerebral ischemia. dca
appears to inhibit its own metabolism, which may influence the duration of its pharmacologic actions and lead to toxicity.
dca can cause a reversible peripheral neuropathy that may be related to thiamine deficiency and may be ameliorated or
prevented with thiamine supplementation.
other toxic effects of dca may be species-specific
and reflect marked
interspecies
variation in pharmacokinetics.
despite its potential toxicity and limited clinical experience,
dca and its
derivatives may prove to be useful in probing regulatory aspects of intermediary
metabolism and in the acute or chronic
treatment of several metabolic disorders.
0 1989 by w.8. saunders company.

t

he first english-language
summary of the pharmacologic and therapeutic effects of  xxxd1870xxx 
(dca) was published in 1969.’ since then, considerable
work has been accomplished in elucidating the mechanisms
of action, toxicology, and clinical potential of this unusual
drug.’ it is fitting, therefore, to review its progress at this
time.
the pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx , its salts, analogs, and derivatives, has been studied for many years. the
utility
of these compounds
as escharotics,3’4
food
preservatives,’ and lipotrophic substance#* were among the
first properties accorded clinical potential. however, the
principle stimulus for pharmacologic research on dca arose
from a 1955 patent by krebs and krebs’” in which chlorinated acetic acids were used to synthesize various gluconic
acid diakylamino acetates. one of these, d-gluconodimethylamino acetate, was reported to be a naturally occurring
substance with vitaminlike properties, and was designated
vitamin bls, or pangamic acid.” subsequently, various domestic and foreign commercial preparations of  xxxd2716xxx ,,
became widely distributed and numerous biologic and therapeutic properties were attributed to them.” analysis of these
preparations, however, soon disclosed many to be mixtures of
sodium gluconate, glycine, and diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx ,” and attention focused on the  xxxd1870xxx  salt as the presumed pharmacologically active moiety of
pangamic acid. thereafter, with few exceptions, most investigations were conducted with the rather complex diisopro-

from the departments of medicine (division of endocrinology
and metabolism) and pharmacology, university of florida. college
of medicine, gainesville.
address reprint requests to peter w. starpoole. phd. md,
departments of medicine (division of endocrinology and metabolism) and pharmacology, university of florida cortege of medicine, gainesville. fl 32610.
6 i989 by w.b. saunders company.
0026-0495/89/381!-0015$03.00/0
1124

pylammonium salt of dca, without attempting to discern
pharmacologic or toxicologic properties of the individual
ions. however, in 1970, while attempting to confirm earlier
work” on certain antidiabetic properties of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx , stacpoole and feltsi determined that
these effects were due entirely to its acid moiety. consequently, most subsequent research on dca has utilized it as
the more simple sodium salt.
physicochemical

properties

sodium dca is a bitter-tasting, odorless, white compound
with a molecular weight of 151 daltons. the dissociation
constant (ka) of the free acid in aqueous solution is 5.50 x
lo-’ and its pka is 1.26.15the sodium salt is hydroscopic but
otherwise stable in both solid and aqueous states. many
sources of  xxxd1870xxx  exist, from which the sodium
salt may readily be synthesized. solutions of dca for
parenteral administration in humans must be sterilized by
filtration, rather than by heating, to avoid decomposition of
the compound and liberation of hydrochloric acid (baumgartner t, curry s, personal communication). when prepared by
sterile filtration, aqueous preparations of dca have a ph
range of approximately 5 to 7 and are stable for at least one
year when refrigerated.
pharmacodynamics
carbohydrate

and lactate

metabolism

early sfudie? indicated that chronic administration of
diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  did not alter hepatic
or muscle glycogen or blood glucose in fed or fasted animals.
in 1961, however, hoffman and paulshock” discovered
several alpha, alpha-substituted acetic acid derivatives, including dca, lowered glucose levels in depancreatized, diabetic
dogs. a year later, lorini and cimani3 reported that diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  strikingly reduced hyperglycemia in alloxan diabetic rats but had no effect on blood glucose
in normal rats. they also demonstrated that this salt demetabolism, vol38,

no 11 (november), 1989: pp 1124- 1144

pharmacology

of  xxxd1870xxx 

creased glycosuria and raised the respiratory quotient of
diabetic animals without changing hepatic or muscle glycogen content or glucose uptake by diaphragmatic muscle.
these workers were unable to establish the site(s) of action of
the compound and did not investigate the metabolic effects of
its constituent ions. at the same time, vailate and rabassini’*
administered 200 mg/d orally or 50 mg/d subcutaneously of
the diisopropylammonium salt for 20 days to patients with
mild type ii diabetes and observed slight reduction in
hyperglycemia and improvement in glucose tolerance. subsequently, stacpoole and feltsi confirmed the selective glucoselowering action of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  in
alloxan diabetic rats and showed that both this compound
and the sodium salt of its acid moiety, dca, stimulated
glucose oxidation to carbon dioxide in vitro in skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue derived from diabetic, but not from
nondiabetic, animals. dca also inhibited long chain fatty
acid oxidation and decreased intracellular citrate accumulation in muscle of diabetic rats.14.19
it is now well established that dca is both orally and
parenterally effective in reducing hyperglycemia in chemor surgically’5*24induced experimental diabetes.
although the drug may also transiently decrease blood
glucose levels in nondiabetic, fasted animals,25~26it does not
alter glycemia in healthy, fed animals.‘3*‘4the blood glucoselowering effect observed in  xxxd3249xxx  or alloxan diabetes
is associated with decreases in ketonemia and ketonuria20*2’
and a significant improvement in short-term survival in
ketotic rats.”
there are several mechanisms by which dca may lower
blood glucose concentrations in diabetes. first, dca stimulates glucose oxidation in peripheral tissues. this has been
demonstrated most convincingly in excised preparations of
cardiac27,28and skeleta1’4.‘9.27muscle obtained from normal
or diabetic animals or in tissues incubated with high concentrations of ketone bodies.27 in addition, roussille et a129
demonstrated by indirect calorimetry that oral administration of dca to healthy subjects prior to a glucose load
acutely increased peripheral glucose oxidation and decreased
both hepatic glucose storage and peripheral fatty acid
oxidation without changing glucose tolerance. both these
and other30-33studies suggest that dca may deplete hepatic
and muscle glycogen levels in vivo, although this has not been
observed in isolated hepatocytes.34 indeed, sobrino et a135
reported that dca stimulated glycogenesis from [u“c]glucose in adipocytes and that this effect was additive
with that of insulin. moreover, dca preserves or augments
skeletal muscle glycogen content at rest36or under conditions
of exercise” or trauma,36 in part by increasing tissue levels of
glucose-6-phosphate, an allosteric activator of glycogen synthase ( xxxg909xxx   xxxg2386xxx .1 1).36 glucose-6-phosphate concentrations
are reduced in livers of animals treated with dca,33 however. which may explain the apparent discordant effects of
the drug on glycogen metabolism in different tissues.
it was originally suggestedi that the glucose-lowering
activity of dca in diabetes was attributed in part to
inhibition of fatty acid utilization by muscle. this hypothesis
was based on the proposal developed by randle et al” of the
existence of a reciprocal relationship in muscle between fat
ical~y1420~23

1125

and carbohydrate utilization. according to this so-called
glucose-fatty acid cycle, cells exposed to high circulating and
tissue levels of  xxxd2154xxx , such as occur in diabetes or
starvation, oxidize them in preference to glucose. the resulting elevation of intracellular concentrations of fatty acyl
coa and acetyl coa derivatives would lead in turn to
accumulation of citrate, a known allosteric inhibitor of a key
 xxxg1053xxx , phosphofructokinase ( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx .1 1).39by
suppressing the accelerated fatty acid oxidation in muscle,
dca could thus reduce citrate levels and reactivate glycolysis. such an effect might explain the selective action of dca
on tissue derived from diabetic, but not from normal,
animals. consistent with this hypothesis were experiments
demonstrating that its glucose-lowering effect in experimental diabetes could be correlated temporally with a significant
fall in the elevated citrate content of hearts and diaphragms,
while the drug did not change citrate levels in normal
muscle.” in addition, fructose-2,6_bisphosphate, an activator
of phosphofructokinase, is increased in adiopcytes incubated
with dca.35
it is now clear that the improvement in hyperglycemia
induced by dca cannot be attributed solely to an effect on
tissue citrate. in 1973 whitehouse and randle4’ made the
important discovery that dca stimulated the activity of
pyruvate dehydrogenase ( xxxg1711xxx   xxxg1712xxx   xxxg1713xxx   xxxg2083xxx ), the mitochondrial
enzyme catalyzing the oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl coa.
this effect, which occurs rapidly upon in vitro addition of
dca to isolated mitochondria, whole cells or isolated organs
or following parenteral administration in vivo, can be demonstrated in brain,4’-4* heart,28v30.40*49-6’
skeletal muscle,62.67
liver,26j’q*.‘*kidney,s"."-'9-*0
adipose,50**'j2
lactating
mam_
mary gland,‘-’ platelet-enriched plasma,84 and fibroblasts.85~s9
the concentrations of dca required for half-maximal activation of the dehydrogenase in intact rat heart and rat heart
mitochondria are approximately 100 pmol/l and 4 pmol/l,
respectively.40 maximum stimulation of enzyme activity by
dca in intact cells or tissues is usually achieved at a
concentration of 1 mmol/l. of all tissues examined, only the
enzymes associated with the testis” and small intestine” may
be insensitive to activation by the drug. several other
halogenated carboxylic analogs and derivatives of dca also
increase pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, although most are
less potent than dca!9.92 this may be related in part to the
fact that dca readily enters mitochondria via the pyruvate
carrier system93-95and is concentrated in the matrix water of
mitochondria,53 enabling it to rapidly achieve intramitochondrial concentrations required to inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. dca and other substrates of the pyruvate
translocator compete with pyruvate and may inhibit its
uptake by mitochondria.93.95
pyruvate dehydrogenase is a multienzyme complex located on the inner mitochondrial membrane (fig 1). the
three enzymes of the complex catalyze the stepwise conversion of pyruvate to acetyl coa and carbon dioxide, with the
first step being the irreversible decarboxylation of pyruvate.
pyruvate dehydrogenase is regulated by substrate activation, end product inhibition, and reversible phosphorylation.5’,52196-99
in the presence of mg++ and atp, pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase ( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx .99) phosphorylates and

peter w. stacpoole

1126

qynw.1.

+ md+

+  xxxd1739xxx  w

ac~tyl-scoa

+ nadh+ + h+ + co2

fig 1. the pyruvate dehydrogenase ipdh;  xxxg1711xxx   xxxg1712xxx   xxxg1713xxx   xxxg2083xxx ) system.
the complex consists of three enzymes: pyruvate decarboxylase
(e,: ec 1.2.4.11, dihydrolipoyl transacetylase (e2;  xxxg26xxx   xxxg34xxx   xxxg35xxx   xxxg122xxx   xxxg440xxx   xxxg508xxx   xxxg513xxx   xxxg519xxx   xxxg640xxx   xxxg765xxx   xxxg871xxx   xxxg2195xxx   xxxg2196xxx .121 and
dihydrolypoyl dehydrogenase (e,;  xxxg641xxx ) and four cofactors:
thiamine pyrophosphate (tppl  xxxd2494xxx  (lip&, slipsh), ravine
adenine dinucleotide (fad), and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(nad+, nadh). pyruvate dehydrogenase is regulated by end
product inhibition (increased ratios of acetyl coaicoa and nadhi
nad+) and reversible phosphorylation, in which the phosphorylated enzyme is inactive. dca inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase ( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx .89) and maintains pyruvate dehydrogenase in its
unphosphoryleted, catalytically active form.

inactivates the dehydrogenase, while pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase ( xxxg766xxx   xxxg1192xxx   xxxg1611xxx   xxxg1613xxx   xxxg1721xxx .43) reverses this inhibition.
dca stimulates pyruvate dehydrogenase indirectly by inhibiting the kinase and thus increasing the proportion of
pyruvate dehydrogenase in its dephosphorylated, catalytically active form. 40950.79
the nature of the inhibition in
cardia? and renal9 tissue is reported to be either noncompetitive or competitive with respect to atp, depending on the
adp concentration. pratt and roche79 have suggested that
neither pyruvate nor dca binds to the free kinase but,
rather, to the e.adp reaction intermediate and thus synergizes with adp, a true competitive inhibitor of the enzyme.
dca may stimulate pyruvate dehydrogenase activity by
mechanisms other than kinase inhibition.
evans and
stacpoolez6 reported that repeated drug administration to
nondiabetic rats produced a progressive increase in the
activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase observed in liver mitochondria. the rate of return of enzyme activity to pretreatment
levels was inversely proportional to the number of drug doses
given. this effect was not blocked by the protein synthesis
inhibitors cycloheximide and  xxxd3041xxx , suggesting that
dca did not act by stimulating enzyme synthesis. it is
possible that dca stabilizes pyruvate dehydrogenase and
retards its rate of degradation, but this hypothesis has not
been evaluated.
stimulation of phosphofructokinase and pyruvate dehydrogenase affords a reasonable explanation for the ability of
dca to promote glycolysis under conditions, such as diabe-

tes and starvation, in which this pathway is inhibited.38
however, pyruvate dehydrogenase also facilitates the removal of lactate and alanine that are in equilibrium with
pyruvate. activation of the enzyme by dca decreases the
release of these gluconeogenic precursors from peripheral
and enhances their oxidative metabolism
tissues 24~25~65~9’~‘oo-‘07
by liver. thus, dca interrupts the cori and alanine cycles by
which lactate and alanine released from the periphery are
utilized for hepatic glucose synthesis (fig 2). dca also
inhibits gluconeogenesis from lactate, but not from pyruvate,
in renal cortical slices and perfused kidneys from both fed or
fasted diabetic and nondiabetic rats.79 the inhibitory effect
of dca on hepatic and renal glucose synthesis appears to be
independent
of its stimulation
of pyruvate dehydrogenase. 70~79~‘08
thus, there is evidence that dca may directly
suppress gluconeogenesis by intrahepatic mechanisms other
than by interrupting the cori and alanine cycles. in isolated
hepatocytes’ws”oit inhibits glucose synthesis from precursors
(eg, lactate, alanine, glycerate) that enter the gluconeogenic
pathway before the level of triose phosphate dehydrogenase
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase;  xxxg127xxx   xxxg128xxx   xxxg129xxx   xxxg130xxx   xxxg132xxx   xxxg133xxx   xxxg134xxx   xxxg135xxx   xxxg136xxx   xxxg138xxx   xxxg140xxx   xxxg141xxx   xxxg861xxx   xxxg862xxx .12)
that catalyzes the reduction of 1,3-diphosphoglycerate to
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
the inhibitory effect of dca
at this site may be mediated by a decrease in the availability
of reducing equivalents (nadh), generated in the cytoplasm or mitochondria, required for the triose phosphate
dehydrogenase-catalyzed
step. this action of the drug is
most evident in vitro when hepatocytes from fasted animals
are incubated in bicarbonate-free media.7’~‘w~“’another
potential inhibitory site of action by dca occurs at the level
of  xxxg1674xxx  ( xxxg1674xxx ), a rate-determining
enzyme of gluconeogenesis that catalyzes the conversion of
pyruvate to oxaloacetate.  xxxg1674xxx  is inhibited
in both liver’12and kidney” by oxalate, a metabolite of dca.
dca does not reduce hyperglycemia by augmenting
glycosuria, ” inhibiting intestinal glucose absoption,20 or
directly promoting glucose transport across cell membranes.
although hexose transport in swiss 3t3 mouse fibroblasts
was reported to be enhanced by dca,“’ this could not be
replicated using cultured 3t3-ll mouse adipocytes, the

i
---

blood
i

lactate*-

fig 2. the lactate (cori) and alanine cycles. dca interrupts
both cycles by activating pyruvate dehydrogenase in liver and
peripheral tissues. thereby decreasing availability of 3-carbon
substrates for gluconeogenesis. in addition, dca may directly
inhibit hepatic glucose formation at the levels of pyruvete carboxylase ( xxxg1386xxx   xxxg1674xxx   xxxg1677xxx  .l) and  xxxg861xxx 
( xxxg127xxx   xxxg128xxx   xxxg129xxx   xxxg130xxx   xxxg132xxx   xxxg133xxx   xxxg134xxx   xxxg135xxx   xxxg136xxx   xxxg138xxx   xxxg140xxx   xxxg141xxx   xxxg861xxx   xxxg862xxx .9).

pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx 

hexose transport system of which is severalfold more sensitive than the fibroblast line to insulin and other known
transport modulators (frost s, personal communication).
furthermore, clark et a136showed that dca causes a small
but significant inhibition of insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by rat skeletal muscle, probably due to impaired glucose
phosphorylation. dca also does not lower blood glucose by
stimulating insulin secretion. this has been demonstrated in
the isolated perfused rat pancreas or islet suspensions (levin
s, stacpoole p, unpublished observations”4.“5), in insulindeficient diabetic animals, in which dca reduces hyperg~y~~~~~14.17~20~24~i16
and in nondiabetic dogs, in which insulin
secretion was prevented by administration of somatostatin.‘05
in these latter experiments, diamond et al”’ showed that
dca reduced glucose levels by increasing peripheral glucose
clearance and by inhibiting hepatic glucose output. the
effect on hepatic glucose production was due both to a
decrease in the release of alanine and lactate from the
periphery and to a direct, intrahepatic inhibition of glucose
synthesis. in fasted dogs not receiving somatostatin, however,
the inhibitory effect of dca on gluconeogenesis is blunted by
a decrease in insulin secretion’07*“7 and an increase in the
insulin:glucagon ratio66*‘08that presumably are initiated by
the hypoglycemic action of the drug.
recent experiments by clark et a136have questioned the
relative importance of various tissue beds in mediating
dca-stimulated glucose clearance. these investigators reported that dca increased glucose oxidation and glycogenesis but markedly impaired insulin-stimulated glycolysis and
lactate production in excised rat skeletal muscle preparations. although the mechanism for this inhibitory effect
could not be determined, other evidence indicates that dca
may suppress glycolysis by decreasing the activities of
hexokinase and pyruvate kinase.33 it is possible, therefore,
that “insulinized” tissues, in contrast to those present in
starvation or diabetes, behave in a qualitatively different
manner to dca, viz glucose utilization. alternatively, the in
vivo data obtained in animalslm and humans2’ indicating that
dca accelerates plasma glucose clearance reflect changes in
tissues other than skeletal muscle.
short-term clinical investigations have substantiated the
glucose-lowering action of dca.‘8,“8 in patients with type ii
diabetes mellitus, oral administration for 1 week of approximately 50 mg/kg/d dca significantly reduces hyperglycemia and causes striking decreases in circulating lactate and
alanine concentrations.“8 lactate and alanine levels fall
within hours after the first drug dose, reach nadirs 50% to
80% below basal within three to four days, and remain
suppressed over 2 weeks after treatment is stopped. blood
lactate is also decreased by dca in patients with type ii
diabetes treated with a biguanide.‘lg in healthy subjects
fasted overnight’20*‘2’ or in patients with coronary artery
disease but normal systemic acid-base status,12’ intravenous
administration of dca has no effect on blood glucose but
causes dose-dependent reductions in lactate levels over a 1 to
50 mg/kg dose range. when five 50 mg/kg infusions, each
separated by two hours, were administered to normal subjects, lactate concentrations decreased up to 75% and remained below pretreatment levels up to 24 hours.‘20 at this

1127

dose level, dca completely prevented the expected postprandial rise in blood lactate.
several reports have demonstrated beneficial effects of
dca in various types of experimentally induced or clinical
lactic acidosis. dca prevents or ameliorates hyperlactatemia produced in animals by exercise,3’,37’23diabetes,‘24q’25
endotoxin,‘26 sepsis,66.67.‘27  xxxd2903xxx ,‘28-‘34 hepatic
insufficiency,‘34s’35epinephrine,‘30s’36 or hypoxia.‘30~‘37“42in
dogs rendered acidemic by diabetes and  xxxd2903xxx , dca
improved intracellular and systemic ph, reduced splanchnic
lactate output and circulating lactate levels, and increased
short-term survival, compared with animals treated with
intravenous sodium bicarbonate.‘34 the reduction in circulating lactate concentration in rats was associated with sparing
of muscle glycogen content and increased exercise capacity
at near maximal work load.37
in open clinical trials, dca also improves morbidity in
most patients with congenital or acquired forms of lactic
acidosis. lactic acidosis presenting in infants and young
children often reflects an inborn error of metabolism due to
relative or absolute deficiency in one or more enzymes of
glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, fatty acid metabolism, the krebs
cycle, or the respiratory chain.‘43-‘45more than 20 infants
and children with lactic acidosis have been treated with dca
(table 1).84,88,'46-'56 in most cases a specific enzyme defect
was not identified, but naito et a115’have exploited the ability
of dca to maximally stimulate the e, subunit of pyruvate
dehydrogenase to screen cultured fibroblasts for defects in
this enzyme.
pediatric patients treated with dca have received oral or
intravenous doses between 15 and 200 mg/kg/d for up to
three years without reports of adverse drug effects. evidence
of a blood lactate-lowering action of the drug was demonstrated in a majority of patients (91%) of whom five were
deficient in the e, (pyruvate decarboxylase) portion of the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and one was deficient in
the e, (dihydrolipoyl transacetylase) (case 21; robinson b,
personal communication). hyperlactatemia decreased in the
e,-deficient patient, despite the fact that in vitro addition of
dca to her cultured fibroblasts failed to stimulate pyruvate
dehydrogenase. most of the remaining 15 patients who had a
metabolic response to dca had no enzyme deficiency
identified. in some subjects elevated lactate levels in cerebral
spinal fluid also fell following dca treatment.‘4g*‘5”53 in one
patient, resolution of the lactic acidosis by dca was associated with increased linear growth’47 and, in two patients,
with temporary improvement of their preexisting psychomotor retardation.‘48*‘50in theory, dca might be expected to be
useless if administered to a subject with a congenital or
acquired enzyme block other than at the pyruvate dehydrogenase-catalyzed step. however, two patients showing a lactatelowering response had normal pyruvate dehydrogenase activity but reduced activities of  xxxg1674xxx  and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.
experience with dca on the outcome of approximately 45
adult patients of lactic acidosis has been similar, despite
variable doses and dose intervals. in three extreme cases,
irsigler et al’58’5gadministered up to 34 g of dca intravenously (including the first 4 g as a bolus) over a few hours.

1128

peter w. stacpodle

table 1. infants or children with lactic acidosis treated
case
no.

sex

age

etiology

with  xxxd1870xxx 

drug dose

re5o0n=+

dustion
of treatment

reference

1

m

12yr

unknown

yes

>_15 mg/kg/d

2

m

1.5yr

unknown

yes

5 150 mglkgid

3

m

>5 mo

pc, pepck

yes

-200

mglkgld

148

4

m

>5 mo

pc, pepck

yes

-200

mgikgld

148

5

f

3.5 mo

cyto c

no

6

f

yes

530 mg/kg/d

f

3 yr
1.5 d

pdh

7

unknown

yes

50 mglkg x 2

8

f

3.5 mo

unknown

no

50mg/kg

9

m

12 d

unknown

yes

50 mg/kg/d

x 2

10

f

1 mo

unknown

yes

50 mgikgld x 2

2d

156

11

f

7d

pdh

no

50 mglkg

id

156

12

m

newborn

unknown

yes

50 w/kg/d

4d

13

m

10.5 mo

pdh

yes

14

m

sne

yes

15

m

1 yr
5d

50 mglkg
550 mg/kg/d

unknown

yes

5 150 mg/kg/d

10d

151

16

m

15 yr

unknown

yes

5 150 mg/kg/d

25 d

151

17

?

5mo

pdh

yes

560

18

?

pdh

yes

30 mg/kg/d

19

m

3 yr
6 mo

unknown

yes

5200

20

f

15 yr

pancreatitis

yes

50 mg/kg/d

21

f

7d

pdh

yes

22

m

15mo

yes

1 yr

147

6mo

146

shulman g, personal

50 mg/kg/d

x 2

10d

26

id

156

id

156

2d

156

150

-l.bmo

142
153

mg/kg/d

22 mo

155
155

mgikgld

3 yr

slonim a, personal

2d

wood e, personal

50 mgfkg x 2

id

personal

50 mg/kg x 4

2d

nyhan w, personal

x 2

communication
observation
communication
abbreviations: pc,  xxxg1674xxx : pepck. phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; cyto c.  xxxg569xxx  oxidase; pdh, pyruvate dehydrogenase;
sne. subacute necrotizing encephalopathy.
*response was defined by at least a 20% fall in blood lactate concentration from the immediate pretreatment value that occurred within six hours of
starting dca therapy.

lactate levels and ph improved in one patient. these dca
doses far excede those given orally or parenterally to any
other human subject. the minimally effective dose of dca
for lactic acidosis is unknown, but both safety and efficacy
have been demonstrated in three open trials’s6~‘60~‘6’
in which
repeated 35 or 50 mg/kg doses were administered to 39 adult
(18 years or older) patients with lactic acidosis. before
treatment about 70% of these subjects had hypotension
(systolic blood pressure 590 mmhg despite administration
of pressors), but almost all had additional possible causes of
their metabolic acidosis, such as sepsis, renal insufficiency, or
hepatic failure. eighty percent of adult patients in these
studies responded to therapy, as defined by at least a 20%
reduction in blood lactate occurring within six hours of
initiating dca treatment. among responders, arterial lactate levels fell an average of about 75%. the lactate nadir
was usually achieved within six hours of starting therapy and
was accompanied by significant improvement in arterial
bicarbonate concentrations and ph.
administration of sodium bicarbonate does not appear to
benefit most patients with lactic acidosis,‘62’” and it is
noteworthy that many subjects refractory to prior alkali
treatment have shown marked improvement in morbidity
following dca therapy.‘5”‘6’ moreover, a recent retrospective analysis of pediatric and aduit patients with lactic
acidosis receiving dca indicates that mean survival time is

considerably prolonged among individuals who show a metabolic response to treatment.ls6 to date, however, no form of
therapy has been unequivocally demonstrated to increase
survival in lactic acidosis, which continues to have a mortality approaching 100% among patients with hypotension.
accordingly, a multicenter controlled, clinical trial is currently in progress to test the hypothesis that treatment of
lactic acidosis with dca significantly decreases mortality.‘67
in this study, adult patients with lactic acidosis are randomly
assigned to receive placebo or dca at a dose and dose
schedule similar to those used earlier.i56*‘6’the initial results
of this trial are not expected for at least three years.
lipid and lipoprotein metabolism

kratzing and windrum6y7 demonstrated lipotrophic properties of chlorinated acetic acid derivatives in animals with
fatty livers induced by choline deficiency. subsequently,
several laboratories reported that diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx , at doses 5250 mg/kg for up to seven days,
protected rats against steatosis induced by carbon
tetrachloride,‘68-‘73 ethanol,‘74 or other hepatotoxins.“’ sporadic investigations’76.‘*4 evaluated very low doses (less than
4 mg/kg/d) of the diisopropylammonium salt in patients
with various forms of liver disease, with minimal results.
increased interest in the effects of dca on lipid metabolism was generated by comparative studies of the drug’s

pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx 

actions in normal and diabetic animals or during myocardial
ischemia. dca impairs oxidation of short and medium chain
 xxxd2154xxx  and ketone bodies in skeletal muscle and in
nonischemic, perfused hearts obtained from normal or diaor in mitochondria isolated from normal
betic animals,‘4~27~28
animals.‘*’ the effect in cardiac tissue may be due to
inhibition of one of more mitochondrial short/medium chain
acyl coa synthetases ( xxxg47xxx   xxxg50xxx   xxxg51xxx   xxxg2223xxx   xxxg2224xxx   xxxg2225xxx .2), with half-maximal
inhibition achieved at approximately 1 to 2 mmol/l dca,
and is independent of the drug’s action on either the
mitochondrial
pyruvate transport system or pyruvate
dehydrogenase.28,‘85 it is likely that dca, rather than one of
its metabolites, is responsible for synthetase inhibition, owing
to the rapidity of the effect. oxidation of long chain fatty
acids is not altered by dca in isolated heart mitochondria,‘s5
but it is inhibited in skeletal muscle’4v27and in isolated or in
situ heart preparations following induction of diabetes2’ or
ischemia.‘@ under these circumstances, myocardial extraction and oxidation of glucose are increased, while fatty acid
uptake and utilization are reduced.
in ketotic diabetic rats, the glucose-lowering effect of
dc4 is accompanied by a decrease in ketonemia and
ketonuria,*‘,*’ despite the fact that dca stimulates ketogenesis in isolated hepatocytes from nondiabetic, starved,“’ or
fed”’ rats and inhibits peripheral ketone body utilization in
both starvation*’ and alloxan-induced diabetic ketoacidosis.2’
these apparent paradoxes have not been resolved. for
example, under conditions in which circulating glucose,
insulin, and glucagon were maintained experimentally at
normal levels in conscious, fasted dogs, dca significantly
reduced arterial concentrations of glycerol and free fatty
acids and also decreased hepatic uptake of glycerol, but not
fatty acid.“’ in other experiments “’ free fatty acid levels fell
with dca administration even as circulating insulin concentrations declined markedly. in contrast, in experimental
diabetes, neither blood glycerol levels nor glycerol release
from adipose tissue is altered by the drug.14 moreover,
although some reports show that dca inhibits lipogenesis in
adipose tissue32*40’88,‘*9
and liver’88~‘90j9’from nondiabetic
rats, others have indicated either no effect on adiposei
synthesis or a stimulatory
or hepatic19* triglyceride
action32,34~b9~76’93
and an increase in the activities of the
regulatory lipogenic enzymes,  xxxg825xxx , and malic enzyme.33.‘94indeed, mariash et a1’95have
demonstrated that dca increases mrna levels of malic
enzyme in rat liver. in general, dca appears to stimulate
lipogenesis during feeding, when the activity of pyruvate
dehydrogenase may be rate-limiting,76 and inhibits lipogenesis during fasting. yet demaugre et a119’have suggested that
dc4’s effect on triglyceride synthesis is best explained by a
balance between activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by
dc4 itself that would stimulate lipogenesis and inhibition of
pyruvate kinase by oxalate,‘96 a dca metabolite, which
would suppress triglyceride formation.
in light of these findings, it would seem reasonable that if a
major effect of dca on fatty acid metabolism was to
stimulate lipid synthesis, chronic administration of the drug
should cause accumulation of fat in the liver and/or stimulate hepatic triglyceride secretion in the form of very low-

1129

density lipoproteins (vldl). yet even at doses of 1 g/kg/
d,33 dca does not increase liver lipid content in normal or
diabetic rats and, as summarized above, may actually inhibit
fatty liver induction. furthermore, studies in hyperlipemic
diabetic23*‘97or obese”* animals and in patients with combined type ii diabetes mellitus and hyperlipoproteinemia”’
clearly demonstrate that short-term, oral administration of
dca significantly decreases circulating triglyceride levels,‘98
although this effect may not be sustained in obese, hyperlipichlorinated
demic rats.‘99 unlike other lipid-lowering
hydrocarbons, *o”dca does not appear to cause peroxisomal
proliferation in liver.33 in hyperlipemic diabetics receiving
approximately 50 mg/kg/d of dca for seven days, serum
triglyceride concentrations decreased over 60% and remained below pretreatment levels more than 2 weeks after
stopping dca. the fall in serum triglyceride was associated
with marked reductions in vldl but in no other circulating
lipoprotein fraction.“* in these subjects, plasma insulin, free
fatty acid, and glycerol levels were unchanged. in contrast,
plasma /3_hydroxybutyrate concentrations rose significantly,
but blood bicarbonate levels were unaffected. similarly, in
patients with lactic acidosis, dca also increases circulating
ketone bodies, even though bicarbonate concentrations and
systemic acid-base status improve.‘6’
denicola et al*” reported that diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  blunted the rise in serum cholesterol and
increased fibrinolytic activity in rabbits fed cholesterolenriched diets. plasma cholesterol also decreases in normal
or alloxan-diabetic dogs23 and both plasma total and vldl
cholesterol concentrations fall in hyperlipemic diabetic patients treated with dca.‘*’ of particular interest was the
finding by moore et a1202of the cholesterol-lowering ability of
the drug in two patients with the receptor-negative form of
homozygous  xxxg1318xxx . in this autosoma1 dominantly transmitted disorder, absence of cellular
receptors for low-density lipoproteins (ldl) markedly retards clearance of ldl from the circulation, leading to
extreme hypercholesterolemia and death from atherosclerosis, usually before the fourth decade.*03 the patients studied
by moore et al*” each received approximately 50 mg/kg/d
of dca orally. after 2 weeks serum total and ldl cholesterol levels fell about 35%, whereas vldl and high-density
cholesterol concentrations remained unchanged. one month
after stopping dca, serum cholesterol levels returned to or
near pretreatment values.
the cholesterol-lowering effect of dca in homozygous
 xxxg1318xxx  is especially striking in light of
the refractoriness of the disease to standard drug therapy.
dca does not alter ldl uptake in cultured fibroblasts
derived from normal subjects or patients with the receptornegative form of homozygous  xxxg1318xxx .204 however, one mechanism that may account, in
part, for the effect of dca in hypercholesterolemic animals
and humans implicates hydroxymethylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx 
(hmg coa) reductase ( xxxg1060xxx ), the endoplasmic
reticulum enzyme catalyzing the rate-controlling step in
cholesterol synthesis205 dca inhibits  xxxg1060xxx 
activity in rat liver”* and human leukocytes,206,207probably
by decreasing both the catalytic activity of the enzyme and

1130

the total mass of enzyme protein (19’ and unpublished
observations). a metabolite of dca, glyoxylate, noncompetitively inhibits rat liver  xxxg1060xxx , with a ki
tenfold lower than that for dca.19’ studies with isolated
liver microsomes demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of
dca on the reductase required preincubating the drug with
microsomes, whereas inhibition of the enzyme with glyoxylate occurred immediately upon its addition to microsomal
suspensions. analogs of dca that did not undergo microsomal conversion to glyoxylate failed to inhibit hmg coa
reductase.“’
these results may be particularly relevant to one of the
familial hypercholesterolemic patients treated with dca
who was subsequently found to overproduce cholesterol in
the untreated state.*08 inhibition at the reductase-catalyzed
step alone, however, is unlikely to account entirely for the
cholesterol-lowering action of the drug because competitive
inhibitors of  xxxg1060xxx  do not alter cholesterol
concentrations in homozygous patients lacking  xxxg1318xxx 
activity. *09it is conceivable that dca may inhibit one or
more steps proximal to  xxxg1060xxx  and common to
both fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis. because citrate,
derived from the mitochondria, is considered to be the
precursor of the acetyl coa moiety utilized in the cytoplasm
for the synthesis of fatty acid and cholesterol,“’ it could be
argued that the citrate-lowering ability of dca could
explain its inhibitory effects on serum lipid and lipoprotein
levels. indeed, cytoplasmic citrate acts as a positive modulator of the activity of acetyl coa carboxylase ( xxxg1386xxx   xxxg1674xxx   xxxg1677xxx .2),
the rate-limiting
enzyme in the fatty acid synthetic
pathway.2” however, dca decreases tissue citrate concentrations mainly in starvation and diabetes, conditions in
which hepatic  xxxg1060xxx  activity, lipogenesis,
and cholesterolgenesis are already suppressed.205 an alternative possibility is that dca may inhibit one or more enzymes,
such as  xxxg39xxx , that may be rate-limiting for both
lipid and sterol synthesis. this hypothesis remains to be
tested.
protein and amino acid metabolism
considering the perturbations dca exerts on regulatory
enzymes and pathways of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, it is not surprising that it also influences the synthesis
and utilization of proteins and amino acids. such actions
were foreshadowed by early pharmacologic studies’69 in
which diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  maintained or
restored normal hepatic and circulating protein concentrations in animals poisoned with carbon tetrachloride. later,
the discovery that dca stimulated pyruvate dehydrogenase
activity, 4o thereby shunting alanine from biosynthetic to
oxidative pathways, focused attention on the physiologic
consequences of this effect. by inhibiting alanine release
from skeletal muscle and other peripheral sites, dca limits
provision of an important gluconeogenic substrate. although
during fasting or in diabetes the peripheral release of other
gluconeogenic
amino acids may increase upon dca
administration,9’~‘w*‘04these, too, may have limited availability as glucose precursors due to the drug’s direct inhibitory
effects on glucose synthesis.7’*‘09~“’

peter w. stacpoole

dca increases circulating levels of the branched chain
amino acids valine, leucine, and isoleucine’a.‘m and has
complex effects on their intracellular metabolism. in skeletal
muscle, dca inhibits
branched
chain amino acid
oxidation.‘w2’2-2’4 because muscle is considered to be the
major site of branched chain amino acid removal, this effect
could contribute to the dca-induced changes in their
circulating levels. snell and dufflo postulated that dca
inhibits branched chain amino acid uptake by skeletal
muscle by decreasing the intracellular availability of pyruvate required for their transamination. in cardiac muscle and
liver, however, dca markedly stimulates leucine oxidation,
although its mechanism of action differs in these tissues. in
the heart, sans et a1215showed that dca promotes both
leucine and valine catabolism by stimulating the activity of
the branched chain cr-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (ec
1.2.4.4) that is rate-limiting in cardiac tissue for the oxidation of branched chain amino acids.2’6 others then demonstrated that dca inhibited branched chain cr-keto acid
dehydrogenase kinase, which inactivates the dehydrogenase
by phosphorylation, in heart 56*2’7
but not in skeletal muscle.*”
thus, the effects of dca on the oxidation of branched chain
amino acid oxidation in heart and of pyruvate in all tissues
are similar, ie, stimulation of the rate-limiting ezyme in an
oxidative pathway by inhibition of a kinase-mediated phosphorylation reaction.
the primary mechanism by which dca promotes hepatic
leucine oxidation in liver differs from that in heart. transamination is the rate-determining step in leucine catabolism in
liver.*19 dca stimulates leucine oxidation by its conversion
to glyoxylate, which serves as an amino group acceptor for
transamination of leucine by an aminotransferase-catalyzed
reaction.2z0,22’ as in cardiac tissue, dca also increases
hepatic branched chain lu-ketoacid dehydrogenase activity,r22
although this effect may be less important to leucine removal
than the stimulation of the transamination reaction. moreover, the drug’s ki for the branched chain a-keto acid
dehydrogenase kinase from liver is almost an order of
magnitude greater than that for heart2** finally, the nutritional state of the animal may in large part determine the
ability of dca to alter the activity state of the branched
chain cy-keto acid dehydrogenase in liver because kinase
inhibition by the drug is observed in rats fed low-protein diets
but not in those fed regulator chow.223
recent studies in rats receiving doses of dca similar to
those used clinically indicate that it accelerates loss of lean
body mass occurring during prolonged fasting.65 this conclusion was based on the association between the drug-induced
fall in whole body weight and striking increases in ammonia
nitrogen and urea nitrogen excretion and in the urinary
nitrogen/creatine ratio. to explain these effects, fields et  xxxd1353xxx 
reasoned that pyruvate dehydrogenase activity is normally
suppressed during fasting, thereby minimizing the rate of
lean body weight loss. by enhancing flux through the
enzyme, dca would divert amino acids toward oxidative,
rather than synthetic, routes. stimulation of branched chain
amino acid catabolism by dca would, of course, provide an
additional mechanism for increased proteolysis during starvation. in contrast to the effects observed in starved animals,

pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx 

dca does not alter proteolysis in skeletal muscles of thermally injured rats36 and may inhibit muscle wasting induced
experimentally by sepsis.224
hemodynamics

dca increases cardiac output in some patients with
hypotension and lactic acidosis’6’ and in subjects with stable
coronary artery disease’** or severe congestive heart failure**’
but with normal acid-base status. the effect occurs within
minutes of drug administration, persists up to a few hours
after dosing, and is accompanied by a rise in systolic blood
pressure in previously hypotensive subjects.16’ the onset of
improvement in cardiac output occurs much sooner than the
drug-induced changes in systemic lactate concentrations or
arterial ph. dca also enhances cardiac output in experimental models of lactic acidosis,‘34.‘38.‘409226*227
again by mechanisms not thought to be related solely to changes in systemic
acid-base balance. in dogs suffering acute hemorrhagic
shock, treatment with dca and  xxxd2164xxx 
did not alter hemodynamics during the oligemic period,
despite decreasing the accompaning metabolic acidosis.***
reinfusion of blood in dca-treated dogs, however, resulted
in marked increases in blood pressure, cardiac index, oxygen
consumption, and survival, compared with untreated animals in normotensive patients with ischemic heart disease,
wargovich et a1’22observed that dca increased cardiac
output and left ventricular stroke volume while it decreased
systemic vascular resistance and did not affect heart rate or
coronary blood flow. because myocardial oxygen consumption did not change, despite an increase in left ventricular
work, these workers concluded that myocardial efficiency
improved. it is uncertain whether the short-term improvement in cardiac function produced by dca in patients with
heart failure can be translated into effective, chronic
therapy.229
the effects of dca on cardiac function under these
conditions probably reflects, in part, its influence on key
aspects of myocardial intermediary metabolism. dca stimulates aerobic glucose oxidation and inhibits fatty acid oxidation in cardiac muscle.230 this has been observed most
strikingly in isolated, perfused animal heart preparations
following induction
of fasting,27.23’ diabetes,27 endotoxemia,59.6’.232
or in the canine heart in situ after coronary
artery occlusion.‘86 as noted earlier, these effects appear to
be linked to a fall in tissue citrate and activation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, although restoration of intracellular ph in
acidotic states may also stimulate glycolysis.‘63*‘65in an in
situ canine model of acute coronary occlusion, mjos et a11g6
reported that the administration of dca before or during the
occlusive period increased myocardial glucose extraction and
decreased both fatty acid uptake and epicardial st segment
elevation without altering coronary blood flow or myocardial
oxygen consumption. in hearts isolated from animals with
endotoxemia, addition of dca to the perfusate rapidly
stimulates pyruvate dehydrogenase, increases glucose and
lactate oxidation, restores depressed atp tissue concentrations, and significantly augments stroke work, cardiac output, and peak systolic pressure development over a wide
range of left atria1 filling pressures.59 dca also enhances the

1131

inotropism of ouabain and  xxxd2341xxx  in the endotoxinstressed, working rat heart model.6’ although it is not known
whether dca itself alters myocardial tissue concentrations
of  xxxd1773xxx , its combined administration with either
ouabain or  xxxd2341xxx  does not increase  xxxd1773xxx  beyond
those levels achieved with ouabain or  xxxd2341xxx  alone.6’
finally, pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, lactate metabolism, and mechanical function are also reported to be
improved upon reperfusion of rat hearts with dca after 20
minutes of normothermic, global ischemia.232 in this regard,
it is noteworthy that recent studies with isolated perfused rat
hearts indicate that flow-induced ischemia markedly reduces
pyruvate dehydrogenase activity.233 it is possible this effect of
ischemia might be reversed or prevented by dca.
collectively, these observations strongly suggest that dca
exerts a direct inotropic effect on the heart, presumably by
facilitating oxidative metabolism of carbohydrate over fat,
under conditions in which the supply of high energy phosphate, oxygen, or both may be rate-limiting for cardiac
function. although myocardial oxygen consumption and
coronary blood flow are not affected by dca. the decreased
oxygen requirements to oxidize glucose compared to fatty
acids and the atp generated from aerobic glucose oxidation
provide reasonable mechanisms by which the drug could
increase myocardial efficiency.
some indirect evidence indicates that dca may also
cause vasodilation.‘22.234 although diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  was described as a potent vasodilator in
animals’6,235’238
and humans,*39-252this is probably due to the
ganglionic
blocking action of the secondary amine
moiety. ‘~‘72~235-238~253~2s4
the effects of dca on vascular smooth
muscle have not been tested directly.
renal metabolism and function

early clinica1’79~‘8’.255.256
and experimental’72 studies claimed
that diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  promoted water
and cation excretion. as little as 50 mg/d was reported to
stimulate diuresis and natriuresis in patients with peripheral
edema or ascites.‘79,‘8’ dca enhances fractional sodium
excretion in the isolated, perfused rat kidney.13* in renal
cortical slices from dogs rendered acidotic from ammonium
chloride administration, dca suppresses ammoniagenesis
from glutamine and causes accumulation of glutamate.257 in
contrast, chronic, oral administration of 50 mg/kg/d of
dca to normal dogs stimulates renal ammoniagenesis that
leads, in turn, to increased net acid excretion due entirely to
increased ammonium ion 10~s.~~~
the net effect, if any, of
dca on ureagenesis is unknown. in isolated hepatocytes,
co, incorporation into urea is stimulated by dca but
inhibited by one of its possible metabolites, hydroxypyruvate.
dca induces significant diuresis and natriuresis in rats
with lactic acidosis produced by hypoxia.“* the mechanisms
for these effects are obscure. because ammoniagenesis can be
enhanced by glycolysis, it is possible that stimulation of renal
pyruvate dehydrogenase activity77.80 and, presumably, glucose oxidation by dca could promote renal ammonia
formation. the increased blood pressure observed in hypoxic
rats treated with dca could improve renal blood flow and
glomerular filtration rate, and the increase in ketonuria’38’54.258

1132

and urinary  xxxd2219xxx ’54 (a metabolite of dca) associated
with dca administration could also facilitate cation excretion. in addition to these putative mechanisms, however,
dca activates renal  xxxg908xxx  (ec
3.5.1.2),259 which may account for both the increase in
ammonium excretion and kidney’s ability to compensate for
the acid load posed by dca administration. the drug does
not alter renal concentrating
ability259 or amino acid
excretion.‘54 it slightly increases urinary lactate and pyruvate excretion,‘54 probably by inhibiting the specific tubular
reabsorption of these anions.

peter w. stacpoole
su~iva1.'53,270~276

because hyperlactatemia following cerebral
ischemia has been correlated with irreversible brain
damage, *” it has been suggested that dca may be useful in
patients during the acute stages of cardiopulmonary resuscitation or other causes of cerebral hypoxia.274.275treatment
with dca has not been uniformly successful in reducing
morbidity or mortality in experimental models of cerebral
ischemia ‘39s27’~278-280
but some of these negative studies may
have employed subtherapeutic doses.278.280
based on in vitro experiments, young and zygas28’ proposed dca be considered for the treatment of inflammatory
demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis. when
neuronal function
bovine central nervous system tissue was incubated with rat
peritoneal macrophages, lysomal enzymes were released by
diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  has sympathetic
and parasympathetic ganglionic blocking activity,‘72*235~237~253the macrophages, lactic acid accumulated in the incubation
media, and local ph fell. preincubation of macrophages with
thought to be due to the ammonium ion.254 both the
dca prevented the changes in lactic acid and ph without
diisopropylammonium and sodium salts of  xxxd1870xxx ,
affecting phagocytic capacity or viability of the cells. myelin
however, have direct effects on central nervous system
lamellae appear to be very sensitive to changes in ambient
function. earlier reports indicated that diisopropylammoph, and local acidity is thought to have a major pathologic
nium  xxxd1870xxx  stimulated cellular oxygen consumprole
in cell-mediated inflammatory demyelination.282-284
tion in vitro and protected animals against cyanide and other
young
and zygas”’ reasoned, therefore, that dca may be
respiratory inhibitors. ‘6*235*260-264
the sites and mechanisms
beneficial in reducing myelin degeneration in central nervous
accounting for these effects are unknown. dca readily
crosses the blood-brain barrier in animals and humans45*‘45 system disorders characterized by the presence of inflammatory cells at the site of active lessions. it is uncertain what
and can be measured in the cerebral spinal fluid of patients
relevance
these in vitro findings may have to the early report
receiving oral doses for congenital lactic acidosis.‘45 the drug
by demaio and zubiana 285of positive effects of diisoprois probably transported across the blood-brain barrier by the
pylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  administered systemically to
carrier system described for monocarboxylic acids.265 most
patients with multiple sclerosis.
studies indicate that dca rapidly stimulates pyruvate dehydca has a mild tranquilizing or sedative effect in probadrogenase activity in brain tissue following administration in
bly
a majority of subjects after oral”’ or parenteral’*‘s’**
vivo63or in vitro in cultured cells4*or in preparations of whole
administration, an observation previously made with the
brain homogenates, mitochondrial extracts, or slices of
diisopropylammonium salt.256*285
in most cases, the effect is
hippocampus or cortex.42-45.63~266
activation of the dehydrogeshort-lived and is too slight to be measured by objective tests
nase by dca is associated with increased glucose oxidation
that are sufficiently sensitive to detect early stages of
by cortical brain slices45 and calcium accumulation by
cognitive
dysfunction induced by sedative-hypnotics286 or
mitochondrial extracts,43 but neither calcium uptake nor
tricyclic antidepressants. 287in occasional subjects who metabnorepinephrine release is altered in rat cerebral cortical
olize the drug s10wly’~~or who receive multiple doses over
synaptosomes.47 if calcium translocation is facilitated by
brief intervals,‘*’ drowsiness may persist several hours. neudca in vivo, this could be an additional mechanism for
rotoxicity associated with dca is discussed below.
stimulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase because intramitochondrial calcium is required for activation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase phosphatase.267 in theory, stimulation of
pyruvate oxidation to acetyl coa by dca might increase
provision of substrate for the synthesis of acetylcholine, but
this has not been examined. likewise, because glycine is a
metabolite of dca and tissue concentrations of glutamate
may increase22**257
on its administration, it is possible that the
drug may alter the levels of these putative amino acid
neurotransmitters
in neural tissue. the inability of some
investigators to demonstrate stimulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by dca in whole brain homogenates, isolated mitochondria, or brain synaptosomes268.269has raised the possibility that fundamental differences exist in either the regulation
of the dehydrogenase complex in brain or in the nature of the
inhibition of brain pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase by dca.
in experimental models of acute cerebral ischemia, treatment with dca prior to or following the ischemic insult is
reported to reduce lactate levels in the cerebral cortex of
cerebral spinal fluid, shorten recovery time and improve

other pharmacologic properties

topical or systemic administration of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  was claimed to improve healing rates in
patients with stasis ulcers2““q248
and stimulate cartilage growth
in animals.*64j8@290
it is unknown whether any of these effects
are related to possible drug-induced changes in the intermediary metabolism and/or regional blood flow and oxygenation of the affected tissues. dca is reported to reduce the
severity of dental caries in diabetic rats,29’ possibly by
decreasing the concentration of lactic acid proximate to the
carious lesions.
dca stimulates
ethanol
metabolism
in isolated
hepatocytes.2~‘5s71crabb et al2 proposed the mechanism
responsible involves the catabolism of dca to glyoxylate in
the cytoplasm and the subsequent provision of nad+ for the
oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde. it is unknown whether
dca alters the clearance of ethanol in vivo or whether its
influence on ethanol metabolism accounts for its reported

pharmacology

of  xxxd1870xxx 

protective effect against  xxxd102xxx induced
tration.‘74

1133

fatty liver infil-

pharmacokinetics
[i -14c] xxxd1870xxx  is not converted to dichloroacetyl
coa, dichloroacetylcarnitine,
or co, by the perfused rat
heart.27 thus, it does not compete with pyruvate for  xxxd1739xxx  in the pyruvate dehydrogenase-catalyzed reaction.
isolated rat hepatocytes metabolize [2-14c]dca and [u“c] dca to glyoxylate and, subsequently, a number of other
metabolites (fig 3).“3.22’9292-294
one possible metabolite,
hydroxypyruvate, also forms glucose via glycerate,292 but
these reactions are unlikely to be significant for either dca
metabolism or gluconeogenesis. neither the quantitative
importance of these pathways nor in vivo distribution of the
drug is known. dca itself is a metabolite of chloramphenicol,295*296methoxyflurane,297-300 and other chlorinated hydocarbons.30’-306it is assumed that dca undergoes
removal of chloride by cytochrome p450-dependent microsoma1 dehalogenases296’3”.3a present in liver and perhaps other
tissues and subsequently is hydroxylated to glyoxylate. however. less than 5% of an oral or intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg
dca administered to healthy volunteers is excreted unchanged or as oxalate in urine (‘2’,307;and unpublished
observations) and negligible quantities are bound to plasma
proteins or taken up by red blood cells.‘20~307
this latter
observation is surprising because erythrocytes contain a
monocarboxylate-specific carrier system for which certain
metabolites of dca may be substrates.“’
dca may be concentrated in various tissues of animals
following systemic administration.53,72 this may account for
both the difficulty in identifying drug metabolites and the
prolonged biological activity of dca in vivo. thus, the exact
metabolic fate of dca in humans and other species remains
to be established. nevertheless, some of the biologic effects
attributed to dca may be due to the presence of active
metabolites. both dca and glyoxylate inhibit hmg coa
reductase, but the inhibitory constant for glyoxylate is an
order of magnitude less than that for dca.lw glyoxylate
may also account for the stimulation of leucine oxidation in
liver by dca because glyoxylate can act as a substrate for
the transamination
of leucine by glyoxylate amino-

4’

cl--ch-coodlchloroacetate

i

dehalogenossw

lactate dehydrogansse

ho-ch,coo
glvcolrtc
 xxxd2219xxx  oxidarc
 xxxd2219xxx  dehydrogenase

oxalate

oxldatlon

fig 3.
proposed metabolism of dca. dechlorination and formation of glyoxylate are probably mediated by a cytochrome p450dependent microsomal enzyme system. the quantitative
importance of any of these pathways is unknown.

transferase.220~22’~309
oxalate, an end product of intermediary
metabolism, has widespread biologic effects and inhibits
hepatic  xxxg1674xxx  and pyruvate kinase,3’2 both of
which are also reported to be inhibited by dca.33.79.“2
neither glyoxylate nor oxalate, however, stimulates the
activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase and high concentrations
of oxalate inhibit the enzyme.26*27*50
most in vivo pharmacokinetic experiments with dca have
been performed in human subjects. in healthy volunteers,
dca can be detected in plasma by gas chromatography
within 15 minutes of a single oral dose of 50 mg/kg (curry
sh, stacpoole pw, unpublished observations) and has a
half-life (tl,2) in plasma between 0.5 and two hours,307
similar to that obtained after a single dose intravenous
infusion.12’ longer half-lives are reported for other species.3”
peak plasma levels in humans following an initial oral or
intravenous dca dose of 50 mg/kg are approximately 150
pg/ml, or about i mmol/l,(‘20~‘2’~‘6’
and unpublished observations). thus, plasma drug levels following “therapeutic”
doses are very similar to the concentrations established from
in vitro experiments for maximum activation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase.
chu”’ reported similar distribution and elimination kinetics for dca in healthy males and females and observed no
difference in the area under the plasma concentration curve
for dca between oral and intravenous doses, indicating
equivalent bioavailability. the renal clearance of the drug is
low (approximately 4 ml/h), and is independent of urinary
flow rate or ph.“’ short-term oral administration of dca to
diabetic subjects resulted in a moderate rise in plasma uric
acid levels, a fall in urate excretion, or both.“* these data,
together with the findings that dca may increase plasma
ketone bodies under some circumstances,2’.‘09’“s’161imply
that the drug may compete with other small anions for
similar renal secretory routes. however, because renal clearance of dca is so much lower than glomerular filtration
rate, any effect of the drug on a secretory process of
elimination may be outweighed by its tubular reabsorption or
its metabolism by the kidney during elimination. this latter
possibility is consistent with the finding that the elimination
rate constants for dca were higher when estimated by renal
clearance data than by fitting plasma concentration curves.3o7
single dose (1 to 50 mg/kg) intravenous administration
was reported by wells et al ‘*oto exhibit nonlinear kinetics at
doses ~35 mg/kg. intravenous administration of up to 50
mg/kg dca in normal subjects’2’ or patients with lactic
acidosisi6’ demonstrated that the drug is metabolized increasingly slowly with repeat dosing, consistent with progressive
changes in t,,,, v,,,, and k,. in these studies, first-order
decay kinetics were retained, presumably because a high
enzyme to substrate concentration ratio was preserved. in
healthy individuals, both the area under the plasma concentration curve for dca and the increase in urinary oxalate
were linearly related to dose, with a mean dca apparent
volume of distribution of 0.30 l/kg that was independent of
dose.‘*’ in contrast, the apparent change in the volume of
distribution in patients with hypotension and lactic acidosis
was directly dependent on drug dose. perhaps reflecting the

peter w. stacpoole

1134

dca-induced changes in cardiac output and blood pressure
observed in these subjects.‘6’
recent studies by chu3” in normal subjects indicate a
surprisingly long-lasting effect of an initial oral dose of dca
on the metabolism of a subsequent identical dose, with
individuals requiring from 1 to 8 weeks between doses before
the original plasma clearance rate was restored. collectively,
these data and those obtained with repeated intravenous
administration suggest that dca, a metabolite, or both may
inhibit one or more reactions involved in its metabolism,
either by enzyme poisoning or endpoint inhibition. regardless of the mechanism, the profound effect dca exerts on its
own metabolism may be relevant to both its prolonged
pharmacodynamics in vivo and its toxicity.
various dca derivatives have been synthesized3” comprising dca esters with polyols (as prodrugs) and dca ionic
complexes to modify the pharmacokinetics and metabolic
effects of the parent drug. preliminary studies in rats indicate
that these derivatives are orally effective and at least as
potent as dca in reducing blood glucose and lactate. one
ionic complex, inositol-hexa[n-methylnicotinate]
hexadichloroacetate, has a potency and duration of action greater than
dca; yet, dca plasma concentrations with this derivative
are only about one half those achieved with an equivalent
amount of the sodium salt. the nicotinate derivative also
inhibits hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol synthesis to a
similar degree as dca itself. thus, these prodrugs and ionic
complex derivatives have the potential advantage of retaining dca’s efficacy while maintaining low plasma levels of
both dca and potentially toxic metabolites, such as oxalate.
toxicology

the acute oral or parenteral toxicity of dca in rodents is
relatively low and is reported to be less than acetic acid itself
and other halogenated acetic acid derivatives, including
monochloroacetate,
trichloroacetate,
and their ethyl
esters. ‘j~*~‘~-~*’
the acute, single dose ld,, of the diisopropylammonium or sodium salt in most species is 1 to 5 g/kg by
mouth and 0.5 to 1 g/kg by intravenous or intraperitoneal
routes.‘.” death is usually from progressive central nervous
system depression. monochloroacetate is manyfold more
toxic than dca in vivo and in vitro and is a potent
respiratory inhibitor.‘5,3’4-3’6 acetate and its chlorinated
derivatives, including dca, bind in vitro to soluble glutathione s-transferases from rat liver,32’ and this may be one
mechanism that limits their toxicity in vivo. several halogenated aliphatic compounds are themselves mutagenic or are
metabolized to mutagenic derivatives in the ames assay and
are considered potential carcinogens.304*322-329despite
claims330‘333
that unpurified preparations of dca were mutagenic, studies using dca of established purity and homogeniety failed to show mutagenicity.327 neither purified monochloroacetate
nor trichloroacetate
is mutagenic.322s328
glyoxylate and oxalate do not appear to have been tested for
mutagenicity.
early chronic toxicity studies with diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  in rodents and dogs revealed no evidence of
serious toxicity.’ similarly, daily intravenous dca doses of

~100 mg/kg in dogs and 2250 mg/kg in rats for 230 d were
nontoxic.334 chronic doses usually exceeding 1 g/kg lead to
anorexia and weight loss. ‘.335when administered orally for
several weeks to rats or dogs at doses >50 mg/kg, however,
the neuropathy is exhibdca is potentially neurotoxic. 335-340
ited primarily by reversible hind limb motor weakness and
demyelination of cerebral and cerebellar white matter. the
incidence of hind limb weakness is -6% in rats receiving 1.1
g/kg/d for 7 weeks. 340the diameter and conduction velocity
of peripheral nerves are diminished in dca-treated rats, but
protein synthesis by neuronal cells does not appear to be
affected.339
in addition to its neuropathic effects, dca has been
claimed to cause morphologic changes in testes of rats and
irreversible lenticular opacities in beagle dogs, administered
as little as 75 mg/kg of dca.337 subsequent studies, however, failed to confirm any adverse effect on either testicular
morphology or function in rats chronically treated with up to
1.l g/kg dca.335.339
confirmation of ocular toxicity in beagle
dogs (an animal prone to drug-induced cataract formation)
by dca has not been reported and the true incidence of this
potentially serious problem is unknown. it was not observed
in rats chronically receiving 50 mg/kg or 1.1 g/kg of the
drug.335
peripheral neuropathy has been reported in one young
adult man with homozygous  xxxg1318xxx 
who received single, daily doses of 50 mg/kg dca for four
months202 toxicity was manifested by loss of deep tendon
reflexes, mild weakness of facial and interosseous muscles,
and diminished tibia1 nerve conduction velocity. these
changes resolved over several weeks after cessation of therapy, suggesting that functional, rather than morphologic,
changes were responsible for the toxicity. ophthalmologic
examination was normal in this subject at the time the
neuropathy was diagnosed. in contrast, two infants with
severe neuropathy and congenital forms of lactic acidosis
were treated for -1 year with a similar dose of dca and
demonstrated no adverse effects.‘47*‘5’the lactic acidemia
resolved in both patients and linear growth increased in one,
but neither showed neurologic improvement. administration
of dca in other human subjects has been limited to
short-term studies in healthy volunteers, adults with type ii
diabetes mellitus, and children and adults with various forms
of lactic acidosis. aside from (usually mild) drowsiness in
about one half the adult recipients, no other drug-related
adverse effects have been reported.
can the neurologic and ocular toxicity reported for dca
be related to its known metabolic actions? the drug’s effects
on both lipid and amino acid metabolism may be important
in affecting pathways of sterol synthesis and myelination in
central34’ and peripheral342 nervous tissue. in addition, because dca stimulates at least two thiamine-dependent
enzymes in vivo, pyruvate dehydrogenase and branched
chain a-keto acid dehydrogenase, stacpoole et a1335*340
reasoned that chronic dca treatment might induce thiamine
deficiency through an increased demand for this vitamin and
found that coadministration of thiamine with dca to rats
significantly reduced the incidence of hind limb weakness

pharmacology of dichloaoacetate

1135

and other behavorial changes typical of both dca toxicity
and thiamine deficiency. an alternative mechanism to explain the toxic effects of dca implicates oxalate, a metabolite known to cause both peripheral neuropathyx4’ and
cataracts344 and other ocular pathology.345 oxalate excretion
increases in humans’23 and rats”’ treated with dca, but is
reduced in animals concurrently
supplemented
with
thiamine.3” whether oxaiate deposition in nerves or lenses
can reasonably be considered as a cause of dca toxicity is
uncertain, however, because neither renal nor testicular
oxalate crystals have been identified in rats receiving high
doses of the drug.3’5y339
experience is too limited to decide whether there exists
important interspecies differences in susceptibility to any
toxic property of dca. of potential importance, however, is
the marked discrepancy in the pharmacokinetics of the drug
administered acutely to different species. the substantial

variability in both the t,,, and apparent volumes of distribution of dca among humans (~2 h; 0.3 l/kg), rats (-3 h; 0.9
l/kg), and dogs (20 h; 0.2 l/kg)3” suggests marked
differences may exist in susceptibility to the toxic effects of
dca or its metabolites and illustrates the difficulty in
predicting biologic disposition and toxicity of therapeutic
doses of a drug administered to humans, compared with
animals.
conclusions

the broad pharmacologic spectrum of dca (fig 4) was
foreshadowed by early studies with the diisopropylammonium salt. appropriate clinical investigation of the drug was
hampered initially because of the lack of patent protection
for such a simple compound and, subsequently, because of its
toxicity in animals and one human subject. recent pharmacokinetic and toxicologic studies of dca, however, may

glucose
r\tp

--

p%nf

 xxxg869xxx   xxxg870xxx ~n~lactone-6-p

cn

idp
t
glucose-6-p

--

inhibition

0
+

-udp-glucose

l

glycogen

j f

dca

“,‘;i,:;;”

iwdp” nadp
it
fructose;rsp-p
0
cholesterol
t
mev alonate

tri -

tsc
fructosedihydroxyacetone-p

*w
1,6-bisp
glyceraldehyde-3-p

.::;:&i
hmg&oa

glycer’de:
0‘:

carnitine
/

i
acetoacetyl-coa

valine
leucine
isoleucine

t
acetyl-coa

el
:~it;i,;?ti:

t
oxaloacetate
\,

a

-ketoacid

nh2

0
malate

fig 4.
proposed sites of action of dca (circles) and its metabolites. glyoxylate (squares) and oxalate wangles).
affected enzymes.
transport
systems, or merabolites
are as follows: (1) hexokinase
( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx .1).
(2) increased glycogenesis (skeletal muscle), (3)
glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (ec 1 .l .1&s), (4) phosphofructokinase
( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx  ,111. (5) glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenese
( xxxg127xxx   xxxg128xxx   xxxg129xxx   xxxg130xxx   xxxg132xxx   xxxg133xxx   xxxg134xxx   xxxg135xxx   xxxg136xxx   xxxg138xxx   xxxg140xxx   xxxg141xxx   xxxg861xxx   xxxg862xxx .9). (6) pyruvate kinase ( xxxg79xxx   xxxg611xxx   xxxg876xxx   xxxg1053xxx   xxxg1744xxx   xxxg1745xxx   xxxg1746xxx   xxxg1747xxx   xxxg1748xxx .40).
(7) malic enzyme (ec 1.1 .1.391. (8)  xxxg1674xxx  ( xxxg1674xxx ).
(9) glyoxylate
aminotransferase
(liver), (10) mitochondrial pyruvate transport, (111 pyruvate dehydrogensse {ec 1.2.4.11, (121 fatty acid oxidation (liver\.
(13) branched chain a-keto acid dehydrogenese (ec 1.2.4.4) (heart), (14) decreased cytoplasmic citrate, (15) decreased lipogenesis wwl.
and (16)  xxxg1060xxx  (ec 1 .l .1.34).

1136

peter w. stacpoole

warrant reevaluation of its clinical potential. the striking
decrease in dca clearance rate following repeated dosinga fact not known during its initial clinical investigationsprovides both one explanation for the persistence of many of
its metabolic effects after cessation of treatment and insight
into mechanisms of its toxicity. at present, it is not known
whether dca, its metabolites, or both interfere with specific
enzymes involved in its metabolism, and this is clearly a
crucial area for further study. toxicity of the drug may be
reduced and its utility as chronic therapy enhanced by a
treatment strategy of initial drug loading followed by reduced dosage at less frequent intervals than employed in
earlier studies. in addition, derivatives of dca and formulations of it with thiamine have been developed and may
provide additional safeguards against toxicity, while preserving therapeutic efficacy of the parent drug.
activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by dca represents
that pharmacologic property with perhaps the most widespread and important clinical ramifications. it also illustrates
how the perturbation of such a critical enzyme of intermediary metabolism can effect striking functional changes in
diverse organ systems and cells. the utility of dca in the
treatment of lactic acidosis and diabetes relates directly to its
stimulatory effect on pyruvate dehydrogenase. in addition,
this property may also be fundamental in explaining the
beneficial effects of the drug on cardiac function in states,
such as ischemia, in which glucose becomes a major energyyielding substrate. although it cannot be determined unequivocally from present data that the stimulation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase is causally related to the inotropic effect and
improvement in myocardial efficiency of dca, it is reasonable to assume that in states of limited oxygen delivery to the
heart, a shift from myocardial fatty acid to carbohydrate
oxidation would lead to more atp generated for a constant
rate of oxygen consumption. if the emerging laboratory and
clinical studies can be confirmed and extended, dca may be
a prototype of a new drug class that improves myocardial
function in acute or chronic states of ischemia or failure, not
by altering adrenergic receptor status or membrane ion
fluxes, but by fundamentally influencing myocardial substrate metabolism.
dca and its derivatives may also be useful probes in
dissecting regulatory steps in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism and in the treatment of diverse lipoprotein disorders.
the inhibitory effects of dca on hepatic triglyceride and
cholesterol synthesis, and its cholesterol-lowering action in
patients devoid of ldl receptors, implies its major influence
is on lipid synthesis. the mechanism by which the drug

inhibits triglyceride formation is unknown but may involve
shunting of acetyl coa from lipogenesis to krebs cycle
oxidation, thereby impairing citrate utilization for triglyceride (and cholesterol) production.
the role of dca in the chronic therapy of infants and
children with congenital lactic acidosis is uncertain because
only scattered case reports exist and the underlying enzymatic defect frequently is unknown. it is unlikely to be useful
in conditions in which the e, (pyruvate decarboxylase)
subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is absent or
mutated so as to be refractory to dephosphorylation. a causal
link between the metabolic acidosis per se and the neurologic
complications of these disorders has not been unequivocally
proven. so far, most patients with congenital lactic acidosis
treated with dca already had neurologic deterioration
advanced to the point that no improvement was achieved,
despite reversal of the lactic acidemia. were such patients
identified very early in life, successful treatment of their
metabolic disorder with dca might retard or prevent
development of the neurologic sequelae. traditionally, chronic
treatment of the congenital lactic acidoses has been disappointing. this, together with the emerging pharmacokinetic
information of dca, warrants consideration of a carefully
designed, prospective evaluation of the safety and efficacy of
the drug in patients in whom the enzymatic defect leading to
their metabolic condition is well characterized.
even if dca and its derivatives are ultimately found
unsafe for long-term administration, all available evidence
indicates oral doses of about 50 mg/kg/d for up to a few
weeks are well tolerated and capable of eliciting profound
effects on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. they therefore
should be valuable tools for exploring pathways involved in
the production and utilization of these substrates, not only in
health, but also in fasting and in genetic and acquired
conditions in which the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids,
or both is impaired.
acknowledgment

for their advise and collaboration on studies of the pharmacology
of dca, the author is particularly indebted to thomas g. baumgartner. michael n. berry, nicholas n. bodor, dean burk, oscar b.
crofford, steven h. curry, harvey l. eichner, owen b. evans,
james m. felts, peter h. forsham, eloise m. harman. h. james
harwood, jr, bertram m. katzung, david m. kornhauser, ernst t.
krebs, jr, chauncey b. leake, virgil s. lequire, grant w. liddle,
anthea c. lorenz, andrew r.l. mcnaughton, jr, robert i. misbin,
george w. moore, john a. oates, david rabin, ronald g. thomas,
thomas g. wargovich, and peter g. wells. the author also thanks
sheri crouch for editorial assistance.

references

1. stacpoole pw: review of the pharmacologic and therapeutic
effects of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa). j chn
pharmacol9:282-291,1969
2. crabb dw, yount ea, harris ra: the metabolic effects of
 xxxd1870xxx . metabolism 30:1024-1039, 1981
3. menschel h: zur kolloidchemic und pharmakologie der keratinsubstanzen der menschlichen haut. archiv fur experimentelle
pathologie 1io:l-451925
4. jansen ct: practical therapy for hyperkeratotic skin lesions.
geriatrics march: 71-80, 1975

5. morrison jl, leake cd: monochloracetic acid as a food and
beverage stabilizer. pharmacology 1:397-422, 1941
6. kratzing cc, windrum gm:  xxxd242xxx  action of ethyl trichloracetate. nature 180:859-860, 1957
7. kratzing cc, windrum gm: the  xxxd242xxx  action of some
halogen derivatives of acetic acid. biochem j 78:745-748,1961
8. krebs et, krebs et jr: n-substituted glycine esters of
gluconic acid. us patent no. 2,7, 10,876,1955
9. krebs et, krebs et jr: gluconic acid (dialkylamino) acetates. chem abstracts 50:5733,1956 (abstr)

pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx 

10. krebs et sr, krebs et jr, beard hh, et al: pangamic acid
sodium: a newly isolated crystalline water-soluble factor. a preliminary report. int record med 163:18-23, 1951
11. stacpoole pw: pangamic acid ( xxxd2716xxx ,,). a review. world
rev nutr diet 27:145-166, 1977
12. bertelli a, casentini s: the  xxxd1870xxx  of diisopropylammonium as the molecule responsible for certain pharmacological
activities previously attributed to the material named “pangamic
acid.” boll sot ital biol sper 34:1532-1534, 1958
13. lorini m, ciman m: hypoglycaemic action of diisopropylammonium salts in experimental diabetes. biochem pharmacol 11:823827, ! 962
14. stacpoole pw, felts jm: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa) and sodium  xxxd1870xxx  (dca): effect on glucose
and fat metabolism in normal and diabetic tissue. metabolism
19:71-781970
t 5. stacpoole pw: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa)
and sodium  xxxd1870xxx  (dca): effects on intermediary metabolism in isolated rat liver parenchymal cells. doctoral thesis,
university of california, san francisco, 1972
16. cascio g: pharmacologic research on diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx . boll chim farm 97:608-611, 1958
17. hoffman he, paulshock m: treatment of diabetes with
alpha, alpha substituted acetic acid derivatives. us patent no. 3,
1961
18. vailati g, rabassini a: hypoglycemic effect of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  in humans. riv crit clin med 62:105-109,
1962
19. stacpoole pw, felts jm: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx : regulation of metabolic intermediates in muscle of alloxan
diabetic rats, metabolism 20:830-834, 1971
20. eichner hl, stacpoole pw, forsham ph: treatment of
 xxxd3249xxx  diabetes with di-isopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx 
(dipa). diabetes 23:179-182, 1974
21. blackshear pj, holloway pah, alberti kgmm: metabolic
interactions of  xxxd1870xxx  and insulin in experimental diabetic
ketoacidosis. biochem j 146:447-456, 1975
22. man kc, alberti kgmm: long term treatment of mild
diabetes in  xxxd3249xxx  diabetic rats with  xxxd2903xxx  and  xxxd1870xxx : normogiycaemia with normal blood lactate concentration diabetologia 12:408, 1976
23. ribes g, valette g, loubatieres-mariani mm: metabolic
effects of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in normal and diabetic dogs.
diabetes 28:852-856, 1979
24. searle gl, felts jm, shakelford r: acute effects of  xxxd1870xxx  in the depancreatized dog: glucose synthesis and turnover.
diabetologia 23:45-48, 1982
25. blackshear pj, holloway pah, george k, et al: the metabolic effects of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in the starved rat. biochem j
1421279-286. 1974
26. evans ob, stacpoole pw: prolonged hypolactatemia and
increased total pyruvate dehydrogenase activity by  xxxd1870xxx .
biochem pharmacol31:1295-1300.1982
27. mcallister a, allison sp, randle pj: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on the metabolism of glucose, pyruvate, acetate, 3-hydoxybutyrate and palmitate in rat diaphragm and heart muscle in vitro and
on extraction of glucose, lactate, pyruvate and free  xxxd2154xxx  by dog
heart invivo. biochem j 134:1067-1081, 1973
28. latipaa pm, hiltunen jk, peuhkurinen kj, et al: regulation
of fatty acid oxidation in heart muscle. effects of pyruvate and
 xxxd1870xxx . biochim biopbys acta 752:162-171, 1983
29. rousselle j, buckert a, pahud p, et al: relationship between
glucose oxidation and glucose tolerance in man. metabolism 31:866870,1982
30. holness mj, french th, sugden mc: hepatic glycogen

1137

synthesis on carbohydrate re-feeding after starvation. biochem j
235:441-445, 1986
3 1. favier rj, koubi he, mayet mh, et al: effects of gluconeogenie precursor flux alterations on glycogen resynthesis after prolonged exercise. j appl physiol63:1733-1738, 1987
32. enser m, whittington fm: the actions of  xxxd1870xxx 
on blood glucose, liver glycogen and fatty acid synthesis in obesehyperglycaemic (ob/ob) and lean mice. horm metab res 15:225229,1983
33. anderson jw, karounos d, yoneyama t: dichloroacetateinduced changes in liver of normal and diabetic rats. proc sot exp
biol med 149:814-821, 1975
34. crabb dw, mapes jp, boersma rw, et al: effect of
 xxxd1870xxx  on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism of isolated
hepatocytes. arch biochem biophys 173:658-665,1976
35. sobrino f, gualberto a, gonzalez-river0 j: regulation of
fructose-2, 6-bisphosphate and glycogen synthesis by  xxxd1870xxx  and phenazine methosulphate in rat adipose tissue. biochem
intern 12:767-774, 1986
36. clark as, mitch we, goodman mn, et al:  xxxd1870xxx 
inhibits glycolysis and augments insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis in rat muscle. j clin invest 79:588-594, 1987
37. schneider sh, komanicky pm, goodman mn, et al:  xxxd1870xxx : effects on exercise endurance in untrained rats. metabolism 30:590-595, 1981
38. randle pj: carbohydrate metabolism and lipid storage and
breakdown in diabetes. diabetologia 2:237-247, 1966
39. passoneau jv, lowry oh: phosphofructokinase and the
pasteur effect. biochem biophys res commun 7:10-15,1962
40. whitehouse s, randle pj: activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in perfused rat heart by  xxxd1870xxx . biochem j 134:651653, 1973
41. abemayor e, kovachich gb, haugaard n: regulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase (pdh) reaction in rat brain by  xxxd1870xxx  (dca) and atp. pharmacologist 10:183, 1978
42. morgan dg, routtenberg a: evidence that a 41,000 dalton
brain phosphoprotein is pyruvate dehydrogenase. bicchem biophys
res commun 95:569-576, 1980
43, browning m, baudry m, bennett wf, et al: phosphorylationmediated changes in pyruvate dehydrogenase activity influence
pyruvate-supported calcium accumulation by brain mitochondria. j
neurochem 36:1932-1940,198l
44. baudry m, kessler m, smith ek, et al: the regulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in rat hippocampal slices: effect of
 xxxd1870xxx . biochim biophys acta 752:162-l 7 1, 1982
45. abemayor e, kovachich gb, haugaard n: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on brain pyruvate dehydrogenase. j neurochem 42:38-42,
1983
46. kurcda y, toshima k, watanabe t, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  on pyruvate metabolism in rat brain in vivo. pediatr
res 18:936-938,1984
47. hendley ed, whittemore sr, chaffee je, et al: regulation
of norepinephrine uptake by adenine nucleotides and divalent
cations: role for extracellular protein phosphorylation. j neurothem 50:263-273,1988
48. kilpatrick-smith l, erecinska m: cellular effects of endotoxin in vitro: i. effect of endotoxin on mitochondrial substrate
metabolism and intracellular calcium. circ shock 11:85-99, 1983
49. cooper rh, denton rm, pask ht, et al: regulation of
mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenases. metab interconvers enzymes, int symp 3rd. berlin, springer, 1974
50. whitehouse s, cooper rh, randle pj: mechanism of activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by  xxxd1870xxx  and other halogenated carboxylic acids. biochem j 141:761-774,1974
51. denton m, randle pj, bridges bj, et al: regulation of

1138

mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase. mol cell biochem 927-53,
1975
52. stansbie d: regulation of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. clin sci mol med 54:445-452, 1976
53. kerbey al, randle pj, cooper rh, et al: regulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase in rat heart. biochem j 154:327-347, 1976
54. hansford rg, cohen l: relative importance of pyruvate
dehydrogenase interconversion and feed-back inhibition in the effect
of  xxxd2154xxx  on pyruvate oxidation by rat heart mitochondria. arch
biochem biophys 191:665-681, 1978
55. dennis sc, padman a, debuysere ms, et al: studies on the
regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in the isolated perfused rat
heart. j biol chem 254:1252-1258,1979
56. buxton db, olson ms: regulation of the branched chain
a-keto acid and pyruvate dehydrogenases in the perfused rat heart. j
biol chem 257: 15026- 15029,1982
57. sale gj, randle pj: role of individual phosphorylation sites
in inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in rat heart
mitochondria. biochem j 203:99-108,1982
58. giacomelli f, wiener j, lapanowski-netzel k: puruvate
dehydrogenase activity in cardiac mitochondria from genetically
diabetic mice. diabetes 34:1075-1081, 1985
59. burns ah, giaimo me, summer wr:  xxxd1870xxx  acid
improves in vitro myocardial function following in vivo endotoxin
administration. j crit care 1:l l-17, 1986
60. matsuoka s, toshima d, naito e, et al: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on the mechanical function of the isolated ischemic heart. jpn
heart j 28:531-537, 1987
61. burns ah, summer wr, burns lar, et al: inotropic
interactions of  xxxd1870xxx  with  xxxd2341xxx  and ouabain in isolated hearts from endotoxin-shocked rats. j cardiovas pharmacol
11~379-386, 1988
62. schadewaldt p, forster mec, munich u, et al: a device for
the liberation and determination of 14x0-2. anal biochem 132:400404,1983
63. fuller sj, randle pj: reversible phosphorylation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase in rat skeletal-muscle mitochondria. biochem j
219:635-646, 1984
64. zuurveld jgem, veerkamp jh, wirtz p: skeletal muscle
fibers in suspension: a new approach to the study of oxidative and
glycolytic metabolism in differentiated muscle. int j biochem
16:1107-1114.1984
65. fields ala, falk n, cheema-dhadli s, et al: accelerated
loss of lean body mass in fasting rats due to activation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase by  xxxd1870xxx . metabolism 36:621-624.1987
66. lang ch, bagby gj, blakesley hl, et al: glucose kinetics
and pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in septic rats treated with
 xxxd1870xxx . circ shock 23:131-141, 1987
67. vary tc, siege jh, tall bd, et al: metabolic effects of
partial reversal of pyruvate dehydrogenase activity by  xxxd1870xxx  in sepsis. circ shock 24:3-18, 1988
68. sholtz r, olson ms, schwab aj, et al: the effect of fatty
acids on the regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in perfused rat
liver. eur j biochem 86:519-530, 1978
69. mapes jp, harris ra: regulatory function of pyruvate
dehydrogenase and the mitochondrion in lipogenesis. lipids l&757764,1975
70. clause th, pilkis sj: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  and glucagon
on the incorporation of labeled substrates into glucose and on
pyruvate dehydrogenase in hepatocytes from fed and starved rats.
arch biochem biophys 182:52-63, 1977
7 1. harris ra, crabb dw: inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis
by  xxxd1870xxx . arch biochem biophys 189:364-37 1.1978
72. evans ob:  xxxd1870xxx  tissue concentrations and its

peter w. stacpoole

relationship to hypolactatemia and pyruvate. biochem pharmacol
31:3124-3126, 1982
73. mariash cn, oppenheimer jh: evidence that glucose induction of malic enzyme mrna is mediated by a product of pyruvate
oxidation. 7th inter conven endo 1034,1984
74. agius l, battersby c, alberti kgmm: monolayer culture of
parenchymal rat hepatocytes on collagen-coated microcarriers. a
hepatocyte system for short-and-long-term metabolic studies. in
vitro 21:254-259,1985
75. chitra ci, cuezva jm, pate1 ms: changes in the activity of
active pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in the newborn of normal
and diabetic rats. diabetologia 28:148-152, 1985
76. agius l, vaartjes wj: effect of insulin on ketogenesis and
fatty acid synthesis in rat hepatocytes incubated with  xxxd1870xxx . biochim biophys acta 844:393-399,1985
77. holness mj, sugden mc: regulation of renal and hepatic
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex on carbohydrate re-feeding after
starvation. biochem j 241:421-425, 1987
78. strong p, illingworth j: aerobic lactate synthesis by rat
cardiac muscle. biochem sot trans 7:1044-1045, 1979
79. pratt ml, roche te: mechanism of pyruvate inhibition of
kidney pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase and synergistic inhibition by
pyruvate and adp. j biol chem 254:7191-7196,1979
80. lasey jh, randle pj: inhibition of lactate gluconeogenesis in
rat kidney by  xxxd1870xxx . biochem j 170:551-560, 1978
81. kiechle fl, jarett l, popp da, et al: isolation from rat
adipocytes of a chemical mediator for insulin activation of pyruvate
dehydrogenase. diabetes 29:852-855, 1980
82. popp da, kichle fl, kotagal n, et al: insulin stimulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase in an isolated plasma membrane-mitochondrial mixture occurs by activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
phosphatase. j biol chem 255:7540-7543, 1980
83. munday mr, williamson dh: role of pyruvate dehydrogenase and insulin in the regulation of lipogenesis in the lactating
mammary gland of the rat during the starved-refed transition.
biochem j 196:831-837, 1981
84. evans ob, stacpoole pw: brief treatment with  xxxd1870xxx  does not modify suspected subacute necrotizing encephalomyelitis. ann neurol8:647-648, 1980
85. rex sheu kf, hu cwc, utter mf: pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex activity in normal and deficient fibroblasts. j clin invest
67:1463-1471,198l
86. buffington ck, stentz fb, kitabchi ae: activation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by porcine and biosynthetic  xxxd2364xxx  in cultured human fibroblasts. diabetes 33:681-684,
1984
87. mccormick k, viscardi rm, robinson b, et al: partial
pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency with profound lactic acidosis and
hyprammonemia: responses to  xxxd1870xxx  and benzoate. am j
med genet 22:291-299, 1985
88. mckay n, petrova-benedict r, thoene j, et al: lacticacidaemia due to pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, with evidence
of protein polymorphism in the a-subunit of the enzyme. eur j
pediatr 144:445-450, 1986
89. wicking ca, scholem rd, hunt sm, et al: immunochemical
analysis of normal and mutant forms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. biochem j 239:89-96, 1986
90. yount ea, harris ra: ketone body and acetate formation
from  xxxd2777xxx  by isolated rat testicular cells. arch biochem biophys
217:503-511, 1982
9 1. park r, radosevich pr, leach wj, et al: metabolic effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  in diabetic dogs. am j physiol245:e94-elol, 1983
92. barnish it, cross pe, danilewicz jc, et al: promotion of
carbohydrate oxidation in the heart by some phenylglyoxylic acids. j
med chem 24:399-404, 1981

pharmacology of  xxxd1870xxx 

93. halestrap ap: the mitochondrial pyruvte carrier. kinetics
and specificity for substrates and inhibitors. biochem j 148:85-96,
1975
94. paradies g, papa s: substrate regulation of the pyruvatetransporting system in rat liver mitochondria. febs lett 62:318321,1976
95. halestrap ap: pyruvate and ketone-body transport across the
mitochondrial membrane. exchange properties, ph-dependence and
mechanism of the carrier. biochem j 172:377-387,1978
96. denton rm, halestrap ap: regulation of pyruvate metabolism in mammalian tissues. essays biochem 15:37-77, 1979
97. krebs eg, beavo ja: phosphorylation-dephosphorylation of
enzymes. annu rev biochem 48:923-959, 1979
98. reed lj: regulation of mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex by a phosphorylation-dephosphorylation
cycle. curr top
cell regul 18:95-106, 1981
99. wieland oh: the mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase complex: structure and regulation. rev physiol biochem pharmacol
96:123-170. 1983
100. blackshear pj, holloway pah, george k, et al: factors
regulating amino release from extrasplanchnic tissues. biochem j
150x379-387,1975
101. snell k: alanine release by rat hemidiaphragm muscle in
vitro. bio sot trans 4:287-288, 1976
102. snell k, duff da: the release of alanine by rat diaphragm
muscle in vitro. biochem j 162:399-403, 1977
103. pegorier jp, ferre p, leturque a, et al: the metabolic
effects of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in the suckling newborn rat.
diabetologia 15:459-463, 1978
104. goodman ml, ruderman nb, aoki tt: glucose and amino
acid metabolism in perfused skeletal muscle. effect of  xxxd1870xxx . diabetes 27:1065-1074, 1978
105. diamond mp, suhrer jh, william pe, et al: contribution of
the hver and extrasplanchnic tissues to the hypoglycemic action of
 xxxd1870xxx  in the conscious dog. diabetes 31:326-332, 1982
106. snell k, duff da: branched-chain amino acid metabolism
and alanine formation in rat diaphragm muscle in vitro. biochem j
223:831-835, 1984
107. diamond mp, rollings rc, erlendson l, et al:  xxxd1870xxx -its in vivo effects on carbohydrate metabolism in the conscious
dog. diabetes 29:702-709, 1980
108. diamond mp, williams pe, lacy ww, et al: effect of
 xxxd1870xxx  on gluconeogenesis in vivo in the presence of a fixed
gluconeogenic substrate supply to the liver. metabolism 30:880-885,
1981
109. stacpoole pw: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  on gluconeogenesis
in isolated rat hepatocytes. metabolism 26:107-l 16, 1976
1io. demaugre f, leroux j, cartier p: the effects of pyruvate
concentration,  xxxd1870xxx  and a-cyano-4- xxxd1756xxx  on
gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis and [3-hydroxybutyrate]/[3-oxybutyrate] ratios in isolated rat hepatocytes. biochem j 172:91-96, 1978
11 i. crabb dw, harris ra: mechanism responsible for the
hypoglycemic actions of  xxxd1870xxx  and 2-chloropropionate.
arch biochem biophys 198:145-152, 1979
112. demaugre f, cepanec c, leroux jp: characterization of
oxalate as a catabolite of  xxxd1870xxx  responsible for the inhibition of gluconeogenesis and pyruvate carboxylation in rat liver cells.
biochem biophys res commun 85:1180-l 185, 1978
i13. kitagawa k, nishino h, iwashima a: insulin-like effects of
dichloroacctic acid on hexose transport in swiss 3t3 cells. experientia 43:323-324, 1987
114. sener a, kawazu s, hutton jc, et al: the stimulussecretion coupling of glucose-induced insulin release effect of exogenous pyruvate on islet function. biochem j 176:217-232, 1978
115. loubatieres-mariani mm, alric a, blayac jp, et al: is

1139

lactate involved in  xxxd2903xxx -induced insulin secretion? horm
metab res 11:95-99, 1979
116. ribes g, blayac jp, valette g, et al: evidence for a role of
exogenous or endogenous hyperlactatemia in insulin secretion in the
dog. j physiol paris 75:88 l-886, 1979
117. ward ra, wathen rl, harding gb, et al: comparative
metabolic effects of acetate and  xxxd1870xxx  infusion in the
anesthetized dog. metabolism 34:680-687, 1985
118. stacpoole pw, moore gw, kornhauser dm: metabolic
effects of  xxxd1870xxx  in patients with diabetes mellitus and
hyperlipoproteinemia. n engl j med 298:526-530,1978
119. stand1 e, janka hu, wittmann p, et al: effect of dca on
elevated blood lactate levels in biguanide treated diabetes. verh
dtshgesinnmed84:1184-1187,
1978
120. wells pg, moore gw, rabin d, et al: metabolic effects and
pharmacokinetics of intravenously administered  xxxd1870xxx  in
humans. diabetologia 19:109-l 13, 1980
12 1. curry sh, chu pi, baumgartner tg, et al: plasma concentrations and metabolic effects of intravenous sodium  xxxd1870xxx .
clin pharmacol ther 37:89-93,1985
122. wargovich tj, macdonald rg, hill ja, et al: myocardial
metabolic and hemodynamic effects of  xxxd1870xxx  in coronary
artery disease. am j cardiol61:65-70, 1988
123. merrill gf, zambraski ej, grass1 sm: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  on plasma lactic acid in exercising dogs. j appl physiol
48:427-431,198o
124. hanson rl, ho rs, wiseberg jj. et al: inhibition of
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis by 2,5-anhydro- xxxd2540xxx . j
biol chem 259:218-223, 1984
125. loubatieres-mariani mm, dalstein jm, ribes g, et al:
effect of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  (dca) on retinal lactate level in
diabetic rat. horm metab res 13:239, 1981
126. merrill gf, rosolowsky m: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  sodium on the lactacidemia of experimental endotoxin shock. circ
shock 7:13-21, 1980
127. vary tc, siegel jh, tall be, et al: altered glucose
regulation in sepsis revealed by partial reversal of pdh inhibition by
 xxxd1870xxx . circ shock 17:372,1986
128. holloway pah, aberti kgmm: reversal of phenformininduced hyperlactaemia by  xxxd1870xxx  in normal and diabetic
rats. diabetologia 11:350-351, 1975
129. loubatieres a, ribes g, valette g: pharmacologic. reduction par le  xxxd1870xxx  de sodium et par l’lnsuline des hyperlactatemies graves consecutives chez le chien anesthisie ou eveille a
l’administration de  xxxd2903xxx . c r acad sot paris 284:325-327,
1977
130. loubatieres a, valette g, ribes g, et al:  xxxd1870xxx  de
sodium son application a la therapeutique des hyperlactatemies
experimentales. diabete metab 4:5-l 1, 1978
131. loubatietes a, ribes g, valette g, et al: actions du
 xxxd1870xxx  de sodium associe a i’insuline sur l’hyperlactatemie
et l’hyperpyruvicemie provoguees chez le chien par la  xxxd2903xxx .
c r sot biol 171:150-155, 1974
132. holloway pah, alberti kgmm:  xxxd2903xxx -induced lactic acidosis: prevention by  xxxd1870xxx . clin sci mol med
50:33p, 1976
133. cingolani ml, bastianelli p, cannelli b, et al: equilibrii
redox e fosforilativi delle vie centrali metaboliche: profolip
epatico in condizioni di controllo, di trattamento con dicloroacetato e con  xxxd2903xxx  seguita da dicloroacetate nel ratto. boll
sot ital biol sper 56:1097-l 102, 1980
134. park r, arieff ai: treatment of lactic acidosis with  xxxd1870xxx  in dogs. j clin invest 70:853-862, 1982
135. johnson gah, george k, alberti mm: the metabolic

1140

effects of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in experimental hepatitis in the rat.
bio sot tram 51387-1388.1977
136. loubatieres al, ribes g, valette g: pharmacological
agents and acute experimental hyperlactataemia in the dog. br 3
pharmacol58:28,1976
137. graf h, leach w, arieff ai: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  in
the treatment of hypoxic lactic acidosis in dogs. j clin invest
76:919-923,1985
138. romeh aa, tannen rl: therapeutic benefit of  xxxd1870xxx  in experimentally induced hypoxic lactic acidosis. j lab clin
med 107:378-383,1986
139. sheikh a, fleisher g, paredes cd, et al: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  in the treatment of anoxic lactic acidosis in dogs. crit care
med 14:970-973,1986
140. nakata f, kemmotsu 0, tanaka r: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  on plasma lactic acid in experimentally produced hypoxia. jpn j
anesth 35:859-1865.1986
141. nakata f, kemmotsu 0, tanaka r: comparative effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  and sodium bicarbonate on plasma lactic acid levels
in experimentally produced hypoxia. jpn j anesth 36:1100-l 107,
1987
142. mccormack cj, naim jo, hinshaw jr: improvement of
lactic acidosis from intestinal ischemia using  xxxd1870xxx . curr
surg 44:472-476,1987
143. robinson bh, taylor j, sherwood wc: the genetic heterogenicity of lactic acidosis: occurrence of recognizable inborn errors
of metabolism in a pediatric population with lactic acidosis. pediatr
res 14:956-962,198o
144. blass jp: inborn errors of pyruvate metabolism in stanbury
jb, wyngarden jb, fredrickson ds, et al (eds): the metabolic
basis of inherited disease. new york, mcgraw-hill, 1983, pp
193-203
145. kuroda y, naito e, takeda e, et al: congenital lactic
acidosis. enzyme 38:108-l 14.1987
146. coude fx, saudbray jm, demaugre f, et al:  xxxd1870xxx  as treatment for congenital lactic acidosis. n engl j med
299:1365-1366,1978
147. mckhann g, francois b, evrard p: long term use of low
doses of  xxxd1870xxx  in a child with congenital lactic acidosis.
pediatr res 14:167, 1980
148. haworth jc, robinson bh, perry tl: lactic acidosis due to
 xxxg1674xxx  deficiency. j inherited metab dis 4:57-58,
1981
149. aynsley-green a, weindling am, soltesz g, et al: transient lactic acidosis and hyperalaninaemia associated with neonatal
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia: the effects of  xxxd1870xxx 
(dca). eur j pediatr 14:114-117, 1983
150. aynsley-green a, weindling am, soltesz g, et al: case
report.  xxxd1870xxx  in the treatment of congenital lactic acidosis.
j inherited metab dis 7:26,1984
151. kuroda y, ito m, toshima k, et al: treatment of chronic
congenital lactic acidosis by oral administration of  xxxd1870xxx . j
inherited metab dis 9:244-252, 1986
152. soltesz g, aynsley-green a, weindling am, et al: the use
of  xxxd1870xxx  (dca) in the treatment of lactic acidaemia.
report of two cases. pediatr res 18:93,1984
153. okabe i, kodama h, shimoizumi h, et al: treatment of
lactic acidosis: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on lactate and pyruvate
levels in the cerebral spinal fluid. eur j pediatr 145:159, 1986
154. kodama h, yamaguchi s, okabe i, et al: renal effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  in vivo. clin chim acta 160:265-271, 1986
155. miyabayashi s, narisawa k: clinical and biochemical
approach to mitochondrial cytopathy-pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex deficiency. no tu hattatsu 19:125-131, 1987
156. stacpcole pw, lorenz ac, thomas rg, et al: dichloroace-

peter w. stacpoole

tate in the treatment of lactic acidosis. ann intern med 108:58-63,
1988
157. natio e, kuroda y, taketa e, et al: detection of pyruvate
metabolism disorders by culture of skin fibroblasts with  xxxd1870xxx . pediatr res 23:561-564, 1988
158. irsigler k, kaspar l, kritz h:  xxxd1870xxx  in biguanideinduced lacticacidosis. lancet 2: 1026- 1027, 1977
159. irsigler k, brandle j, kaspar l, et al: treatment of
biguanide-induced lactic acidosis with  xxxd1870xxx . arzneimittelforschung 29:555-559,1979
160. blackshear pj, fang lst, axelrod l: treatment of severe
lactic acidosis with  xxxd1870xxx . diabetes care 5:391-394, 1982
161. stacpoole pw, harman em, curry sh, et al: treatment of
lactic acidosis with  xxxd1870xxx . n engl j med 309:390-396,
1983
162. misbin ri:  xxxd2903xxx -associated lactic acidosis: pathogenesis and treatment. ann intern med 87:591-595,1977
163. kreisberg ra: lactate homeostasis and lactic acidosis. ann
intern med 92:227-237, 1980
164. warner a, vaziri nd: treatment of lactic acidosis. south
med fj 74:841-847, 1981
165. park r, arieff ai: lactic acidosis: current concepts. clin
endocrinol metab 12:339-358, 1983
166. stacpoole pw: lactic acidosis: the case against bicarbonate
therapy. ann intern med 105:276-279, 1986
167. dca-lactic acidosis collaborative study group: the design of a randomized, multicenter study of sodium  xxxd1870xxx 
(dca) as a treatment for lactic acidosis. sot clin trials 8:291-292,
1987
168. izquierdo m, anguirre d, de armijo m: effect of vitamin
b-15 on hepatic necrosis produced by ccl-4. arch inst farmacol
exp 11:102-115, 1959
169. cagianelli ma, spremolla g: effects of diisopropylammonium dichloroethanoate on the histological biochemical changes in
the initial stages of carbon tetrachloride poisoning. minerva med
51:2924-2928,196o
170. cagianelli ma, spremolla g: effects of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa or is-401) on the histological and
biohumoral alterations in the initial phases of carbon tetrachloride
intoxication. instituto di patologia speciale medics e metadologia
clinica dell universita de pisa 51:2920-2924,196l
171. gambini g, manganaro m: study of the effect of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  in comparison with other hepatoprotectors in the wistar rat intoxicated with carbon tetrachloride.
arch ital sci med trop parassitol46:3-370, 1965
172. kruglikova-l’vova r, rekunova v, ushakova m, et al:
synthesis of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  and a study of its
pharmacological properties. med prom sssr 19:19-22, 1965
173. abdullev n: the effect of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx , a pangamic acid ( xxxd2716xxx ,,) analog, on some metabolic
indices in experimental chronic toxic hepatitis. vop pitan 26:52-62,
1967
174. mitkov d: the effect of pangamic acid on fatty liver in
experimental alcohol intoxication. folia medica 9: 180-l 84,1967
175. abdullev nk: effect of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  on the pathochemical changes in experimentally induced heliotrin hepatitis. meditsinskii zhurnal uzbekistana 12: 13-i 7, 1966
176. ceccarelli g: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  in psychiatric therapy. neuropscichiatria 14591-605, 1966
177. barbieri ll, pedrazzi f: effect of diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  on absorption and utilization of protein hydrolyzates. minerva med 51:2924-2926, 1960
178. vailati g: clinio-metabolic observation during treatment
with di-isopropylammonium dichloroetanoate in patients with cirrhosis of the liver. minerva med 51:2950-2953,196o

pharmacology

of oichloroacetate

179. vailati g: clinico-metabolic survey of the treatment of
hepatic cirrhosis with diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx . minerva medica 51:46-2948, 1960
180. miyazaki m, izeri y, takedatsu s, et al: treatment of acute
hepatitus with dada. teishin igaku 13:854-858, 1961
181. mennucci f, antonelli ca: effects of the diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dida) treatment in chronical hepatopathies.
minerva gastroenterol8:8- 11, 1962
182. rini u, de masi c, gelli br: trattamento delle manifestazioni neuropsichiche da alcoolismo cronico con dicloroetanoato di
diisopropilammonio. gazz med ital 121:260-262, 1962
183. manganaro m, frega f: the action of diisopropylammonium dichlorocthanoate on the hepatic circle. arch ital sci med
trop46:371-376, 1965
184. gambini g, manganaro m: about 30 cases of medium
hepatic insufficiency treated with the combination of diisopropylammonium dichloroethanoate, antitoxic hepatic extract and b complex.
arch ital sci med trop 46:359-362, 1965
185. man kc, brosnan jt: inhibition of medium and short-chain
fatty acid oxidation in rat heart mitochondria by  xxxd1870xxx .
metabolism 31:44-748, 1982
186. mjos od, miller ne, riemersma ra, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  on myocardial substrate extraction, epicardial stsegment elevation, and ventricular blood flow following coronary
occlusion in dogs. cardiovasc res 10:427-436,1976
187. diamond mp, suhrer jh, williams pe, et al: dichioroacetate: direct inhibitor of lipolysis in the conscious dog. horm metab
res 14:102-103, 1978
188. stansbie d, sherriff rj: metabolic effects of  xxxd1870xxx . n engl j med 299:256, 1978
189. agius l, watts di, sugden mc: effects of  xxxd1870xxx 
on fatty acid synthesis in interscapular brown adipose tissue of the
rat in vivo and in vitro. horm metab res 15:482-485, 1983
190. misbin ri: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on lipid metabolism in
isolated rat liver cells. diabetes 28:265-271, 1979
19 1. stacpoole pw, harwood hj, varnado ce: regulation of rat
liver hydroxymethylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx  reductase by a new class of
noncompetitive inhibitors. j clin invest 72:1575-1585, 1983
192. but ha, demaugre f, moncion a, et al: effects of oxalate
and  xxxd1870xxx  on lipogenesis and ketongenesis in rat hepatocytes. biochem biophys res commun 104:1107-l 113, 1982
193. demaugre f, but ha, cepanec c, et al: comparison of the
effects of 2chloropropionate and  xxxd1870xxx  on ketogenesis and
lipogenesis in isolated rat hepatocytes. biochem pharmacol32:18811885,1983
194. mariash cn, oppenheimer jh: stimulation of malic enzyme formation in hepatocyte culture by metabolites: evidence
favoring a nonglycolytic metabolite as the proximate induction
signal. metabolism 33:545-552, 1983
195. mariash cn, schwartz hl: effect of  xxxd1870xxx  acid
on rat hepatic messenger rna activity profiles. metabolism 35:452456,1986
196. reed gh, morgan s: kinetic and magnetic resonance
studies of the interaction of oxalate with pyruvate kinase. biochemistry 133537-3541, 1974
197. felts jm, staprans i, stacpoole pw: the effect of sodium
 xxxd1870xxx  (dca) on plasma triglycerides of  xxxd3249xxx 
diabetic rats. diabetes 25:363, 1976 (suppl)
198. hayek a, woodside wf: short-term influences of  xxxd1870xxx  on genetically hyperlipemic rats. metabolism 29:120-124,
1980
199. hayek a, woodside wf: long-term  xxxd1870xxx  administration to genetically hyperlipemic rats. horm metab res 13:184185, 1980
200. vainio h, linnainmaa k, kahonen m, et al: hypolipidemia

1141

and peroxisome proliferation induced by phenoxyacetic acid herbicides in rats. biochem pharmacol32:2775-2779, 1983
201. denicola p, giarola p, egge h, et al: the role of platelets in
haemostasis and thrombosis. acta univ carol med 53:416-420,
1972
202. moore gw, swift ll, rabinowitz d, et al: reduction of
serum cholesterol in two patients with homozygous  xxxg1318xxx  by  xxxd1870xxx . atherosclerosis 33:285-293,1979
203. brown ms, goldstein jl: a receptor mediated pathway for
cholesterol homeostasis. science 232:34-47, 1986
204. shireman rb, mace l, davidson s: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  and glycoxylate on low density liprotein uptake and growth of
cultured fibroblasts. proc sot exp biol med 175:420-423, 1984
205. rodwell vw, nordstrom jl, mitschlen jj: regulation of
 xxxg1060xxx . adv lipid res 14:l-74, 1976
206. harwood hj, schneider m, stacpoole pw: measurement of
human leukocyte microsomal  xxxg1060xxx  activity. j lipid
res 25:967-978, 1984
207. harwood hj, bridge dm, stacpoole pw: in vivo regulation
of human mononuclear leukocyte 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl  xxxd1739xxx  reductase, studies in normal subjects. j clin invest 79: 11251132,1987
208. stacpoole pw, grundy sm, swift ll, et al: elevated
cholesterol and bile acid synthesis in an adult patient with homozygous  xxxg1318xxx . reduction by a high glucose
diet. jclininvest68:1166-1171,
1981
209. have1 rj: lowering cholesterol, 1988. rationale, mechanisms, means. j clin invest 81:1653-1660, 1988
210. axelrod b: glycolysis, in greenburg dm (ed): metabolic
pathways, vol 1 (ed 3). san diego, academic, 1967, pp 112-146
211. goodridge a: regulation of the activity of acetyl coenzyme
a carboxylase by palmitoylcoenzyme a and citrate. j biol chem
247~6946-6952, 1972
212. pardridge wm. duducgian-vartavarian l, casanello-ertl
d: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on the lactate/pyruvate ratio and on
aspartate and leucine metabolism in cultured rat skeletal muscle
cells. biochem pharmacol32:97-100, 1983
213. palmer tn, caldecourt ma, sugden mc: amino acid
oxidation and alanine production in rat hemidiaphragm in vitro.
biochem j 223:113-l 17, 1984
214. schadewaldt p, radeck w, staib w: differential effect of
 xxxd1870xxx  on branched-chain amino acid catabolism in pcrfused rat hind limbs. febs lett 183:33-36, 1985
215. sans rm, jolly ww, harris ra: studies on the regulation
of leucine catabolism: iii. effects of  xxxd1870xxx  and 2chloropropionate on leucine oxidation by the heart. j mol cell
cardiol 12:1-16, 1980
216. shinnick fl, harper ae: branched-chain amino acid oxidation by isolated rat tissue preparation. biochim biophys acta
437~477-486, 1976
217. paxton r, harris ra: clofibric acid,  xxxd2922xxx , and
dichioroacetate inhibition of branched-chain a-ketacid dehydrogenase kinase in vitro and in perfused rat heart. arch biochem biophys
231:58-66, 1984
218. odessey r: reversible atp-induced inactivation of
branched-chain 2-0~0 acid dehydrogenase. biochem j 192:155- 163,
1980
219. krebs ha: some aspects of the regulation of fuel supply in
omnivorous animals. adv enzyme regul 10:397-420, 1972
220. crabb dw, harris ra: studies on the regulation leucine
catabolism in the liver: stimulation by pyruvate and  xxxd1870xxx .
j biol chem 253:1481-1487, 1978
221. harris ra, crabb dw, sans rm: studies on the regulation
of leucine catabolism: ii. mechanism responsible for  xxxd1870xxx 

1142

stimulation of leucine oxidation. arch biochem biophys 190:8-16,
1978
222. paxton r, harris ra: isolation of rabbit liver branched
chain a-ketoacid dehydrogenase and regulation by phosphorylation.
j biol chem 25:14433-14439,1982
223. harris ra, paxton r, goodwin gw, et al: regulation of the
branched-chain 2-0~0 acid dehydrogenase complex in hepatocytes
isolated from rats fed on a low-protein diet. biochem j 234:285-294,
1986
224. vary tc, siegel jh, zechnick a, et al: pharmcological
reveral of abnormal glucose regulation, bcaa utilization, and
muscle catabolism in sepsis by  xxxd1870xxx . j trauma 28:13011311,1988
225. bersin r, kwasman m, wolfe c, et al: metabolic stimulation of hemodynamic function in chronic heart failure with sodium
 xxxd1870xxx . circulation (in press)
226. burns a, summer w:  xxxd1870xxx , lactic acidosis, and
the cardiovascular and cellular events associated with shock. j crit
care 3:79-81,1988
227. sagy m, swedlow nb, schaible dh, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  and naloxone on hemodynamic performance and
substrate use following endotoxin administration. j crit care
3:82-88, 1988
228. granot h, steiner i: successful treatment of irreversible
hemorrhagic shock in dogs with fructose-l,6 diphosphate and
 xxxd1870xxx . circshock 15163-173, 1985
229. wilson jr, mancini dm, ferraro n, et al: effect of
 xxxd1870xxx  on the exercise performance of patients with heart
failure. j am co1 cardiol 12:1464-1469, 1988
230. randle pj: regulation of glycolysis and pyruvate oxidation
in cardiac muscle. circ res 38:18-l 15, 1976 (suppl 1)
231. higgins a, morville m, burges ra: comparison of the
actions of  xxxd1870xxx  and 2-bromopalmitate in palmitateperfused rat hearts: effects on carboydrate metabolism, contractility
and oxygen consumption. bio sot trans 6: 152- 154,1978
232. burns a, summer w: the effect of  xxxd1870xxx  on the
isolated post ischemic rat heart. life sci 44:2015-2023
233. pate1 tb, olson ms: regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex in ischemic rat heart. am j physiol246:h858-h864, 1984
234. weingand kw, fettman mj, phillips rw, et al: effects of
sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in awake, healthy, yucatan miniature swine.
am j vet res 47:441-446, 1986
235. santi r, contessa ar, cozzari lv: pharmacologic action of
di-isopropyl-ammonium dichloroethanoate. minerva med 51:29132933,196o
236. kraushaar ae, schunk rw, thym hf: the pharmacology
of diisopropylamine. arzneimettel forsch 13:109- 117, 1963
237. maccari m, maggi gc: pharmacological activities of diisopropylammonium dichloroethanoate (is 401). farmaco 18:662-678,
1963
238. abdou ms, helmy r: clinico-pharmacological studies of
the actions of diisopropylamine  xxxd1870xxx  (is 401). j egypt
med assx 46:399-406,1966
239. barbano g, turbiglio pc: treatment of angina pectoris with
a new compound: dipa (is 401). minerva med 51:2949-2954,196o
240. guagliano g, stoppani l, vittori c: use of diisopropylammonium dichloroethanoate (diedi) in the treatment of chronic
arterioscelotic obliterating peripheral arterial disease. minerva med
51:2935-2939,196o
241. muscari a: the clinical use of is-401. minerva med
51:2963-2967,196o
242. cuccia d, arposio m: first results of the treatment of
“raynaud’s disease” with diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx .
riv patol clin 16:695-700, 1961
243. ninni n, zanettin g: therapeutic effect of diisopropylammo-

peter w. stacpoole

nium  xxxd1870xxx  in coronaropathies. minerva cardioang 9:126134,196l
244. velati g: considerations of the use of diisopropylammonium
 xxxd1870xxx  in the treatment of arteriosclerotic arteriopathies in
thelowerlimbs. minervachir7:1121-1125, 1962
245. beretta a, dogliotti am, dogliotti gc, et al: indagini con
somministrazione di dicloroetanoato di diisopropilammonio in
corso di arteriopatia. minerva cardionagiol 11:681-686, 1963
246. de liperi e, coli r: diisipropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx 
in the treatment of chronic coronary disease. gazz med ital
122:43-53,1963
247. ruberti a, manzoli u, antonioli g, et al: dicloroetanoato di
diisopropilammonio nelle vasculopatie periferiche. minerva cardioangiol 11:600-603, 1963
248. ruberti a, manzoli u, tomasi am, et al: dicloroetanoato
di diisopropilammonio nelle vasculopatie periferiche. minerva
cardioangiol 11:12-18, 1963
249. ricci l, negroni g: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx 
in combination with oxygen therapy and vasodilators in some
ophthalmological cases. ann ottal clin ocul 100:844-850, 1963
250. martelli a, rossi s, cavara v: dicloroethanoata di diisopropilammonio in patologia cardiovascolare. minerva med 54:793798,1963
25 1. bovi a: effectti de1 diclorcetanoato di diisopropilammonio
iniettato endocarotide in soggetti vasculopatici - relievi angiografici e reografici. giornale di psichiatria e di neuropatologia
l:l-52, 1963
252. mocchi n, malusardi r: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa) in the treatment of peripheral arteriopathy in senile
persons. gazz med ital 1’22:310-315, 1963
253. quevauviller a, dupont c: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  with emphasis on its ganglioplegic action. therapie 16:136141,1961
254. stacpoole pw, iwamoto e, glasgow ce: diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  (dipa): reversible antagonism towards smooth
muscle stimulants and inhibition of acetylcholinesterase in the
isolated guinea pig ileum. res commun chem path01 pharmacol
2:439-446, 1971
255. randazzo sd: comparative clinical evaluation of the effects
of octamethylated pangamic acid and diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  in dermatological pathology. rassegna di dermatologia e
di sifilografia 11:83-91, 1958
256. fortunato a, ghersina s, parentin c: clinical considerations on the use of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx . gazz
med ital 122:19-24, 1963
257. lemieux g, vinay p, baverel g, et al: relationship between
lactate and glutamine metabolism in vitro by the kidney: differences
between dog and rat and importance of alanine synthesis in the dog.
kidney int 16:451-455, 1979
258. hulter hn, glynn rd. sebastian a: renal and systemic
acid-base effects of chronic  xxxd1870xxx  administration in dogs.
metabolism 29:997-1002, 1980
259. davis me: effect of chloroacetic acids on the kidney.
environ heatlh perspect 69:209-214,1986
260. santarato r, manzini e, giaroli m, et al: study of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx . arch ital sci farmacol 8:271-277,
1958
26 1. santarato a: study of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  as administered to animals treated with barbiturates. arch ital
sci farmacol8:289-292,1958
262. santarato r: study of diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  and other similar molecules. their effect alone or in combination
with thiopental on the oxygen consumption of rat brain homogenates. boll chim farm 98:72-78, 1959
263. santarato r: research on diisopropylammonium dichloro-

pharmacology

of  xxxd1870xxx 

ethanoate and other similar molecules. boll chim farm 98:79-82,
1959
264. soliano a: osteogenetic processes and diisopropylammonium  xxxd1870xxx  3. interference in the rapidly growing cartilage
damage by antimytotic action. biol lat 14:303-308, 1961
265. pardridge wr, oldendorf wh: transport of metabolic
substrates through blood-brain barrier. j neurochem 28:5-12, 1977
266. yang j, smith ra: the effect of  xxxd1870xxx  on the
phosphorylation of mitochondria proteins. biochem biophys res
commun lll:lo54-1058.1983
267. pettit fh, roche te, reed lj: function of calcium ions in
pyruvate dehyrogenase phosphatase activity. biochem biophys res
commun 49:563-571,
268. evans ob: effects of  xxxd1870xxx  on brain tissue pyruvate dehydrogenase. j neurol41:1052-1056,1983
269. schaffer wt, olson ms: the regulation of pyruvate oxidation during membrane depolarization of rat brain synaptosomes.
biochem j 192:741-751, 1980
270. dimlich rvw, biros mh, barsan wg: treatment of lactic
acidosis that follows partial cerebral ischemia in the rat. j cereb
blood flow metab 5:237-238, 1985 (suppi 1)
271. colohan art, welsh fa. miller ed, et al: the effect of
 xxxd1870xxx  on brain lactate levels following incomplete ichemia
in the hyperglycemic rat. stroke 17:525-528, 1986
272. biros mh, dimlich rvw, barsan wg: postinsult treatment of &hernia-induced cerebral lactic acidosis in the rat. ann
emerg med 15:397-404, 1986
273. barson wg, hedges jr, syverud sa, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  in spinal stroke in the rabbit. life sci 41:1065-1069,
1987
274. biros mh, dimlich rvw: brain lactate during partial
global ischemia and reperfusion: effect of pretreatment with dichlcroacetate in a rat model. am j emerg med 5:271-277, 1987
275. gin-shaw sl, barsan wg, eymer v, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  following canine asphyxsial arrest. ann emerg med
17:473-477, 1988
276. neubauer ja, simone a, edelman nh: role of brain
acidosis in hypoxic depression of respiration. j appl physiol65:13241331, 1988
277. rehncrona s, rosen l, siespo bk: brain lactic acidosis and
ischemic cell damage: biochemistry and neurophysiology. j cereb
blood flow metab 1:297-311, 1981
278. micklawsky mg, dimlich rvw:  xxxd1870xxx  treatment of seizure induced cortical and serum hyperlactatemia in rats.
clin res 35:26a, 1987
279. syverud sa, barsan wg, van ligten pf, et al: effects of
 xxxd1870xxx  administration during fatal hemorrhagic shock in
immature swine. ann emerg med 16:1228-1230,1987
280. dimlich rvw, biros mh, widman dw, et al: comparison
of sodium bicarbonate with  xxxd1870xxx  treatment of hyperlactatemia and lactic acidosis in the ishemic rat. resuscitation 16:1330, 1988
28 i. young pr, zygas ap: secretion of lactic acid by peritoneal
macrophages during extracellular phagocytosis. the possible role of
hyperacidity in inflammatory demyelination. j neuroimmunol 15:
295-308, 1986
282. kirk j: the fine structure of the cns in multiple sclerosis:
ii. vesicular demyelination in an acute case. neuropathol appl
neurobiol5:289-294, 1979
283. trugate v, reinherz el, raine cs: multiple sclerosis:
distribution of t cell subsets within active chronic lesions. science
219:308-310, 1983
284. bever ct, whitaker jn: proteinases in inflammatory demyelinating diseases. semin immunopathol8:235-250, 1985
285. de maio d, zubiana a: diisopropylammonium dichloroace-

1143

tate (dipa) neuropsychiatry clinical, humoral, and bioelectric
contribution in individual cases. minerva med 5 1:2935-2945, 1960
286. curry sh, smith cm: diazepam-ethanol interaction in
humans: addition or potentiation? community psychopharmacol
3:101-113,1979
287. curry sh, devane cl, wolfe mm: hypotension and
bradycardia induced by amitriptyline in healthy volunteers. human
psychopharmacol3:47-52, 1988
288. soliano a: osteogenic processes and diisopropylammonium
dichloroethanate. biol latina 14:297-300,196l
289. rienzo c, soliano a: osteogenic processes and disopropylammonium dichlorethanate: iv. bone vascularization as a manifestation of increased osteogenic processes. biol latina 14:309-312
290. soliano a, tagliabue d: osteogenic processes and diisopropylammonium dichloroethanate: v. homoplastic graft “take” and
bone callus formation. biol latina 14:313-3 19, 196 1
291. dalstein jm, ribes g, campo p, et al: effect of sodium
 xxxd1870xxx  on dental caries in diabetic rats. horm metab res
14:438-439, 1982
292. hems r: the effect of  xxxd1870xxx  and hypdroxypyruvate on the entry of 14-c from [l-“c] alanine into urea in rat
hepatocytes. febs lett 160:255-258, 1983
293. rowsell ev, snell k, carnie ja, et al: the subcellular
distribution of rat liver i- xxxg102xxx  in
relation to a pathway for glucose formation involving glyoxylate.
biochem j 127:155-165, 1972
294. hems r: mitochondrial compartmentation of metabolic
co-2 resulting from its site of origin in relation to urea synthesis.
febs lett 177:138-142, 1984
295. pohl lr, krishna g: study of the mechanism of metabolic
activation of chloramphenicol by rat liver microsomes. biochem
pharmacol27:335-341,1978
296. pohl lr, nelson sd, krishna g: investigation of the
mechanism of the metabolic activation of chloramphenicol by rat
liver microsomes. identification of a new metabolite. biochem
pharmacol27:491-496, 1978
297. greenstein lr, hitt ba, mazzi ri: metabolism in vitro of
 xxxd1993xxx , isoflurane and methoyxflurane. anesthesiology 42:420424,1975
298. mazze ri, trudell jr, cousins mj:  xxxd2604xxx  metabolism and renal dysfunction. anesthesiology 35:247-255, 1971
299. holaday da, rudofsky s, treuhaft ps: the metabolic
degredation of  xxxd2604xxx  in man. anesthesiology 33:579-593,
1970
300. selinsky bs, perlman me, london re: in vivo nuclear
magnetic resonance studies of hepatic methoxyflurance metabolism:
ii. a reevaluation of hepatic metabolic pathways. mol pharmacol
331567-573, 1988
301. schultz dr, marxmiller rl, koos ba: residue determination of dichlorvos and related metabolites in animal tissue and fluids.
j agric food chem 19:1238-1243,1971
302. bonse g, urban t, reichert d, et al: chemical reactivity,
metabolic oxirane formation and biological reactivity of chlorinated
ethylenes in the isolated perfused rat liver preparation. biochem
pharmacol24:1829-1834. 1975
303. jones bk, hathway de: the biological fate of vinylidene
chloride in rats. chem biol interact 20:27-41, 1978
304. halpert j, neal ra: cytochrome p-450-dependent metabolism of 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane to  xxxd1870xxx  in vitro.
biochem pharmacol30: 1366- 1368,198o
305. miller jw, uden pc: characterization of nonvolatile aqueous chlorination products of humic substances. environ sci technol
17:150-157, 1983
306. vandyke ra: dechlorination of mechanisms of chlorinated
olefins. environ health perspect 21:121-124, 1977

1144

307. chu pi: pharmacokinetics of sodium  xxxd1870xxx . doctoral dissertation. university of florida, gainesville, fl, 1987
308. de bruijne aw, vreeburg h, van steveninck j: alternativesubstrate inhibition of l-lactate transport via the monocarboxylatespecific carrier system in human erythrocytes. biochim biophys
acta 812:841-844, 1985
309. tolbert ne: metabolic pathways in peroxisomes and glyoxysomes. annu rev biochem 50: 133- 157,198 1
310. hodgkinson a:  xxxd2802xxx  in biology and medicine. san
diego, academic, 1977, pp 52-61
3 11. lukas g, vyas kh, brindle sd, et al: biological disposition
of sodium  xxxd1870xxx  in animals and humans after intravenous
administration. j pharm sci 69:419-420, 1981
3 12. stacpoole pw, gonzalez mg, vlasak j, et al:  xxxd1870xxx  derivatives. metabolic effects and pharmacodynamics in normal
rats. life sci 41:2167-2176, 1987
313. bergmann f, haskelberg l: synthesis of lipophilic chemotherapeuticals: iii. remarks on the properties of halogen-acylureas,
amides and related compounds. j am chem sot 68:1437-1439,
1941
314. woodard g, lange sw, nelson kw, et al: the acute oral
toxicity of acetic, chloracetic, dichloracetic and trichloracetic acids.
j indus hyg toxicol23:78-81,194l
3 15. laug ep: effect of acetic, monochloroacetic, dichloroacetic,
trichloroacetic acids on oxygen consumption of mouse liver. proc sot
exp biol med 61:178-179, 1946
316. morrison jl: toxicity of certain halogen substituted aliphatic acids for white mice. j pharmacol exp ther 86:336, 1946
3 17. smith hf, carpenter cp, weil cs: range-finding toxicity
data: list iv. arch ind hyg occup med 4:119-122,1951
3 18. kratzing cc: variations in toxicity of some halogen derivatives of acetic acid in rats. biochem pharmacol3:245-247, 1960
3 19. lepoidevin n: the toxicity of some halogenated  xxxd2154xxx 
and their derivatives. acta pharmacol toxicol23:98-102, 1965
320. chappel c, vielander l: toxicity studies on  xxxd3050xxx  (diisopropylaminedichloroacetate).
montreal, bio-research laboratories,
1966
321. dierickx pj: in vitro binding of acetic acid and its chlorinated derivatives by the soluble glutathione s-transferases from rat
liver. res commun chem path01 pharmacol44:327-330,1984
322. rannug u, gothe r, wachtmeister ca: the mutagenicity
of chloroethylene oxide, chloroacetaldehyde, 2chloroethanol and
chloroacetic acid, conceivable metabolites of vinyl chloride. chem
biol interact 12:251-263, 1976
323. hussain s, oseterman-golkar s: comment on the mutagenic effectiveness of vinyl chloride metabolites. chem biol interact
12~265-267, 1976
324. weisburger ek: carcinogenicity studies on halogenated
hydrocarbons. environ health perspect 21:7-16, 1977
325. fischer gw, schneider p, schuefler h: zur mutagenitat
von dichloracetaldehyd und 2,2-dichlor-l,l-dihydroxy-athanphosphonsauremethylester, moglichen metaboliten des phosphororganisthen pestizides trichlorphon. chem-biol. interactions 19:205-213,
1977

peter

w. stacpoole

326. lofroth g: the mutagenicity of dichloracetaldehyde. naturforsch 33:783-785, 1978
327. waskell l: a study of the mutagenicity of anesthetics and
their metabolites. mutation res 57:141-153, 1978
328. nestmann er, chu i, kowbel dj, et al: short-lived mutagen in salmonella produced by reaction of trichloroacetic acid and
dimethyl sulphoxide. can j genet cytol22:35-40, 1980
329. weightman aj, weightman al, slater jh: toxic effects of
chlorinated and brominated alkanoic acids on pseudomonas putida
pp3: selection at high frequencies of mutations in genes encoding
dehalogenases. appl environ microbial 49: 1494-1501, 1985
330. herbert v, gardner a, coleman n: mutagenicity of  xxxd1870xxx  (dca), an ingredient of the “cancer cure” pangamic acid
(“ xxxd2716xxx -15”). blood 52:252, 1978 (suppl)
331. herbert v, gardner a, coleman n:  xxxd1870xxx -a
mutagen? n engl j med 300:625,1979
332. gelernt md, herbert v: mutagenicity of diisopropylamine
 xxxd1870xxx , the “active constituent” of vitamin b15 (pangamic
acid). nutr cancer 3:129-133, 1982
333. herbert v, gardner a, coleman n: mutagenicity of  xxxd1870xxx , an ingredient of some formulations of pangamic acid
(trade-named“ xxxd2716xxx -15”). am j clin nutr 33:1179-l 182,198o
334. traina v, thompson s, katz r, et al: cgs 7937a (sodium
 xxxd1870xxx ): acute and subacute toxicity studies in mice, rats
and dogs. summit, nj, ciba-geigy, 1977
335. stacpoole pw, harwood hj jr, cameron df, et al: chronic
toxicity of  xxxd1870xxx : possible relation to thiamine deficiency in
rats. (submitted)
336. stacpoole pw, moore gw, kornhauser dk: toxicity of
chronic  xxxd1870xxx . n engl j med 300:372, 1979
337. katz r, tai cn, diener rm, et al:  xxxd1870xxx , sodium:
3-month oral toxicity studies in rats and dogs. toxicol appl
pharmacol57:273-287,198l
338. spencer ps, bischoff mc, stacpoole pw: differential neurotoxicity of  xxxd1870xxx  and 2,5-hexanedione: implications for the
pathogenesis of gamma diketone neuropathy. toxicologist 1:51,
1981
339. yount ea, felten sy, o’connor bl, et al: comparison of
the metabolic and toxic effects of 2-chloropropionate and  xxxd1870xxx . j pharmacol exp ther 222:501-508, 1982
340. stacpoole pw, harwood hj jr, curry sh, et al: induction
of thiamine deficiency by  xxxd1870xxx . clin res 32:236a, 1984
341. csiza ck: lipid class analysis of the central nervous system
of myelin-deficient wistar rats. j lipid res 23:720-724,1982
342. stillway lw, weigand da, buse mg: leucine as an in vitro
precursor to lipids in rat sciatic nerve. lipids 14:127- 13 1, 1979
343. bilbao jm, berry h, marotta j, et al: peripheral neuropathy
in oxalosis. a case report with electron microscopic observations.
can j  xxxd122xxx  sci 3:63-67, 1976
344. fielder ar, garner a, chambers tl: ophthalmic manifestations of primary oxalosis. br j ophthalmol64:782-788, 1980
345. caine r, albert dm, lahav m, et al: oxalate retinopathy:
an experimental model of a flecked retina. invest ophthalmol
14:359-363,1975

