chirality 1:265-270 (1989)

the interaction of the enantiomers of carvedilol
with al-and pi-adrenoceptors
andrew j. nichols, anthony c. sulpizio, daryl j. ashton,
j. paul hieble, and robert r. ruffolo, jr.
department of phnrmcobgy, smith kline & french laboratories, 709 swedeland
road, king of prussia, pennsylvania 19406

abstract
the stereoselectivity of carvedilol, a novel p-adrenoceptor antagonist and vasodilator with one asymmetric carbon atom, was examined a t al- and
p,-adrenoceptors in vitro and in vivo. (-)-(s)-carvedilol is a potent, competitive
antagonist of the pi-adrenoceptor-mediated positive chronotropic response to
 xxxd2401xxx  in guinea pig atrium, with a dissociation constant ( k , ) of 0.4 nm.
( +)-(r)-carvedilol was more than 100-fold less potent than the (-)-s-enantiomer as
an antagonist of &-andrenoceptors, having a k, of approximately 45 nm. consistent
with these findings (-)-(s)-carvedilol (0.1 mg/kg, i.v.) produced a 25-fold rightward
shift in the /i,-adrenoceptor-mediatedpositive chronotropic response to  xxxd2401xxx 
in pithed rats, whereas the (+)-r-enantiomer had no p,-adrenoceptor blocking
activity in vivo a t this dose. in contrast to the marked degree of stereoselectivity
observed at 8,-adrenoceptors, both ( - )-(s)- and ( + )-(r)-carvedilol produced equal
antagonism of the a,-adrenoceptor-mediated vasoconstrictor response to norepinephrine in rabbit aorta, with k , values of 14 and 16 nm, respectively.
furthermore, in the pithed rat, the a,-adrenoceptor-mediated pressor dose-response
curve to  xxxd1707xxx  was shifted approximately 6-fold to the right by both the (+)-rand (-)-s-enantiomers of carvedilol a t a dose of 1 mg/kg, i.v. in anesthetized
spontaneously hypertensive rats, ( - )-(s)-carvedilol was 6-fold more potent as an
antihypertensive than ( + )-(r)-carvedilol. the vasodilator and acute antihypertensive
activity of carvedilol results from a,-andrenoceptor blockade produced by both
enantiomers, and the concomitant &-adrenoceptor blockade produced by the ( - )-senantiomer, which prevents reflex tachycardia that can offset the antihypertensive
response, leading to greater overall antihypertensive potency of ( - )-(s)-carvedilol
relative to the (+)-r-enantiomer. these data also suggest that distinct regions of the
carvedilol molecule are responsible for blocking a,- and p,-adrenoceptors, with
pi-adrenoceptor blockade resulting from an area of the molecule containing the
asymmetric carbon atom, specifically the carbazolyloxy propanolamine moiety, and
a,-adrenoceptor blockade resulting from a part of the molecule that does not contain
the asymmetric carbon atom, most likely the phenoxyethylamine moiety.

introduction

carvedilol is a novel b-adrenoceptor antagonist and
vasodilator that has antihypertensive activity in both
animals' and
previous in vitro and in vivo
studies have shown that carvedilol is a potent, relatively
nonselective p, - and p,-adrenoceptor a n t a g o n i ~ t , ' ,and
~.~
an a,-adrenoceptor antagonist?-6 carvedilol is also a
moderately potent calcium channel antagoni~t:?~*~
the
antihypertensive activity of carvedilol most likely results from a combination of these activities, most important of which are the p- and a,-adrenoceptor antagonist
properties, since the antihypertensive activity in spontaneously hypertensive rats is nearly abolished by prior a,and p-adrenoceptor blockade with  xxxd3000xxx  and propranolol, respectively:
0 1989 alan

it. liss, inc.

carvedilol possesses one asymmetric carbon which
gives rise to two enantiomers, and the preparation of
carvedilol used clinically represents a 50:50 racemic
mixture of the (- )-s- and ( )-r-enantiomers. figure 1
shows the chemical structure of carvedilol and the position of the asymmetric carbon. many agents that interact with a- and/or p-adrenoceptors possess asymmetric
carbon atom(s), and the resulting enantiomers often show
high degrees of stereoselectivity with respect to their
interactions with the adrenoceptors, irrespective of

+

received for publication july 28, 1989; accepted september 1, 1989.
address reprint requests to andrew j. nichols, department of
pharmacology (l-510), smith kline & french laboratories, p. 0.
box 1539, king of prussia, pa 19406-0939.

266

nichols et al.

oh

i

0-ch1-c h-c h2-n h-

h

carved ilo i
fig. 1. the chemical structure of carvedilol showing the position of the asymmetric carbon atom (*).

whether they are agonists or antagonists?.' the purpose
of the present study is to investigate the interaction of
the enantiomers of carvedilol with a,-and &-adrenoceptors in vitro and in vivo. in this way it may be possible
t o determine the stereochemical demands made by these
receptors for carvedilol as well as to establish which
parts of the molecule contribute to the al- and &-adrenoceptor antagonist properties of the drug.
material and methods
isolated tissues

washed from the preparation a t regular intervals by the
overflow method. consecutive dose-response curves on a
given tissue were separated by a t least 2 h to ensure
maximum washout of the agonist and to minimize the
possibility of receptor desensitization. in all experiments
at least one representative tissue was run in parallel
with the experimental tissues but received neither of the
enantiomers of carvedilol, and was used to correct for
time-dependent changes in agonist sensitivity?2

determination of dissociation constants
the dissociation constants ( k r ) for the enantiomers
guinea pigs and rabbits were sacrificed by an overdose
of sodium pentobarbital. guinea pig atria and of carvedilol acting as antagonists a t al- and /?,-adrenorabbit aorta were removed, dissected free of fat and ceptors were determined by the technique of
dose ratios produced by the
connective tissue in krebs-henseleit buffer (see below arunlakshana and s~hi1d.l~
for composition) and suspended in organ baths contain- enantiomers of carvedilol (i.e., the ratio of the concentraing buffer aerated with 5% carbon dioxide-95% oxygen. tion of the agonist required to produce a half-maximal
the tissues were attached to grass fto3 isometric response in the presence of the antagonist divided by the
transducers connected to either a beckman r611 dyno- control half-maximal concentration) were determined for
graph, a narco bio-systems physiograph mk-iv, or a various concentrations of the enantiomers of carvedilol.
narco bio-systems narcotrace 80 recorder and allowed the logarithm of the (dose ratio - 1)was plotted against
t o equilibrate under a resting tension of either the respective logarithm of the concentration of
1 g (guinea pig atrium) or 2 g (rabbit aorta) for a t least 2 carvedilol, which resulted in a straight line, allowing the
h before drug addition. the composition of krebs- slope and intercept along the abscissa to be determined.
henseleit buffer was (mm)  xxxg2020xxx , 118; kc1, 4.7; mgcl,, under equilibrium conditions, the slope of the schild
0.54;  xxxg2125xxx ,, 2.5; nah,po,, 1.0; nahc03, 25; and glu- regression does not differ significantly from unity if
cose 11. cocaine (6 pm) and edta (30 pm) were added antagonism is competitive, and the intercept along the
t o the krebs-henseleit buffer to block neuronal uptake abscissa is the pa,, which is equal to the negative
and t o prevent the spontaneous oxidation of cate- logarithm of the dissociation constant (i.e., -log k b ) .
cholamines, respectively. the ability of the enantiomers when the slope of the schild regression was not signifiof carvedilol t o interact with a,-adrenoceptors was as- cantly different from unity, the data were fitted to a line
sessed in the rabbit aorta using norepinephrine as the with a slope constrained to 1.0, and the value of the
agonist,'o and their ability to interact with /?,-adreno- intercept along the abscissa of this plot was used to
ceptors was assessed in the guinea pig atrium using determine the pa2.14715
 xxxd2401xxx  as the agonist. dose-response curves in all
pithed normotensive rats
tissues were constructed by the method of stepwise cumale
normotensive
sprague-dawley rats (300-400 g,
mulative addition of the agonist." the concentration of
the agonist in the organ bath was increased approxi- charles river, wilmington, de) were anesthetized with
mately %fold a t each step, with each successive addition sodium  xxxd2599xxx (60 mg/kg, i.p.). the tracheas were
being made only after the response to the previous dose cannulated and the rats were pithed by passing a steel
had attained a steady-state level and remained constant. rod (1.5 mm in diameter) through the orbit and foramen
after completion of a dose-response curve, drugs were magnum down into the spinal canal. immediately after

267

carvedilol enantiomers

pithing, the tracheal cannula was connected to a harvard apparatus model 680 rodent respirator and the rats
were artificially ventilated a t a frequency of 60
cycles/min with a tidal volume of 2 m1/100 g body
weight. systemic arterial blood pressure was measured
from the right common carotid artery via a statham p23
i d pressure transducer and was recorded on a beckman
r611 dynograph recorder. heart rate was measured by
a beckman 9857b cardiotachometer triggered by the
pressure pulse and recorded on the dynograph recorder.
the left femoral vein was cannulated for the intravenous
administration of drugs in a volume of 1 ml/kg. the
preparation was allowed to stabilize for a t least 30 min
before drug administration. under these conditions, diastolic blood pressure was 39 k 1 mm hg and heart rate
was 304
2 beats/min ( n = 27).
t o assess p,-adrenoceptor antagonist activity, a cumulative dose- response curve was constructed for the positive chronotropic response to  xxxd2401xxx  15 min after
pretreatment of the animals with either vehicle or one of
the enantiomers of carvedilol. in the rat atrium  xxxd2401xxx -induced positive chronotropic responses are
mediated exclusively by p, -adrenoceptors.16 to assess
a,-adrenoceptor antagonist activity, a cumulative
dose-response curve was constructed for the pressor
response t o  xxxd1707xxx  15 min after the intravenous administration of either vehicle or one of the enantiomers
of carvedilol.  xxxd1707xxx -induced pressor responses in the
pithed r a t a r e mediated exclusively by a l adrenoceptors.'

+

anesthetized spontaneously hypertensive rats
male, okamoto-aoki spontaneously hypertensive rats
(shr; 250-300 g, taconic farms, germantown, ny)
were anesthetized with sodium thiobutabarbital (120
mg/kg, i.p.) and the tracheas were cannulated to allow
the rats to breathe room air spontaneously. the right
carotid artery was cannulated for the measurement of
systemic arterial blood pressure via a statham p23 i d
pressure transducer connected to a beckman r611
dynograph recorder. heart rate was measured by a
beckman 9857b cardiotachometer triggered by the pressure pulse. the left jugular vein was cannulated for the
administration of drugs in a volume of 1 ml/kg. the
animals were allowed to stabilize for a t least 30 min
before drug administration. under these conditions, resting mean arterial blood pressure was 146 & 14 mm hg
(n = 8) and heart rate was 375 k 15 beats/min ( n = 8).
dose-response curves for the antihypertensive effects of
the enantiomers of carvedilol were constructed by the
method of stepwise cumulative administration of the
compound. the cumulative dose of carvedilol was increased approximately %fold at each step, with each
successive dose being given only when the response to
the previous dose had attained a steady-state level.

drugs
for in vitro studies, drugs were prepared as stock
solutions (10 m m ) in appropriate solvents, and subse-

quent dilutions were made in distilled water. the
enantiomers of carvedilol (synthesized by boerhingermannheim gmbh, mannheim, west germany) were solubilized by dissolving the free base in  xxxd1898xxx  (dmf; final concentration, lo%), adding 1
mol equivalent of 1 n hc1 and making up to volume in
distilled water. (-)- xxxd2750xxx  and (-) xxxd2401xxx  . hc1 (sigma chemical co., st. louis, mo)
were dissolved in distilled water containing  xxxd228xxx 
(50 mm). cocaine . hc1 (merck, sharpe & dohme, west
point, pa) was dissolved in distilled water. for in vivo
studies, stock solutions of the carvedilol enantiomers (3
mg/ml) were obtained by dissolving in dmf (final concentration, lo%), adding 1 mol equivalent of 1 n hc1
and making up t o volume in 0.9%  xxxg2020xxx . sodium  xxxd2599xxx  ( xxxd2599xxx ; eli lilly and co., indianapolis, in),
sodium thiobutabarbital (inactin; byk gulden, konstanz, w. germany), and  xxxd1707xxx  . hcl (gift from synthelabo, paris, france) were dissolved in 0.9% nacl.
subsequent dilutions were made in 0.9% nacl. the
optical purity of the carvedilol enantiomers as determined by an hplc assay system was (-)-(s)-carvedilol
> 99.5%; (+)-(r)-carvedilol 98.8%.
statistical evaluation

all data are presented as the mean + sem of n
observations. the statistical significance of the differences between means was tested by student's t test for
nonpaired observations." all straight lines were drawn
by linear regressi~n'~
and tested, wherever possible, for
deviations from linearity by analysis of variance in regression.18 the slopes of the regression lines were tested
for significance by an f test.lg

results
isolated tissues
( - )-(s)-carvedilol produced a potent, competitive in-

hibition of the pl-adrenoceptor mediated positive
chronotropic response to  xxxd2401xxx  in the guinea
atrium (fig. 2a). analysis of the data by the method of
arunlakshana and schild13gave a schild regression with
slope of 1.23
0.16, which was not significantly different from the theoretical value of unity. the schild
regression with slope constrained to unity gave a pa, of
9.44 & 0.07, which corresponds to a kb of 0.4 nm. in
contrast, (+)-(r)-carvedilol produced only a very small
inhibition of the response to  xxxd2401xxx  a t 0.1 pm
(fig. 2b). at this concentration, (+)-(r)-carvedilol produced a dose ratio of 3.9
0.9, which corresponds to a
k b of 45 nm.
in contrast to the marked stereoselectivity observed
a t p,-adrenoceptors, figure 3 shows that both enantiomers of carvedilol were potent, competitive antagonists of the ai-adrenoceptor-mediated vasoconstrictor
response to norepinephrine in rabbit aorta. (-)-(s)carvedilol gave a schild regression with a slope of
0.86
0.14, which was not significantly different from
unity. the schild regression with slope constrained to
1.0 gave a pa, of 7.87 & 0.06, which corresponds to a

*

*

268

nichols et al.

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

t

.z
x

e

.c

20

x

c4$)-cayedllol
x 10- m)

y

b

0)

cn

cn

c

e

g
cn
2

100

cn

2

0

20

s o

0

0)

g

control
(1 x 10 m)
s(-)-cyvedllol

r"

9
$
v

0
0

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

lo-'

0

r(+)-carved1101 (1 x

0

r(+)-carvedllol (3 x 10.' m)
r(+)-carvedllol (1 x

m)

m)

20

0

0

1c

1(

 xxxd2401xxx  (molar)

norepinephrine (molar)

fig. 2. the p,-adrenoceptor antagonist activity of

( - )-(s)carvedilol (a) and (+)-(r)-carvedilol (b) in guinea pig isolated
spontaneously beating atrium.

fig. 3. the a,-adrenoceptor antagonist activity of (-)-(s)carvedilol (a) and ( + )-(r)-carvedilol (b) in rabbit isolated aorta.

k , of 13 nm. similarly, the schild regression for (+)-

produce significant p, -adrenoceptor blockade (fig. 4),
confirming the stereoselectivity observed for the enantiomers of carvedilol in vitro.
both enantiomers of carvedilol, at a dose of 1 mg/kg,
i.v., produced a 6-fold rightward shift of the doseresponse curve for the a,-adrenoceptor mediated pressor
response to  xxxd1707xxx  (fig. 5), confirming the lack of
stereoselectivity observed for the enantiomers of
carvedilol in vitro.

+

(r)-carvedilol had a slope (1.10
0.25) that was not
significantly different from unity. the schild regression
with slope constrained to 1.0 gave a pa, of 7.79
0.10,
which corresponds to a k, of 16 nm. the dissociation
constants for the two enantiomers of carvedilol a t aladrenoceptors in rabbit aorta were not significantly different from each other ( p > 0.05).
pithed rats
in pithed rats, the dose-response curve for the pladrenoceptor-mediated positive chronotropic response to
 xxxd2401xxx  was shifted 25-fold to the right by
(-)-(s)-carvedilol a t a dose of 0.1 mg/kg, i.v. (fig. 4). in
contrast, (+)-(r)-carvedilol a t the same dose did not

anesthetized spontaneously hypertensive rats
the antihypertensive activity of the enantiomers of
carvedilol was studied in anesthetized spontaneously hypertensive rats. as may be seen in figure 6, both enantiomers of carvedilol are potent antihypertensive agents

269

carvedilol enantiomers

180

160
140

9)
u

i?

z
z
a9)g
i0

120

n-4

100

4-

'3

80

a

60

$e

-6

s(-)-carvedllol

40
20

0
0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

lsoproterenol (pg/kg, i.v.)
fig. 4. the p, -adrenoceptor antagonist activity of ( - )-(s)- and
(+)-(r)-carvedilol (1 mg/kg, i.v., -15 min) in pithed rats.

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

carvedllol (mg/kg, i.v.)
fig. 6. the hypotensive activity of ( -)-(s)- and ( + )-(it)-carvedilo1 in anesthetized spontaneously hypertensive rats.

macologic profiles. the ( - )-s-enantiomer of carvedilol is
a potent pl-adrenoceptor antagonist and an a,-adrenoceptor antagonist, whereas the (+)-r-enantiomer is a
selective a1-adrenoceptor antagonist. the stereoselectivity observed a t the b,-adrenoceptor was in accord with
previous studies of other p-adrenoceptor antagonists,'
with the ( - )-(s)-enantiomer being significantly more
potent than the ( )-r-enantiomer. the dissociation
constant of (-)-(s)-carvedilol for &-adrenoceptors in
guinea pig atrium (0.4 n m ) is one-half of the value
reported by us previously for the racemic mixture (0.8
(1 mllkg. i.v.)
n m 5), which is consistent with what would be expected
for a racemic mixture in which one of the two enan0 r(+)-carvedllol
(1 mglkg, i.v.)
tiomers was essentially inactive. the weak p, -adrenoceps(-)-cafv~dllol
tor blocking activity observed at high concentrations of
(1 mglkg. i.v.)
(+)-(r)-carvedilol may be due to the small amount
(approximately 1%) of the (-)-s-enantiomer that was
0.1
1
10
100
present in the sample after resolution, and not to a
clrazollne (pg/kg, i.v.)
direct action of the (+ )-r-enantiomer itself. the dissocifig. 5. the a,-adrenoceptor antagonist activity of ( - ) - ( s ) - and ation constants obtained for the two enantiomers acting
a t a,-adrenoceptors [(-)-(s) 14 nm, (+)-(r) 16 n m ]
(+)-(r)-carvedilol (1 mg/kg, i.v., -15 min) in pithed rats.
were not significantly different from those obtained by
us previously for the racemic mixture (10 n m 5 ) .
in vivo, with ( - )-(s)-carvedilol being approximately 6the fact that the enantiomers of carvedilol show differential stereoselectivity at a,- and &-adrenoceptors
fold more potent than (+)-(r)-carvedilol.
strongly suggests that different parts of the carvedilol
molecule are responsible for the al- and &-adrenoceptor
discussion
blocking activities. examination of the structure of
these data clearly demonstrate, both in vitro and in carvedilol (see fig. 1) shows the molecule to be an
vivo, that the enantiomers of carvedilol show marked aryloxypropanolamine, specifically carbazol-4-yloxy-2stereoselectivity at p,-adrenoceptors, but  xxxd1991xxx - propanolamine, attached to a phenoxyalkylamine, 2ical difference a t a,-adrenoceptors. as such, the two methoxyphenoxyethylamine, with the amine group
enantiomers of carvedilol have markedly different phar- shared by both parts. the asymmetric carbon atom of
140

pithed rat

+

270

nichols e t al.

carvedilol is within the aryloxypropanolamine moiety.
acknowledgments
aryloxypropanolamines form a general class of p-adrethe authors would like to thank ms. shirlev wilson
noceptor antagonists, such as propranolol. thus, the fact for her expert secretarial assistance.
that the carbazolyoxypropanolaminemoiety is similar to
literature cited
that found in other 8-adrenoceptor antagonists, and that
stereoselectivity is seen for the 8,-adrenoceptor blocking
1. sponer, g., strein, k., muller-beckmann, b., bartsch, w. studactivity of carvedilol which possesses an asymmetric
ies on the mode of vasodilating action of carvedilol. j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 10 (suppl. ll):s42-s48, 1987.
carbon atom in the carbazolyloxypropanolamine portion
2. sundberg, s., tiihonen, k., gordin, a. vasodilatory effecta of
of the molecule, strongly suggests that this part of the
carvedilol and  xxxd2957xxx . j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 10 (suppl.
molecule is responsible for the &- (and presumably the
1l):s76-s80, 1987.
&-) adrenoceptor antagonist activity of carvedilol.
3. eggertsen, r., sivertsson, r., andren, l., hansson, l. acute
and long-term hemodynamic effects of carvedilol, a combined
because there is no stereoselectivity for the a,-adrenop-adrenoceptor blocking and precapillary vasodilating agent, in
ceptor antagonist property of carvedilol, it would appear
hypertensive patients. j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 10 (suppl.
that this activity does not result from the carbazolylll):s97-s100, 1987.
oxypropranolamine moiety, but rather results from the
4. nichols, a.j., gellai, m., ruffolo, r.r., jr. in vivo studies on
phenoxyethylamine moiety. phenoxyalkylamines form a
the mechanism of vasodilation produced by carvedilol, a novel
vasodilator/p-adrenoceptor antagonist. fundamen. clin. phargeneral class of a-adrenoceptor antagonists," and many
macol., in press, 1989.
phenoxyethylamines are potent, selective a,-adrenocep5. nichols, a.j., sulpizio, a.c., ashton, d.j., hieble, j.p., ruffolo,
tor antagonists, such as thymoxamine, phenoxybenzar.r., jr. the in vitro pharmacological profile of carvedilol, a
mine, and wb-4101. phenoxybenzamine and wb-4101
novel vasodilator/p-adrenoceptor antagonist. fundamen. clin.
pharmacol., in press, 1989.
have chiral centers in the phenoxyethylamine moiety,
6. seki, n., nagao, k., komori, k., suzuki, h. a- and p-adrenoand both compounds show stereoselectivity with respect
ceptor blocking action of carvedilol in the canine mesenteric
to their ability to interact with a,-adrenoceptors? this
artery and vein. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 246:1166-1122, 1988.
is in contrast to the lack of stereoselectivity of the
7. hattori, y., nakaya, h., endou, m., nakao, y., kanno, m.
carvedilol enantiomers at a,-adrenoceptors, which we
vascular effects of carvedilol, a new p-adrenoceptor antagonist
with vasodilating properties, in canine coronary artery. j. carinterpret as being due to the absence of an asymmetric
diovasc. pharmacol. 13:572-579, 1989.
carbon atom in the phenoxyethylamine moiety of
8. patil, p.n. , miller, d.d., trendelenberg, u. molecular geomecarvedilol.
try and adrenergic drug activity. pharmacol. rev. 26:323-392,
the functional significance of the difference in the a,1975.
9. ruffolo, r.r., jr. stereochemical requirements for activation
and /?,-adrenoceptor blocking activities of the enanand blockade of a, - and a,-adrenoceptors. trends pharmacol.
tiomers of carvedilol is demonstrated in the difference
5:160-164, 1984.
observed in the antihypertensive potency. both enan- 10. sci.
awad, r., payne, r. deth, r.c. alpha adrenergic receptor
tiomers of carvedilol, which block a,-adrenoceptors
subtype associated with receptor binding, ca" influx, ca2'
equally well, lower blood pressure, with the (-)-senrelease and contractile events in rabbit aorta. j. pharmacol.
exp. ther. 227:60-67, 1983.
antiomer, which also blocks & -adrenoceptors, being
approximately 6-fold more potent than the ( + )-r-enan- 11. van rossum, j.m. cumulative dose-response curves. 11. technique for the making of dose-response curves in isolated organs
tiomer. this finding adds support to the notion that
and the evaluation of drug parameters. arch. int. pharmacopi-adrenoceptor blockade can augment the antihyperdyn. ther. 143:299-330, 1963.
tensive response to a vasodilator. in other words, for any 12. furchgott, r.f. the classification of adrenoceptors (adrenergic
receptors). an evaluation from the standpoint of receptor thegiven degree of vasodilation, concomitant p-adrenocepory. in: handbook of experimental pharmacology, vol. 33,
tor blockade will produce a greater reduction in blood
catecholamines. blaschko, h., muscholl, e., eds. berlin:
pressure due to blockade of reflex tachycardia. in addisurinrrer-verlaa. 1972: 283-335.
tion, p-adrenoceptor blockade may also enhance the 13. lungkshana,-o., schild, h.o. some quantitative uses of drug
antagonism. br. j. pharmacol. 14:45-58, 1959.
hypotensive response to a,-adrenoceptor blockade by
kenakin, t.p. pharmacologic analysis of drug-receptor interother mechanisms, i.e., inhibition of renin release or a 14. action.
new york: raven press, 1987.
central mechanism. also, the degree of vasodilator activ- 15. mackay, d. how should values of pa, and affinity constants
ity required to produce a given reduction in blood presfor pharmacological competitive antagonists be estimated? j.
pharm. pharmacol. 30:312-313, 1978.
sure will be less in the presence of concomitant &-adre16. juberg, e.n., minneman, k.p., abel, p.w. pi- and &-adrenonoceptor blockade.
ceptor binding and functional responses in right and left atria
our data indicate that the enantiomers of carvedilol
of rat heart. naunyn-schmiedeberg's arch. pharmacol.
show differential stereoselectivity as antagonists at a,330~193-202, 1985.
and pi-adrenoceptors, with no stereoselectivity observed 17. nichols, a.j., ruffolo, r.r., jr. the relationship between alterations in a,-adrenoceptor reserve by phenoxybenzamine and
at a,-adrenoceptors, but marked stereoselectivity obbenextramine and the sensitivity of  xxxd1707xxx -induced pressor
served at p,-adrenoceptors, with the ( - )-s-enantiomer
responses to inhibition by nifedipine. dur. j. pharmacol.
being over 100-fold more potent than the (+)-r-enantio126~297-301, 1986.
mer. a functional consequence of these observations is 18. sokal, r.a., rolf, f.j. regression. in: biometry. san francisco:
w. h. freeman, 1969:404-493.
that the (-)-s- and (+)-r-enantiomers of carvedilol
c.m. principles of biometry; statistics for biologists.
have dramatically different pharmacologic profiles, and 19. woolf,
princeton: van nostrand, 1968.
that the pharmacologic profile of the racemic mixture of 20. bowman, w.c., rand, m.j. adrenoceptor antagonists. in:
carvedilol used clinically cannot be obtained with either
textbook of pharmacology. oxford: blackwell, 1980: 11.4011.49.
of the enantiomers alone.

