cryobiology

26,

485-495 (1989)

low temperature
cheng
laboratories

and muscarinic

s. tsai and richard

of pharmacology

receptor

activities

f. ochillo

and toxicology, xavier university
new orleans, louisiana 70125

of louisiana,

lowering temperature from 37°c to 22, 18, and 14’c triggered automaticity of smooth longitudinal
muscle of guinea pig isolated ileum. the amplitude of the hypothermia-induced
automaticity
was
dependent on the degree of tempemlure drop: the greater the temperature drop, the greater the
amplitude. however, when the preparation was initially prepared and maintained at 14°c and then the
temperature was raised at a similar rate to 18, 22, and 37”c, the automaticity was not observed. this
series of observations suggests that cooling rate may be the trigger and/or part of the triggering
mechanism for the observed automaticity.  xxxd2566xxx  (1.0 x 10e6 m), a specific muscarinic receptor
antagonist, blocked the automaticity suggesting the involvement of muscarinic receptors in the pathogenesis and/or the manifestation of the automaticity.
verapamil (1.0 x lo-’ m), a calcium channel
into smooth muscle cells during excitation,
blocker which inhibits the transmembrane ca” influx
.
blocked the automaticity suggesting that transmembrane ca’+ influx plays a significant role in the
pathogenesis and/or manifestation
of the automaticity.
a specitic cytoplasmic
calcium channel
blocker, 8-(n,n-diethylamino)-octyl-3,4,s-trimethoxybenzoate
hydrochloride (1.0 x 10e6 m) blocked
the automaticity, suggesting that cytoplasmic calcium also plays a significant role in the pathogenesis
and/or manifestation of the automaticity. in order to characterize the temperature-induced
changes in
the muscarinic receptors, an attempt was made to use the classic method of furchgott and burstyn to
determine the dissociation constants of acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors at different temperatures. however, the alkylation of muscarinic receptors with phenoxybenzamine
at lower temperatures
was erratic and the recovery from the occlusion was too rapid to apply the method of furchgott and
burstyn. we concluded that the lack of reversibility of the effects of phenoxybenzamine
at 37°c is due
to the predominance of covalent bonding of phenoxybenzamine
with the receptors, whereas at lower
temperatures like 24”c, the blockade of the muscarinic receptors by phenoxybenzamine
is mainly due
0 1989 academic press, inc
to simple occlusion.

several factors have contributed to the
new focus in hypothermic research. among
the factors are the need to know how to
manage accidental exposure to cold by
those personnel operating in frigid ocean
water, exposure to cold by inebriates, tishermen, and others with similar occupational hazards. also, the necessity for humans to extend activities to cold environments
has added
to the interest.
additionally,
in the area of organ transplantation, there are several problems like vasospasm associated with cardiovascular operations at hypothermic
temperatures of
which the underlying mechanisms need to
received
1989.

march 29. 1988; accepted

february

be elucidated in order to develop appropriate treatment modalities.
the use of smooth muscle strips to study
contractile properties of the muscle cells
rests on the assumption that properties of
individual cells are directly reflected in the
behavior of whole muscle tissue. our laboratory has taken a keen interest in the contractile properties of smooth muscle when
exposed to a hypothermic environment (14,
15, 17, 18). literature surveys regarding the
effects of hypothermia on the contraction
of smooth muscle are scanty. therefore,
we have investigated the effects of hypothermia on the smooth muscle using in vitro
techniques (10, 12, 13, 16) and acetylcholine (ach) as the agonist at 37, 34, 24, 14,
and 9”c, respectively. we found that low

22.

485
001 l-2240/89 $3.00
copyright d 1989 by academic press. inc.
all rights of reproduction
in any form reserved.

486

tsai and

temperature facilitated a parallel rightward
shift of the dose-response curves of ach
(17). we unsuccessfully attempted to construct the dose-response curves of ach using the same preparations at different temperatures. the major problem was that
when the temperature was dropped below
24°c the temperature drop initiated spontaneous contractions of each preparation
which made it impossible to construct a
dose-response curve of ach.
therefore, the experiments in this investigation were designed (i) to see if the
magnitude of hypothermia-induced automaticity is temperature-dependent; (ii) to
characterize the automaticity by using  xxxd2566xxx  (mpz), a specific muscarinic
receptor antagonist (20); verapamil, a transmembrane ca*+ channel blocker (4, 13,
19); and 8-(n,n-diethylamino)-octyl-3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoate
hydrochloride
(tmb-8), a cytoplasmic ca*+ channel
blocker (3, 4, 8); and (iii) to determine the
dissociation constants of the receptors at
different temperatures with phenoxybenzamine, an irreversible  xxxd3249xxx , using
the classical method of furchgott and
burstyn (7) to decipher the hypothermiainduced changes of the receptor.

ochillo

and kept in a modilield tyrode solution of
the following composition (mm); nacl
128.3, kc1 2.68,  xxxg2125xxx , 1.80, nah,po,
0.36, mgcl, 0.49, nahco, 23.8, and glucose il. 10. the longitudinal muscle of the
ileum was dissected according to the
method of ochillo et al. (11).
a piece of the longitudinal muscle approximately 2.0 cm long was tied at both
ends and suspended in a 20-ml bath containing tyrode solution. the solution was
gassed with 95% 0, and 5% co,. one end
of the muscle was fastened to an f-60 microdisplacement myograph transducer
(narco biosystems, houston, tx) to record isometric contractions which were displayed on a narco biosystems dmp-4a
physiograph. the preparation was left to
equilibrate for 20 to 30 min at 37°c before it
was subjected to a tension of 0.5 g and then
it was allowed to equilibrate for an additional 30 min. each preparation was challenged with a dose of ach (1.0 x lop6 m)
for 1 min, after which the preparation was
washed with tyrode solution. the procedure was repeated every 7 min until the
elicited contractions were uniform.
the cooling procedure

in order to ensure that the experiment
was carried out at the desired temperature
below 37°c a refrigerated pump was contissue preparation
nected to an organ bath which was set up
male guinea pigs, weighing 250 to 300 g, with a thermoregulated heater. the water
used in this series of experiments were pur- in the pump was precooled to 10°c overchased from harlan spraque-dawley, inc. night the day before the experiment. the
(indianapolis, in).  xxxd2566xxx  bromide cooling of the organ bath was carried out by
was obtained from merrel laboratories.
pumping the precooled water into the bath
verapamil was a gift from knoll pharma- and recycling the warm water from bath to
ceutical co. (whippany, nj). phenoxyben- the refrigerated pump unit, which was conzamine was obtained from sk&f pharma- trolled by a proportioning circulator. once
ceutical co. (philadelphia, pa) as a gift. all the desired temperature was reached, the
other chemicals were obtained from sigma heater was used to maintain the temperachemical co. (st. louis, mo).
ture at the desired level during the experithe guinea pigs were killed by cervical mental period. in order to raise the temperdislocation or decapitation on the day of the ature, the pump was shut off and the heater
experiment. the abdomen was opened and was used to raise the temperature to the
the ileum was carefully removed, cleaned, desired level.
materials

and

methods

hypothermia

and

muscarinic

the effects of temperature on the
dose-response curve of ach

receptor

487

activity

the influence of mpz, verapamil, and
tmb-8 on the
hypothermia-znduced
automatic@

the dose-response curve was constructed at temperatures of 37, 34, 24, 14,
the temperature change from 37 to 14°c
and 9°c respectively, using a new set of initiated automaticity with the highest ampreparations. to eliminate the differences plitude. therefore, this temperature change
between each preparation, the procedure (37 to 14°c) was selected for the investigawas carried out on the same preparation tion of the effects of different agents on the
with different temperatures. after the automaticity. after the automaticity was
dose-response curve of ach at 37°c was fully initiated, a final concentration of mpz
completed, the bath was cooled to the next (1 .o x lop6 m) was added into each bathing
temperature and the dose-response curve solution to observe the effect on the autowas constructed again. this was done at maticity for 20 min. the same procedure
temperatures of 34, 24, and 14°c. the pro- was repeated as above using different concedure was repeated with a reversed tem- centrations of different drugs as follows:
perature sequence of 14,24,34, and 37, and verapamil (1, 2, 4, and 10 x 10k8 h4); and
14”c, respectively. the dose-response
tmb-8 (1.0, 10, and 100 x lo-* m).
curve was then plotted semilogarithmically.
the effects of temperature change on
the znitiation of automaticity

the effects of temperature on the
muscarinic receptor activities

the effects of temperature change in the
initiation and amplitude of the spontaneous
contractions were investigated as follows.
after the preparations were set up and the
dose-response curves of ach at 37°c were
constructed as described in the preceding
section, the preparations were put into the
following sets: a, b, c, and d. the temperature of set a was maintained at 37°c;
that of set b was dropped from 37 to 22°c;
that of set c was dropped from 37 to 18°c;
and that of set d was dropped from 37 to
14°c. the new temperature of each set was
maintained for 30 min, a period which had
been predetermined for the temperatureinduced manifestation of automaticity of
smooth muscle preparation. in order to be
sure that irreversible changes had not occurred in the tissues at the new temperature
setting during the experimental period, the
dose-response curve of the preparation to
ach was repeated for each set of preparations after restoring the temperature to normal (37°c). a dose-response curve identical to the control (a) would be confirmation
that no irreversible changes have occurred
in the preparation.

to characterize the temperature change
on the muscat-uric receptor activities, the
preparations were set up as above and
dose-response curves were constructed for
ach. a fraction of muscarinic receptors
was occluded by incubating the preparation
with tyrode solution containing phenoxybenzamine (1.0 x 10e4 m) for 30 min before reconstructing a second set of doseresponse curves for ach. several equipotent doses of ach before [a] and after
phenoxybenzamine [a’] treatment were determined graphically. according to the
method of furchgott and burstyn (7), a plot
of l/[a] vs l/[a’] should give a straight line
which is described by the equation
1
-=-

[al

l-q

1

1

4 * kz +;.[a’1

where q is the fraction of the receptors not
occluded by phenoxybenzamine; k, is the
dissociation constant of agonist-receptor
complex. according to this equation
i
slope - 1
- = slope and k, =
intercept
4

488

tsai and ochillo

and the affinity, k&, is numerically equal to
the reciprocal of k,.
the effects of temperature on the offset
(recovery) of phenoxybenzamine at the
muscarinic receptors of the
longitudinal muscle of isolated guinea
pig ileum
the results of our attempt to determine
muscarinic receptor activities using phenoxybenzamine were disappointing because the recovery of the receptors from
phenoxybenzamine occlusion was very
rapid at low temperatures. therefore, this
experiment was designed to investigate the
temperature-dependent characteristics of
the offset of action of phenoxybenzamine at
muscarinic receptors of the longitudinal
muscle of the isolated guinea pig ileum.
the response of the isolated longitudinal
muscle preparation to ach (5.0 x lop3 m)
at 37 and 24°c was recorded before the
preparation was exposed to the selected
concentration of phenoxybenzamine for a
predetermined incubation time (approximately 9 min). after the  xxxd3249xxx 
was washed off, the preparation was challenged with the same dose of ach every 10
min until there was no further change in the
contractions. the response of the preparation to ach after phenoxybenzamine occlusion at different temperatures was plotted
and compared.

/

/
&icereai”
minutes

fig. 1. cooling rate from the ambient temperature
(37”c), at which the control experiments were carried
out, to different temperatures (34, 22, and 14°c) at
which each of the experiments were repeated in order
to show the effect of hypothermia on the activities of
acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors. at the end of
each experiment, the temperature was increased to the
ambient temperature at which the experiment was repeated.

when the temperature was decreased from
24 to 14”c, the construction of a doseresponse curve of ach became impossible
because of the raised baseline and initiation
of automaticity which could not be suppressed by washing with tyrode solution
(fig. 2b). when the procedure was repeated on a fresh preparation with a reversed temperature sequence of 14, 24, 34,
and 37”c, respectively, the initiation of automaticity was not observed (fig. 3). howioo-

results

establishing the
experimental temperatures
the cooling and heating rate were approximately 3°c per minute and the desired
hypothermic level was maintained with a
precision of ? 1°c during the experimental
period (fig. 1).
the effects of temperature on the
dose-response curve of ach
there was a rightward shift on the doseresponse curve of ach at 24°c (fig. 2a).

0
10-a

10-7

10-b
acetilcholine

10-s

10-4

(m,

fig. 2a. the effects of hypothermia on the doseresponse curve of ach at muscarinic receptors of the
smooth longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated
ileum. the dose-response curve was constructed at
temperatures of 37, 34, 24, 14, and 9°c. respectively,
using a new set of preparations. each value is the
mean 2 se of seven animals.

hypothermia

and

muscarinic

receptor

activity

489

ever, the automaticity was observed again
in the same preparation when the temperature was dropped from 37 to 14°c (fig. 3).

eliminated. however, at 1.0 x lob5 m,
mpz immediately blocked the automaticity
(fig. 5).

the effects of temperature change on
the initiation of automaticity

the effect of verapamil on the
hypothermia-znduced automaticity
the hypothermia-induced automaticity
was reduced by i.0 x io-’ m verapamil, a
calcium channel blocker. when the concentration of verapamil was increased to 1.o x
io-’ m or higher, the automaticity was
completely blocked (fig. 6).

the amplitude of the hypothermiainduced automaticity was dependent on the
fall in temperature: the greater the temperature drop, the greater the amplitude.
there was no significant change in the control contractions when the preparation was
maintained at 37°c for the same period. after the automaticity was observed and the
temperature was raised to 37°c the doseresponse curve to ach was identical to that
before temperature change (fig. 4). this
observation confirms that the temperature
change had no significant effect on the
functional integrity of the preparation.
the effect of mpz on the
hypothermia-znduced automaticity
mpz (1.0 x 1o-6 m), a specific muscarinic receptor antagonist, progressively
suppressed the amplitude of spontaneous
contraction until the contractions were

the effect of tmb-8 on the
hypothermia-znduced automaticity
a comparable concentration (1.0 x 10d8
iv) of tmb-8, a cytoplasmic calcium channel blocker, had no significant effect on the
automaticity. however, the automaticity
was suppressed by 1.0 x lop7 m and
blocked by 1.0 x 10m6m tmb-8 (fig. 7).
the effects of hypothermia on the
recovery of muscarinic receptors
from phenoxybenzamine
in order to compare the effects of temperature on the phenoxybenzamine block-

fig. 2b. the effect of temperature on the dose-response curve of acetylcholine on the smooth
longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. the construction of the dose-response curve
became impossible because the automaticity was triggered when the temperature was dropped from 24
to 14°c. note that the hypothermia-induced automaticity cannot be removed by washing with tyrode
solution.

490

tsai and ochillo

n

har,

fig. 3. the effect of temperature on the dose-response curve of acetylcholine on the smooth
longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. the initiation of automaticity was not observed
when the temperature was increased from 14 to 37°c. however, the automaticity was triggered when
the temperature was dropped from 37 to 14°c.

ade, the dose of phenoxybenzamine and the
time of incubation were selected such that
the degree of blockade at 37 and 24°c was
similar. after incubation of the preparation
with phenoxybenzamine at 37 and 24°c for

37’c

i

9 min, the contraction (% of maximum) was
reduced to 27 * 3.0 and 33 5 5.0, respectively. the recovery at 37°c was not significant within the experimental period (70
min). however, the recovery at 24°c was

22-c

37-c

14-c

37’c

i

b

37-c
d

4

4

2:s
5
io
acetylcholine

4

20
(~10-~m)

+

200

+

2.5

9

r

5
acetylcho:ne

+
20
2!0
(x 10%)

fig. 4. the effect of temperature change on the initiation of automaticity on the smooth longitudinal
muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. after the dose-response curves of acetylcholine at 37°c were
constructed, the temperature of the first set (a) was maintained at 37°c; that of the second set (b) was
dropped from 37 to 22°c; that of the third set (c) was dropped from 37 to 18°c; and that of the last set
(d) was dropped from 37 to 14°c. the amplitude of the hypothermia-induced automaticity was dependent on the fall in temperature: the greater the temperature drop, the greater the amplitude.

hypothermia

and

muscarinic

i mn

receptor

activity

491

vehicle

mpz (lo-6m)
+

mpz(lo-%bq
4

4
2.5

t f
5

10

acetylcholine

e
20

f
200

(xlo+m)

5. the effect of  xxxd2566xxx  (mpz) on the hypothermia- induced automaticity of the smooth
longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. mpz (1.0 x 10m6lw)completely blocked the
automaticity.
fig.

rapid and a full recovery occurred 40 min
after the exposure to phenoxybenzamine
(fig. 8).
discussion

according to our results, hypothermia
triggered automaticity of smooth longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum
(figs. 2b and 3). it is important to note that
whereas automaticity was associated with
temperature drop from a higher level to a
temperature of 22°c or below (fig. 4), automaticity was suppressed when the preparation was equilibrated at 14°c before constructing the dose-response curve of ach
at 14°c and at higher temperatures (fig. 3).
however, a drop of the temperature of the
same preparation from 37 to 14°c precipitated the automaticity (fig. 3). the amplitude of automaticity was dependent on the
temperature change: the greater the temperature drop, the greater the amplitude
(fig. 4). the hypothermia-induced automaticity was blocked by mpz, a specific muscat-uric receptor antagonist (12, 14, 15, 17,
18). this suggests that muscarinic receptors

are involved in the pathogenesis and/or
manifestation of the automaticity (fig. 5).
verapamil, a potent calcium channel
blocker, which inhibits the transmembrane
ca*+ influx into smooth muscle cells during
excitation (4, 13, 19), blocked the automaticity (fig. 6). tmb-8, a cytoplasmic calcium channel blocker (3, 4, 8), blocked automaticity after a noticeable lag period (fig.
7). these data indicated that calcium movement is involved in the pathogenesis and/or
manifestation of the automaticity. similar
observations with calcium have been made
using other smooth muscles (1, 5). in order
to further characterize the temperatureinduced changes in the muscarinic receptor
activities, an attempt was made to use phenoxybenzamine to partially block the receptor for the determination of the dissociation constants of ach at the muscarinic
receptors at different temperatures according to the classical method of furchgott and
burstyn (7). the dissociation constants of
ach at muscarinic receptors could not be
determined at low temperature according to
this method. this failure to determine the

492

tsai and

d

ochillo

j

2.5

5

10

acetylcholine

20

200

(x10-%)

fig. 6. the effect of verapamil on the hypothermia-induced automaticity of the smooth longitudinal
muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. verapamil (10 x lo-’ m) blocked the hypothermia-induced
automaticity.

dissociation constants is due to the fact that
not enough covalent bonds are formed by
phenoxybenzamine at lower temperatures
w.

it has been demonstrated that the rate of
cooling has an effect on the hypothermic
automaticity of vascular smooth muscle
elicited by different drugs (5). the investigators showed that the expression of
cx-adrenotropic activity is enhanced in normothermia. according to our results, the
muscarinic receptor responsiveness to ach
was reduced by hypothermia (figs. 2a and
2b), an observation which is at variance
with that for a-adrenergic receptors (5).
the potential sources of the discrepancy
between our results and those of fonteles
and karow (5) lie in the type of preparation

used. whereas they used the vascular
smooth muscle of the isolated rabbit kidney, we used smooth longitudinal muscle of
guinea pig isolated ileum. the other difference is in the cooling rate. they tested the
preparation after rapidly or slowly induced
cooling, whereas the cooling rate we used
from 37 to 34,22, and 14°c was very similar
(fig. 1).
smooth muscle can utilize two stores of
coupling:
ca2+ in excitation-contraction
one extracellular, the other consisting of
one or more intracellular pools. verapamil,
a potent calcium channel blocker, which inhibits transmembrane ca*+ influx into the
smooth muscle cells during excitation (4,
13, 19), blocked the automaticity (fig. 6).
tmb-8, a cytoplasmic calcium channel

hypothermia

and

muscarinic

receptor

activity

493

’ ! i, zb i

25

200

acetvlcholine

(x10%)

fig. 7. the effect of tmb-8 on the hypothermia-induced automaticity of the smooth longitudinal
muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. tmb-8 (1 x 10e6 iv) blocked the hypothermia-induced
automaticity.

blocker (3, 4, 8), did not block the automaticity instantly. the lag period was probably due to the time needed for the diffusion
into the site of action (fig. 7). this observation supports the hypothesis that, apart

fig. 8. the effect of hypothermia on the irreversible competitive antagonism of phenoxybenzamine to
ach at muscarinic receptors of the longitudinal muscle of the guinea pig isolated ileum. the blockade produced by phenoxybenzamine at 37°c was not reversed
by washing. however, there was a rapid recovery
from the similar degree of blockade produced by
phenoxybenzamine at 24°c. the plotted values are
mean -+ se of five determinations.

from the muscat-uric receptors, the availability of ca2+ also plays an important role
in the manifestation of the hypothermiainduced automaticity of the smooth muscle.
the results of this investigation do not
provide sufficient lines of evidence necessary for the identification of the stimulus
for the observed automaticity. however,
two possibilities cannot be ruled out; (i) the
involvement of other rapidly metabolized
cell messengers the release of which is induced by hypothermia; and (ii) the involvement of receptor change(s) induced by low
temperature and/or the cooling rate as the
triggering or part of the triggering mechanism for the observed automaticity is particularly intriguing and merit further investigation. examples of cell messengers include cyclic nucleotides and prostanoids.
the fact that these compounds are enzymatically synthesized in smooth muscle in
response to stimulus makes them suspect in
the pathogenesis and manifestation of the
automaticity. the receptor changes include

494

tsai

and

the structural conformation and binding
process which may be reflected in the dissociation constants. therefore, we attempted to measure the dissociation constants for the muscarinic receptors of the
smooth muscle to decipher the changes induced by hypothermia.
the classical
method of furchgott and burstyn (7) was
used and the alkylation of muscarinic receptors by phenoxybenzamine at 37°c was
expected. however, at a low temperature
of 24°c the blockade of muscarinic receptors by phenoxybenzamine had a rapid recovery after the  xxxd3249xxx  was
washed off (18). because of the rapid recovery from the effects of phenoxybenzamine, it was impossible to measure the dissociation constants of ach at muscarinic
receptors.
the ability of phenoxybenzamine to
block the contractile response of smooth
muscle preparations to ach has been explained on the basis of the following theories. first, it has been postulated that the
immonium intermediates of phenoxybenzamine covalently bond with the active site of
the receptor with which an agonist interacts
(6, 9). second, it has been suggested that
part of the blockade by phenoxybenzamine
is due to a simple occlusion of the receptors
(2). the dissociation of covalent linkage is a
slow process which is temperaturedependent. however, the occlusion of the
receptor is reversed by washing off the  xxxd3249xxx .
according to our results, the very slow
recovery at 37°c from blockade by phenoxybenzamine, which makes such a blockade essentially “irreversible”
for short
term experiments, is probably attributable
to an extremely slow dissociation of the covalent linkage between receptor and antagonist moiety with the regeneration of activatable receptor. the rapid recovery of the
contractile response from the blockade of
phenoxybenzamine at 24°c is probably due
to the fact that the large part of the blockade was simple occlusion which can be re-

ochillo

versed by washing with the tyrode solution.
our observation revealed that we cannot
use phenoxybenzamine according to the
method of furchgott and burstyn (7) to
measure changes in dissociation constants
of ach at muscarinic receptors at low temperatures. this observation suggests that
there are some alterations of receptor activities which are induced by hypothermia
and/or the rate of cooling. we are currently
trying to characterize these alterations and
investigating how the rate of cooling may
trigger the automaticity and the possible
role of muscarinic receptors and calcium in
the genesis and manifestations of the hypothermia-induced automaticity. of secondary significance is to modify the method of
furchgott and burstyn and/or develop a
new method which could be applied to hypothermic research to uncover changes in
the dissociation constants of specific agonists at the receptors.
acknowledgments

this investigation was supported by grant nooo1484-k-0635 from the united states office of naval research and grant rr-08008 from nih. we also thank
ms. mei h. tsai and ms. angela simon for expert
technical assistance and typing this manuscript.
references

1. bevan, j. a. the use of rabbit aorta strip in the
analysis of the mode of the action of lepinephrine on vascular smooth muscle. j.
phnrmacol. exp. ther. 129, 417427 (1960).
2. cheng, h. c., and sastry, b. v. r. dissociation
constants of d- and l-lactoylcholines and related compounds at cholinergic receptors. j.
pharmucd. exp. thu. mo, 326-339 (1972).
3. chiou, c. y., and malagodi, m. h. studies on the
mechanism of action of a new ca*’ antagonist,
i-(n,n-diethylamino)
octyl 3,4,strimethoxybenzoate hydrochloride in smooth and
skeletal muscles. brit. j. pharmacol. 53, 279285 (1975).
4. church, j., and zsoter, t. t. calcium antagonistic drugs. mechanism of action. canad. j.
physiol. pharmacol. 58, 254-264 (1980).
5. fonteles, m c., and karow, a. m., jr. vascular
alpha adrenotropic responses of the isolated

hypothermia

6.

7.

8.

9.

and

muscarinic

rabbit kidney at 15°c.arch. int. phartnacodyn.
thu. 227, 195-205 (1977).
furchgott, r. f. dibenamine blockade in strips of
rabbit aorta and its use in differentiating receptors. .i. pharmacol. exp. thu. 111, 265-284
(1954).
furchgott, r. f., and burstyn, p. comparison of
dissociation constants and of relative efficacies
of selected agonists acting on parasympathetic
receptors. ann. n. y. acad. sci. 144, 882899 (1967).
malagodi, m. h., and chiou, c. y. pharmacological evaluation of a new ca’+ antagonist, 8(n,n-diethylamino)-octyl-3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoate hydrochloride (tmb-8): studies in
smooth muscles. eur. j. pharmacol. 27, 25-33
(1974).
nickerson, m. non-equilibrium drug antagonism.
pharmacol.

rev. 246-259 (1957).

10. ochillo, r. f. apparent activity of 5-methylfurmethide at muscarinic receptors. arch. int.
pharmacodyn.

ther. 248, 69-75 (1980).

11. ochillo, r. f., rowell, r. p., and sastry,
b. v. r. effects of cooling on the levels of acetylcholine, chohnesterase, choline acetyhransferase and intramural electrical stimulation of
the guinea-pig ileum. pharmacology 16, 121130 (1978).
12. ochillo, r. f., tsai, c. s., andtsai, m. h. mechanism of action of muscarine on the longitudinal muscle of the guinea-pig isolated ileum.
brit. j. pharmacol. 72, 225-232 (1981).
13. ochillo, r. f., and tsai, c. s. the influence of
verapamil on the amplitude and frequency of
cholinergic-initiated contractions of isolated

receptor

activity

495

gastric muscularis muscle of bufo marinus.
24, 185-192 (1982).
14. ochillo, r. f., and tsai, c. s. defining the limitations of the use of dibenzamine and phenoxybenzamine as the alkylator in determining receptor activity parameter. fed. proc. abstract
no. 2212, 534 (1986).
15. ochillo, r. f., and tsai, c. s. “an in vitro experimental model for hypothermia-induced shivering. in “iii world conference on clinical pharmacology and therapeutics,
stockholm,
sweden,” abstract no. 1671, 330, 1986.
16. tsai, c. s., and ochillo, r. f. preliminary pharmacological characterization of the isolated circular strips of gastric muscularis muscle of bufo
marinus: a new preparation. j. pharmacol.
methods 10, 45-53 (1983).
17. tsai, c. s., and ochillo, r. f. cold-stress and the
sensitivity of the muscarinic receptors of the
longitudinal muscle of the isolated guinea-pig
ileum. fed. proc. abstract no. 2213, 534
(1986).
18. tsai, c. s., and ochillo, r. f. the effects of hypothermia on the blockade of muscarinic receptors by phenoxybenzamine. arch. int. pharmacodyn. ther. 292, 76-85 (1988).
19. van nueten, j. m., and vanhoutte, p. m. calcium entry blockers and vascular smooth muscle heterogeneity. fed. proc. 40, 2682-2685
(1981).
20. vaugh, g., sesi, s. j., tsai, c. s., and ochillo,
r. f. characterization of antagonism between
acetylcholine (ach) and  xxxd2566xxx  (mpz) at
muscarinic receptors (mr) of the rat isolated
ileum. fed. proc. abstract no. 6065, 1308
(1982).
pharmacology

