the action of adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists on the guinea pig and dog trachea.  the action of beta- and alpha-adrenoceptor agonists ( xxxd2398xxx ,  xxxd2583xxx , noradrenaline, phenylephrine and ephedrine) and antagonists (propranolol,  xxxd2623xxx , exaprolol, bl 445 and  xxxd2914xxx ) on the resting tension and camp level of the guinea pig and the mechanical and electrical activities of the dog trachea were studied. by activating beta 2-adrenoceptors,  xxxd2398xxx  and  xxxd2583xxx  relaxed the smooth muscle, elevated the membrane potential and attenuated the excitatory effect of histamine on membrane potential and muscle tension. noradrenaline and phenylephrine, acting on alpha 1-receptors, did not affect the membrane potential and increased the basal tension of the dog trachea only insignificantly. ephedrine, in high concentrations, however, hyperpolarized the smooth muscle membrane and relaxed the dog trachea, while it did not alter the camp level in the guinea pig preparations. it is, therefore unlikely that alpha 1-adrenoceptors play a major role in the excitation of the dog trachea under resting conditions whereas the participation of alpha 2-receptors in the mechanisms of adrenergic relaxation could not be ruled out. all the beta-adrenoceptor antagonists studied enhanced the action of low  xxxd2398xxx  concentrations and competitively antagonized it in high concentrations. the order of their antagonistic potency in the guinea pig trachea was as follows:  xxxd2623xxx  greater than propranolol = exaprolol greater than or equal to bl 445. it was suggested that  xxxd2623xxx  and exaprolol are nonselective beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, similarly as propranolol, whereas bl 445 shown some beta 1-selectivity. in contrast to their antagonistic effects on the membrane activities and muscle tension, both histamine and  xxxd2398xxx  increased the level of camp in smooth muscle cells and, when present simultaneously, their effect was additive. the mechanism of histamine-induced camp level elevation and the possible involvement of different subcellular compartments in the action of  xxxd2398xxx  and histamine in relation to the contraction-relaxation cycle is discussed.