european heart journal (1988) 9 {supplement h), 85-90

receptor-mediated inotropic drugs
p. a . van zwieten

division of pharmacotherapy, faculty of medicine, university of amsterdam, academic medical centre,
meibergdreef 15, 1105 az amsterdam, the netherlands

key words: oc-adrenoreceptors, /?-adrenoreceptors, dobutamine, dopaminergic receptors, inotropic drugs,
xamoterol.

introduction

an increase in myocardial contractility may be
obtained upon stimulation of various types of receptors in the heart, namely, the adrenergic (ji- and a-),
dopaminergic, histaminergic and, most recently discovered, the serotonergic receptors. histaminergic
(h 2 ) and serotonergic receptor stimulation as a basis
of enhanced inotropic activity is dealt with by opie
"'. here we discuss predominantly agonists towards
various types of adrenoreceptors and also pay some
attention to dopaminergic agonists. as a basis for an
adequate discussion of the inotropic compounds
involved, it seems useful to summarize briefly the
various cardiac adrenoreceptor populations and their
subtypes, as well as to give an overview of dopaminergic receptors in the heart, blood vessels and
kidney.
adrenoreceptors in the heart
the myocardial cell membranes and pacemaker
cells of the sino-atrial node have been demonstrated
to contain both post- and pre-synaptic adrenoreceptors of various types. the adrenoreceptors in the
coronary vascular system remain beyond the scope
of the present survey.
with respect to inotropic responses as elicited by
cardiotonic agents, the postsynaptic adrenoreceptors
appear to be the most important mediators, although
in certain cases it can be imagined that presynaptic
%2- or /j2-adrenoreceptors may play a modulatory
0195-668x;88,09h083 + 06 $02.00,0

role. an increase in contractile force can be induced
by the stimulation of /?,-, f}2- and a,-adrenoreceptors
with their appropriate agonists (fig. 1).
^-adrenoreceptors

both /},- and /? 2 - a drenoreceptors are known to coexist in the heart. the /?,-receptors are functionally
dominant, although the cardiac /j r adrenoreceptors
should not be underestimated, as was the case until
very recently. several ^-adrenoreceptor agonists have
been described which display a certain degree of selectivity for either chronotropic or inotropic activity
(table 1). it might therefore be assumed that the
receptors mediating chronotropic responses would be
clearly different from those that trigger inotropic
activity of the heart. no consensus has been achieved
concerning this question' 2| . it could also be hypothesised that the efficiency of the coupling between
the stimulation of the receptor and the subsequent
table i ji-adrenoreceptor agonists which are selective for
either chronotropic or inotropic responses13*

selective for chronotropy

selective for inotropy

cartcolol
 xxxd3017xxx 
salbutamol
soterenol

prenalterol
 xxxd2964xxx 
dopamine
dobutamine
asl-7022

1, 1988 the european society of cardiology

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

cardiac inotropic activity can be triggered by /?,-. fi2- and aradrenoreceptors in the heart when stimulated with
appropriate agonists. dopaminergic receptor agonists have little influence on contractile force but the peripheral
vasodilatation, improved renal perfusion and enhanced natriuresis mediated by dopaminergic receptor stimulation
mav improve a condition of congestive heart failure. after a general survey of cardiac fi- and a-adrenoreceptors
and of dopaminergic receptors in the cardiovascular system, the following receptor-mediated inotropic drugs are
discussed'  xxxd2398xxx , dobutamine, xamoterol,  xxxd2964xxx , terbutaline, salbutamol. dopamine, l-dopa and
dopexamine. attention is paid to the receptor profile of these compounds and to the scope and limitations of
their application as inotropic drugs in the treatment of congestive heart failure.

86

p. a. van zwieten

sympathetic nerve ending

heart

a2(+a,?)

0.
ft

contractile force •
heart rate 1

» na
contractile force 4
a.

heart rate t or •

ft

pharmacological effect, could differ between the
chronotropic and inotropic responses' 3 '.
as discussed below, it is very difficult to separate
inotropic and chronotropic activities under clinical
circumstances, at least for those /j-adrenoreceptor
agonists available so far. a further problem that
occurs upon chronic administration of /j-adrenoreceptor agonists is the development of receptor
desensitisation' 4 '. this problem is particularly relevant where partial agonists are concerned.
3-adrenoreceptors

it was recognised approximately a decade ago that
upon stimulation, cardiac a,-adrenoreceptors induce
a rather slowly developing increase in contractile
force which is greatly dependent upon pre-existing
heart rate. in contrast to /?-adrenoreceptor inotropic
activity, that induced by cardiac a,-adrenoreceptors
is not mediated by camp. 2,-adrenoreceptor agonists maintain their inotropic activity whereas fladrenoreceptors become desensitised after prolonged
treatment with /?-adrenoreceptor agonists and/or in
a condition of long-existing congestive heart failure,
when persistently elevated plasma noradrenalme
levels
cause
down-regulation
of
^-adrenoreceptors 1561 .
a,-adrenoreceptor agonists in pithed rat preparations have been reported to increase heart rate, but

it is not clear whether this effect would be relevant to
the cinical application of these drugs. under certain
experimental conditions 2,-adrenoreceptor stimulation can also cause a negative inotropic effect. a
potential problem which is difficult to avoid is the
vasoconstriction induced by stimulation of vascular
a:i-adrenoreceptors at postsynaptic sites.

dopaminergic receptors

little is known of the dopaminergic receptors
present in the heart, apart from the fact that they are
probably not of major relevance or function. dopamine, the biosynthetic precursor of noradrenaline
and an endogenous agonist of dopaminergic receptors in the central nervous system, is also a therapeutic agent in cardiological disorders. it causes
an increased cardiac output via the stimulation of
both y.- and ^-adrenoreceptors in the heart;
cardiac dopaminergic receptors are probably not
involved.
l-dopa, a well-known drug in the treatment of
parkinson's disease, also possesses inotropic activity
when administered orally. this effect is caused by
dopamine, the product of decarboxylation of l-dopa.
ibopamine, an orally active inotropic agent, is con-

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

figure i sympathetic nerve ending and synapse in the heart with a
schematic overview of the subtypes of *- and /(-adrenoreceptors131.
stimulation of both /),- and /j 2 " a£ i r enoreceptors at postsynaptic sites
causes an increase in contractile force and in heart rate. postsynaptic
1,-adrenoreceptor stimulation induces an increase in contractile force
and either an increase or a decrease in heart rate, dependent upon the
experimental circumstances i 2 -adrenoreceptor excitation at presynaptic sites reduces the release of endogenous noradrenalme from the
nerve endings, whereas this release is enhanced by the stimulation of
presynaptic /j2-receptors. these effects, which would also influence contractile force and heart rate via a modulation of the release of noradrenaline. probably do not offer an important basis for drug-induced
changes in inotropy.

receptor-mediated inotropic drugs

application of /j-adrenoreceptor agonists
a variety of /j-adrenoreceptor agonists have been
studied both experimentally and in patients, with the
aim of improving cardiac contractility. since both /?,and /?2-adrenoreceptor stimulation causes inotropic
actions, agonists with /?,, p2 or mixed /?, and p2
stimulatory activity have been studied. the most
relevant of these compounds are listed in table 2
and a few of them are discussed below in more detail.
none of the /?-adrenoreceptor agonists has gained
widespread clinical use in the chronic treatment of
congestive heart failure. at best, a few of these
compounds can be applied in order to improve an
table 2

acute situation of heart failure. this limitation on
the long-term use of /?-adrenoreceptor stimulants in
heart failure is due to the following problems. firstly,
under clinical conditions the inotropic agents all
cause a certain degree of tachycardia (although a
separation between chronotropic and inotropic activities could be imagined on theoretical grounds);
secondly, virtually none of the compounds in table
2 can be administered orally, so parenteral application is unavoidable; and thirdly, chronic administration of these compounds leads to receptor desensitisation, as discussed above.
 xxxd2398xxx  and oraprenaline are classical, nonselective /?, and p2 agonists, widely applied in
bronchial asthma as broncholytics before the development of selective /?2-adrenoreceptor agonists. since
both agents cause significant tachycardia and a consequent sharp increase in oxygen consumption, they
are no longer used in the treatment of congestive
heart failure unless severe bradycardia occurs.  xxxd2583xxx  is longer-acting than  xxxd2398xxx . both
compounds are applicable only via the parenteral
route.
dobutamine is an inotropic agent which is reported
to stimulate /?,-receptors and, to a lesser degree,
p2- and also a,-adrenoreceptors. the ( —) isomer has
greater selectivity for inotropy than has the ( + )
isomer of  xxxd2398xxx . the ( —) isomer is the
stronger a,-adrenoreceptor agonist and the weaker
pi > pi stimulant. it therefore seems likely that
a,-adrenoreceptor stimulation is involved in the
inotropic action of dobutamine, in addition to its p
stimulant activity'91.

survey of p-udrenorecepior and mixed agonisis which cause molropic aclivily mediated by cardiac fi-adrenoreceplors

compound

dopexamine
prenalterol
xamoterol (ici 118,587)
dobutamine
salbutamol
terbutahne
 xxxd3130xxx 
 xxxd2098xxx 
albuterol
 xxxd2964xxx 

p,
0, . pa*,, *i)
0, .02
"co

noradrenaline
adrenaline
 xxxd2398xxx 
 xxxd2583xxx 
dopamine

potential application (as a result of ft stimulation)

0,/02

.02

p, . p 2 ,

a,, d a , , d a 2

pi , da,,  xxxd1379xxx 

p, pp,
p, pp,
p, pp:
pi
pi
pi
pi
pi
02

pp
pp
pp
pp
pp
pp,

_

broncholytic
broncholytic, a-v conduction disturbances, bradydysrhythmia
broncholytic, a-v conduction disturbances, bradydysrhythmia
cardiotonic (via fi and z), improved renal perfusion and natnuresis
(via da,)
cardiotonic (acute only)
cardiotonic (acute only)
cardiotonic
cardiotonic
broncholytic
broncholytic
uterus relaxation
broncholytic; cardiotonic?
broncholytic; cardiotonic?
broncholytic; cardiotonic?

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

verted in vivo into epinine, a compound with dopamine-like activity.
in summary, as far as can be judged at present,
the inotropic action of several compounds with a
dopaminergic component is mediated predominantly
by adrenoreceptors rather than by cardiac dopaminergic receptors. it should be realised, however,
that stimulation of the dopaminergic receptors in
peripheral blood vessels and in the kidney contributes
significantly to clinical improvement in patients with
congestive heart failure. the stimulation of daireceptors causes peripheral and renal vasodilatation,
as well as enhanced natriuresis. the excitation of presynaptic da 2 -receptors in the blood vessels inhibits
the release of noradrenaline from presynaptic sites
and hence contributes to vasodilatation. for reviews
of cardiovascular and renal dopaminergic receptors
the reader is referred elsewhere' 781 .

87

88

p. a. van zwieien

application of ot-adrenoreceptor agonists
an 2,-adrenoreceptor-mediated increase in cardiac
contractile force has been demonstrated for noradrenaline, adrenaline, phenylephrine,  xxxd2601xxx 
and dopamine. dopamine, as discussed below, also
stimulates /?,-, fi2, da,-and  xxxd1379xxx -receptors. the
other compounds mentioned above are not currently
applied as inotropic drugs. vasoconstriction as a
result of a,-adrenoreceptor stimulation seems an
adverse reaction which can hardly be avoided. it has
already been mentioned that dobutamine probably
owes part of its inotropic activity to the stimulation
of cardiac a,-adrenoreceptors.
the impression has been obtained that the inotropic activity of a,-adrenoreceptor agonists is
maintained after desensitisation of cardiac /?-adrenoreceptors. so far it has not been established whether
cardiac a-adrenoreceptors are down-regulated after
prolonged treatment with a agonists and/or during
congestive heart failure as such. a review of the
cardiac activity of postsynaptic a,-adrenoreceptor
stimulants has appeared"41.
application of dopaminergic receptor agonists
as indicated above, stimulation of the cardiac
dopaminergic receptors has little influence on cardiac
contractility. for this reason the inotropic activity
of dopamine and ibopamine is due rather to the
stimulation of a- and/or ^-adrenoreceptors. however, the stimulation of dopaminergic receptors in the
blood vessels and the kidney is potentially useful,
causing vasodilatation, improved renal perfursion
and enhanced natriuresis'781.
dopamine causes a complex series of haemodynamic changes as a result of the simultaneous stimulation of several receptor types (see table 2). dopamine
is always applied as an intravenous infusion and
increases cardiac output as a result of an increase in
contractile force rather than because of an increase
in heart rate, although tachycardia also occurs at
higher doses. systemic and pulmonary vascular
resistances are reduced renal perfusion should be
expected to increase on theoretical grounds but this
is not always the case in patients with chronic congestive heart failure. natriuresis is increased, possibly
as a result of improved renal perfusion and owing to
a direct effect on the renal tubuli, mediated by da,receptors. at higher doses a,-receptor stimulation
induces vasoconstriction.
l-dopa given orally has been reported to increase
cardiac performance in patients with congestive heart

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

dobutamine at low doses causes a stronger inotropic than chronotropic response, but tachycardia
is observed at higher doses. dobutamine has a short
half-life and duration of action, so prolonged intravenous infusion is the only useful route of administration. continuous application for more than 72 h
may lead to tolerance as a result of down-regulation
of /j-adrenoreceptors.
at present the possibility is being studied of
administering dobutamine by means of intermittent
infusions, with the aim of obtaining sufficient cardiac
stimulation but avoiding /?-adrenoreceptor downregulation. this subject has been reviewed elsewhere"01.
prenalterol is a selective /i,-adrenoreceptor agonist
with a high degree of intrinsic sympathomimetic
activity (isa). the acute effects of prenalterol may
be useful in improving cardiac performance but longterm treatment has proved disappointing, probably
as a result of ^-receptor down-regulation. partial
agonists are more likely to induce receptor desensitisation than are full agonists'341.
xamoterol (corwin) is a /?,-adrenoreceptor partial
agonist with 43% maximal isa compared with
 xxxd2398xxx . the clinical reports on the use of this
drug in congestive heart failure are relatively favourable, as far as can be judged at present. although
the drug's half-life would be sufficiently long to allow
oral application, its bioavailability after oral ingestion is only 5%. xamoterol has also been claimed to
display anti-anginous activity.
the partial agonist character of the drug appears
to be of potential interest. at low levels of sympathetic stimulation xamoterol increases cardiac performance as a result of f) stimulation; at high levels
of sympathetic activity xamoterol acts as a /?blocker. for a review, see molajo and bennett'1 n .
 xxxd2964xxx  is an orally active /?2 agonist with weak
or negligible /j, activity. in patients with congestive
heart failure,  xxxd2964xxx  increases cardiac output and
decreases left ventricularfillingpressure and systemic
vascular resistance, without apparent chronotropic
effects. however, long-term treatment will probably be impaired because of ^-receptor desensitisation" 21 .
salbutamol and terbuialine are also  xxxd752xxx  agonistic
drugs which might be expected to cause similar
haemodynamic effects as  xxxd2964xxx . they are wellknown broncholytics but few clinical data are available on their potential usefulness in the treatment of
congstive heart failure. so far only short-term studies
have been performed. their use may also be limited
by the development of tolerance"2131.

receptor-mediated inotropic drugs

conclusions
receptor-mediated inotropic drugs involve mainly
the stimulation of /j-and a-adrenoreceptors and their
various subtypes, whereas the dopaminergic components of some of these drugs contribute to an
overall favourable pharmacological eftect as a result
of peripheral vasodilatation, improved renal perfusion and enhanced natriuresis. potentially, the subtle
variations among the /?-adrenoreceptor agonistic
drugs, implicating combinations of /?,-, /?2-agonistic
activity, partial agonism, etc., offer the prospect of
refined patterns of treatment of congestive heart
failure. so far, acute treatment of several forms of
congestive heart failure can be performed satisfactorily with certain types of /?-adrenoreceptor agonists, in addition to other measures. dobutamine is

probably the most often used compound of this type
at present, although it should be realised that dobutamine also increases contractile force via the stimulation of cardiac a,-adrenoreceptors. most of the
available /?-adrenoreceptor agonists can be applied
only intravenously, although a few newer compounds
appear to be active orally. the intravenous route of
administration, the tendency to develop tolerance
caused by receptor desensitisation and the almost
unavoidable chronotropic side-effects are the main
drawbacks in the chronic application of /j-adrenoreceptor-mediated inotropic drugs. some of these
problems may be overcome by subtle combinations
of various properties in new drugs still to be designed,
but this will certainly not be simple.
so far, little attention has been paid to a,-adrenoreceptor agonists as inotropic drugs and this might
be a new approach in treatment. however, it should
be realised that it will be very difficult to avoid
the side-effects of peripheral vasoconstriction also
induced by the stimulation of postsynaptic a,-adrenoreceptors.
dopaminergic receptor stimulation may be beneficial in congestive heart failure, although not primarily
via an inotropic mechanism. ancillary properties
such as a- and/or /j-adrenoreceptor stimulation are
required for inotropic activity in a dopaminergic
drug. this combination of vasodilatory, natriuretic
and inotropic activities might still offer several potentially useful drugs in the treatment of congestive heart
failure. the possibility that an orally active drug with
these combined properties could be designed, can
well be imagined.

references
[1] opie lh. serotonin and hj-agonists in heart failure
eur heart j (in press).
[2] broadly kj. cardiac adrenoceptors. j auton pharmacol 1982; 2: 119^»5.
[3] wilffert b. adrenoceptors in the heart. progr pharmacol 1986; 6: 47-64.
[4] kenakin tp, beek d. in vitro studies on the cardiac
activity of prenalterol with reference to its use in congestive heart failure. j pharmacol exp ther 1982; 220:
77-85.
[5] bristow mr. decreased catecholamine sensitivity and
beta-adrenergic receptor sensitivity in failing human
hearts. new engl j med 1982; 307: 205-11.
[6] bristow mr. myocardial beta-adrenergk receptor
down-regulation in heart failure. int j cardiol 1984; 5:
648 52.
[7] goldberg l. dopamine receptors: applications in clinical cardiology. circulation 1985; 72: 245-8.
[8] struyker boudier haj. dopamine receptors in the
cardiovascular system and in the kidney. progr pharmacol 1986; 6: 81-96.

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

failure 1 " 1 . the effect obtained is in fact caused by
dopamine, which is formed upon biotransformation
of the amino acid l-dopa. a potential advantage of
this treatment is the oral applicability of l-dopa.
however, l-dopa shows considerable adverse reactions, as is well known from its application in
parkinson's disease. furthermore, it is so far unknown whether long-term treatment can be maintained, owing to the possible desensitisation of
dopaminergic receptors or /?-adrenoreceptors.
ibopamine is an orally active analogue of dopamine
which is hydrolysed on absorption, to yield the active
metabolite epinine. accordingly, ibopamine should
be considered as a pro-drug. the pharmacological
and therapeutic characteristics of ibopamine are
virtually the same as those of dopamine, as far as
can be judged at present. the oral applicability of
ibopamine is potentially favourable. so far, only
short-term studies on the effect of ibopamine in
congestive heart failure are available' 161 .
dopexamine, a compound derived from and
pharmacologically similar to dopamine, is assumed
to stimulate da,- and da 2 -receptors but also fi2adrenoreceptors. adrenoreceptors of the /j, and a
types are not involved. the drug can be administered
only via the intravenous route. dopexamine causes a
mild inotropic effect, reduces peripheral vascular
resistance and increases natriuresis' 171 . heart rate
is hardly influenced. dopexamine seems to be a
potentially interesting drug for the treatment of
acute congestive heart failure. no data are available
on its usefulness when applied in long-term treatment schedules. the solely intravenous route of
administration is certainly a drawback in this respect.

89

90

p. a. van zwteten

[14]

[15]
[16)
[17]

butamol in pauents with chronic congestive heart failure. am heart j 1985, 109: 840 7.
scholz h. effects of beta- and alpha-adrenoceptor
activators and adrenergic transmitter releasing agents
on the mechanical activity of the heart in: szekeres l.
ed handbook of experimental pharmacology. vol. 54.
berlin-springer-verlag, 1980:651 733
rajfer si, anton ah, rossen jd. goldberg li. beneficial hemodynamic effects of oral lcvodopa in heart
failure new engl j med 1984. 310. 1357 62.
caponetto s el al. positive inotropic effects of ibopamine in patients with congestive heart failure arzneimitt forsch 1986, 36. 386 90
dawson jr acute haemodynamic and metabolic
effects of dopexamine. a new dopaminergic receptor
agonist, in patients with chronic heart failure br
heart j 1985; 54: 313 20

downloaded from http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on june 9, 2016

[9] ruftolo rr. spradlin ta, pollock gd. waddell je,
murphy pj alpha and beta adrenergic effects of the
stereoisomers of dobutamine j pharmacol exp ther
1981. 219. 447 52
[10] sonnenblick eh. frishman wh. lejemtel th dobutamine: a new synthetic cardioactive sympathetic
amine. new engl j med 1979; 300: 17-22.
[ii] molajo ao. bennett dh. effect of xamoterol (ici
118,587). a new beta.-adrenoceptor partial agonist, on
resting haemodynamic variables and exercise tolerance
in patients with left ventricular dysfunction br heart
j 1985. 54: 17-21.
[12] awan na. hemodynamic effects of oral  xxxd2964xxx  in
chronic severe congestive heart failure circulation
1981; 63: 96- 101.
[13] mettauer b. detrimental arrhythmogenic and sustained beneficial hemodynamic effects of oral sal-

