experimental

and

fusion

molecular

of storage

renate
department

pathology

46,

136- 143 ( 1987)

lysosomes in experimental
and glycogenosis

l~~llmann-rauch
of anatomy,

university
received

and dietlind
of kiel,
august

2300 kiel,

lipidosis

watermann
west germany

1, 1986

this ultrastructural investigation on renal collecting duct cells and hepatocytes of rats
deals with the question of whether or not lipid-storage lysosomes as induced by cationic
amphiphilic compounds retain their ability to fuse with autophagosomes/autolysosomes.
these were recognized by their glycogen content which was made to persist by means of
acarbose, an inhibitor of lysosomal cc-glucosidase. to induce lipidosis, rats were pretreated
for several weeks with chloroquine or chlorphentermine; they then received combined
treatment with the lipidosis-inducing drug plus acarbose. in renal collecting duct cells,
mixed storage lysosomes displaying the features of both lipidosis and glycogenosis were
found to predominate, indicating that fusion between lipid-laden lysosomes and glycogencontaining autophagosomes/autolysosomes was efficient. hepatocytes also displayed some
mixed storage lysosomes; these were, however, regularly accompanied, within a given hepatocyte, by greater numbers of pure lipidosis-related inclusions and pure glycogen vacuoles. this observation indicates that in hepatocytes lipid-storage lysosomes were rather
reluctant to fuse, thus displaying a feature of telolysosomes which are no longer capable of
participating in cellular digestion. q 1987 academic press. inc.

introduction
generalized lipidosis can be induced experimentally
by means of various amphiphilic cationic drugs, as reviewed in detail by lullmann-rauch
(1979). ultrastructurally, lipidosis is characterized by the occurrence of enlarged lysosomes
filled with lamellar or reticular structures that reflect polar lipids aggregated in the
lamellar and hexagonal phases, respectively (buchheim et al., 1979). the congestion of lysosomes raised the question of whether such storage organelles are inert
telolysosomes or still functioning parts of the lysosomal apparatus. one prerequisite for participation
in intracellular digestive events is the ability to fuse with
other digestive vacuoles (daems et al., 1969; brunk, 1973).
previous experiments with exogenous tracers such as dextran,  xxxd2385xxx 
(lullmann-rauch,
1979), or 1251-lysozyme (christensen et al., 1983) showed that
fusion between endocytic vacuoles and lipid-storing lysosomes in hepatic and
splenic macrophages and in renal proximal tubules was possible. the purpose of
the present investigation was to test whether fusion of lipid-storing
lysosomes
with autophagosomes and autolysosomes is also possible. these organelles are
defined as vacuoles containing material which can be identified structurally as
being endogenous to the cell (ericsson, 1969). glycogen is an example of material
which reaches the lysosomal apparatus via autophagy only (hers and de barsy,
1973). usually, intralysosomal
glycogen disappears rapidly (papadopoulos and
pfeifer, 1986) due to hydrolysis (geddes and stratton, 1977; brown et al., 1980)
and is rarely demonstrable ultrastructurally
within lysosomes under normal conditions (pfeifer, 1971). it persists, however, when the lysosomal a-glucosidase
either is lacking, as in pompe’s disease (hers and de barsy, 1973), or is inhibited
experimentally.
the latter condition can be induced by injection of an ol-glucosi136
0014-4800/87 $3.00
copyright 0 1987 by academic press, inc.
au rights of reproduction
in any form reserved.

experimental

lipidosis

and

glycogenosis

137

dase inhibitor, i.e., acarbose, a pseudotetrasaccharide
which reaches the lysosomes via endocytosis; as a result, gradual accumulation of glycogen occurs in
lysosomes which can thus be identified as autolysosomes
(lullmann-rauch,
1981, 1982).
in the present study, we pretreated rats with chlorphentermine
(anorectic drug)
or with chloroquine (antimalarial
drug) to induce generalized lipidosis and then
gave either one or repeated injections of the a-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose to
induce glycogenosis. fusion between lipid-storing lysosomes and autophagic vacuoles or autolysosomes was expected to result in mixed storage lysosomes harboring both lamellated or reticular structures and glycogen particles within the
same limiting membrane. we examined hepatocytes and renal collecting ducts
because these are typical locations where significant lipidosis (abraham and
hendy, 1970; ltillmann-rauch,
1975) and glycogenosis (lullmann-rauch,
198 1,
1982), respectively, are known to occur.
materials

and methods

female wistar rats with an initial weight of 180 g were used. chlorphentermine-hcl
was a gift of tropon (koln, west germany); chloroquine diphosphate
and acarbose were generously provided by bayer (leverkusen, west germany).
to induce lipidosis, six animals received chlorphentermine
(0.075%) and seven
animals received chloroquine (0.15%) as additives to the ground chow (altromin,
altrogge, lage, west germany). the daily drug doses resulting from the food
consumption
amounted to approximately
40 mg/kg (chlorphentermine)
and 75
mg/kg (chloroquine),
respectively. seven weeks after the beginning of lipidosis
induction, each group of animals was divided into two subgroups, one receiving
ip injections of acarbose (200 mg/kg, five times per week; drug dissolved in saline,
0.5 ml/100 g body wt), the other receiving ip injections of saline only. acarbose
treatment and saline injections were conducted for 2.5 to 5.5 weeks; the lipidosisinducing drugs were fed continually throughout the entire experimental period. in
order to study the reversibility
of the storage phenomena, two rats, pretreated
with chloroquine for 7 weeks and then treated with chloroquine plus acarbose for
a further 6.5 weeks, were allowed to survive for 8 weeks without any drug treatment. additionally,
four rats pretreated with chloroquine for 9 weeks received
either a single injection of acarbose (400 mg/kg; two rats) or of saline (two rats)
and were killed 5 days later; in this experiment only the liver was examined.
before sacrifice most animals were starved for 17 hr in order to reduce the
cytoplasmic glycogen in the hepatocytes. the animals were then deeply anesthetized with pentobarbital,
and tissue tixation was achieved by vascular perfusion
with 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m phosphate buffer (ph 7.4). osmication and embedding in araldite were performed as usual. semithin sections were stained either with toluidine blue or with pas-hematoxylin
as described previously (lullmann-rauch, 1981, 1982). ultrathin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and
lead citrate and viewed with zeiss em 9 and philips e 300 electron microscopes.
results
renal collecting ducts
the examination was confined to the collecting ducts of cortex and outer medulla. after treatment with chloroquine or chlorphentermine
alone, the chief cells

138

ltillmann-rauch

and watermann

contained solitary lamellated
inclusion. the intercalated
cells (madsen and
tisher, 1986) were often stuffed with numerous lamellar bodies as described previously (liillmann-rauch,
1975). glycogen particles were never seen within the
lipidosis-related
inclusions. after treatment with acarbose alone, both cell types
lysoof the collecting ducts are known to contain numerous glycogen-storing
somes (liillmann-rauch,
1982).
after combined treatment with chloroquine or chlorphentermine
plus acarbose, mixed storage lysosomes containing lamellated structures plus glycogen
particles (fig. 1) were the predominating
inclusions in the collecting duct cells.
within the individual inclusions, lipid material was usually more abundant than

fig. 1. renal collecting duct of a rat pretreated with chloroquine (7 weeks) and thereafter treated
with chloroquine plus acarbose (5.5 weeks). the inset shows three cells containing numerous abnormal inclusions. at higher magnification, mixed storage lysosomes are recognized containing lamellated material as an indication of lipidosis, and glycogen particles indicating glycogenosis.
x 43,200; inset, x 4500.

experimental

lipidosis

and

glycogenosis

139

glycogen. those intercalated cells that were stuffed with lipidosis-related
inclusions did not display mixed storage lysosomes nor pure glycogen vacuoles. generally, the glycogenosis in kidney was less severe after combined treatment than
was previously observed after treatment with acarbose alone.
hepatocytes

treatment with chloroquine
alone induced marked lipidosis as reported by
abraham and hendy (1970); centrolobular
hepatocytes were affected more severely than those in the periphery of the hepatic lobules. treatment with chlorphentermine
alone caused moderate lipidosis, as previously described (liillmann-rauch and reil, 1973). glycogen particles were never seen in lipidosis-related inclusions. after treatment with acarbose alone, the hepatocytes are known
to contain glycogen vacuoles, with the centrolobular hepatocytes being more severely affected than the peripheral cells; significant glycogenosis is present as
early as 5 days after a single injection of acarbose (lullmann-rauch,
1981).
after combined treatment with chloroquine or chlorphentermine
plus acarbose, mixed lysosomes were encountered (fig. 2), but they were less predominant than in renal collecting duct cells. hepatocytes with mixed storage lysosomes regularly contained greater numbers of pure lipidosis-related
inclusions
and pure glycogen vacuoles, irrespective of whether acarbose had been injected
repeatedly or only once.
independent of the drug used for the induction of lipidosis, the relative proportion of lipid and glycogen within mixed storage lysosomes was variable from one
profile to the other. most of the mixed storage lysosomes displayed lamellated
structures (figs. 2, 3, and 5); in some inclusions the reticular type of lipid material
was seen (fig. 4). occasionally, pictures were observed suggesting the process of
fusion between a lipidosis-related
inclusion and a glycogen vacuole (fig. 6).
in the case of chloroquine-pretreated
rats, the intralobular distribution of glycogenosis was the reverse of the pattern previously observed after treatment with
acarbose alone (lullmann-rauch,
1981). the centrolobular hepatocytes were severely affected by chloroquine without showing significant glycogen storage; in
contrast, the peripheral hepatocytes showed many pure glycogen vacuoles but
hardly any lipidosis-related
inclusions. the mixed storage lysosomes were found
mainly in hepatocytes of the intermediate lobular zone. in all rats pretreated with
chloroquine or chlorphentermine,
the overall degree of glycogenosis in the liver
was clearly lower than previously observed in rats treated with acarbose alone.
findings

after discontinuation

of combined

drug

treatment

eight weeks after the end of treatment with chloroquine plus acarbose, the
hepatocytes were free of lipidosis and glycogenosis. the renal collecting duct
cells still contained significant numbers of glycogen vacuoles which were, however, largely free of lamellated structures. thus, glycogenosis and lipidosis in
collecting duct cells receded with different time courses.
discussion
the occurrence of mixed storage lysosomes shows that fusion is possible between autophagic vacuoles or autolysosomes containing glycogen, and lysosomes
affected by lipidosis. in fig. 7 two pathways which may be visualized as leading
to the formation of mixed storage lysosomes are depicted. a third possibility is

140

lullmann-rauch

and watermann

fig. 2. hepatocyte (intermediate lobular zone) of a rat pretreated with chloroquine (7 weeks) and
thereafter treated with chloroquine plus acarbose (4 weeks). one mixed storage lysosome (m) is seen
containing lamellated material and glycogen particles. the other profiles display signs of either lipidosis (l) or glycogenosis (g) only. bc, bile canaliculus. x 18,000.
figs. 3 and 4. mixed storage lysosomes in hepatocytes of a rat pretreated with chloroquine for 9
weeks and then treated with a single injection of acarbose 5 days prior to sacrifice. glycogen particles
and lipid material, either in the lamellar form (fig. 3) or in the reticular form (fig. 4), are seen surrounded by a common limiting membrane. fig. 3, x 72,000; fig. 4, x 63,000.

experimental

lipidosis

and glycogenosis

fig. 5. mixed storage lysosome in a hepatocyte of a rat pretreated with chlorphentermine (7 weeks)
and thereafter treated with chlorphentermine plus acarbose (2.5 weeks). x 56,500.
fig. 6. fusion between a lamellated inclusion (l) and a small glycogen vacuole (g). hepatocyte of
a rat pretreated with chloroquine (7 weeks) and thereafter treated with chloroquine plus acarbose (5.5
weeks). x 64,000.

omitted, namely, the development of lipid storage within a preexisting glycogen
vacuole. this pathway might be conceivable in the animals that received combined treatment with the lipidosis-inducing
drug plus acarbose for several weeks;
however, in the animals that were sacrificed 5 days after a single injection of
acarbose, this pathway is unlikely to contribute significantly to the formation of
mixed storage lysosomes.
fusion was quite effective in renal collecting duct cells, as indicated by the
observation that most lipidosis-related
inclusions contained glycogen particles.
an exception was the intercalated cells that were severely affected by lipidosis
but free of mixed storage lysosomes and of pure glycogen vacuoles. obviously
such cells were, under the present experimental conditions, resistant to the acarbose-induced glycogenosis, either because they did not take up the enzyme inhibitor or because there was no longer a significant lysosomal sequestration of glycogen. the same explanations may be applicable to the observation on centrolobular hepatocytes of chloroquine-pretreated
rats, where glycogenosis, and thus
mixed storage lysosomes, were absent.
for the purpose of the present study, the absence of mixed storage lysosomes
is significant only in those hepatocytes which displayed signs of both lipidosis and
glycogenosis, i.e., in cells where there might have been sufficient opportunity for
fusion between both types of storage lysosomes. in the case of the chloroquinepretreated rats, the hepatocytes of the intermediate lobular zone are of particular

142

lullmann-rauch

and watermann
ecs

x

ics

phosphorolvsi,s

fig. 7. diagram summarizing the possible pathways leading to formation of mixed storage lysosomes (m). cytosolic glycogen (glyc) that does not undergo phosphorolysis is sequesteredinto autophagic vacuoles (av). acarbose (x), the inhibitor of u-glucosidase, is taken up from the extracellular
space (ecs) into endocytic vesicles (ev). upper half: by fusion of a preexisting lipid-storage lysosome
(l) with endocytic vesicles and autophagic vacuoles the enzyme inhibitor and glycogen are delivered
to the lamellar inclusion. repeated fusion with av will lead to glycogen storage within a lipi&&related inclusion. lower half: the enzyme inhibitor is delivered to a primary or secondary lysosome
(1~s) not yet affected by lipidosis. repeated fusion with av will lead to an autolysosome (a-lys) filled
with glycogen. fusion between such an autolysosome and a preexisting lipidosis-related inclusion will
lead to a mixed storage lysosome. ics, intracellular space.
interest. the mixed storage lysosomes were never predominant,
but were, within
a given hepatocyte, always accompanied by greater numbers of pure lipid-storage
lysosomes and pure glycogen vacuoles (fig. 2). this observation indicates that
the lipidosis-related
inclusions in hepatocytes, in contrast to those in renal collecting ducts, were rather reluctant to fuse. it may well be that in some instances
glycogen and lamellar structures, respectively, were just not in the plane of section and therefore not detectable; but this is unlikely to account for the great
number of lysosomal profiles displaying only one type of storage material. the
reason for the different fusion behavior of lipid-storing lysosomes in renal collecting ducts and in hepatocytes is not known. the observation indicates that in
liver a considerable fraction of the lipidosis-related
inclusions may represent telolysosomes which no longer participate in the digestive events, a prerequisite of
which would be the ability to fuse.

acknowledgments
we thank mrs. dagmar niemeier and mrs. rita kirsch for excellent technical assistance.

references
abraham, r., and hendy, r. i. (1970). effects of chronic chloroquine treatment on lysosomes of
rat liver cells. exp. mol. pathot. 12, 148-159.
brown, d. h., brown, b. i. and waindle, l. m. (1980). studies on the lysosomal degradation of
glycogen in cultured human skin tibroblasts. in “mechanisms of saccharide polymerization and
depolymerization”
(j. j. marshall, ed.), pp. 187-208. academic press, new york.
brunk, u. (1973). distribution and shifts of ingested marker particles in residual bodies and other
lysosomes. exp. cell res. 79, 15-27.
buchheim, w., drenckhahn, d., and l~~llmann-rauch, r. (1979). freeze-fracture studies of
cytoplasmic inclusions occurring in experimental lipidosis as induced by amphiphilic cationic drugs.
biochim.

bi0ph.w.

am

575, 71-80.

experimental

lipidosis

and glycogenosis

143

christensen, e. i., maunsbach, a. b., and lullmann-rauch, r. (1983). renal lysosomal protein digestion in experimental lipidosis. virchows arch. (cell path/.) 43, 309-316.
daems, w. t., wisse, e.. and brederoo, p. (1969). electron microscopy of the vacuolar apparatus.
in “lysosomes in biology and pathology” (j. t. dingle and h. b. fell, eds.), vol. 1, pp. 64-l 12.
north-holland, amsterdam.
ericsson, j. l. (1969). mechanisms of cellular autophagy. in “lysosomes in biology and pathology” (j. t. dingle and h. b. fell, eds.), vol. 2, pp. 345-394. north-holland, amsterdam.
geddes, r., and stra~on, g. c. (1977). the influence of lysosomes on glycogen metabolism. biochern. j. 163, 193-200.
hers, h. g.. and de barsy. t. (1973). type 11 glycogenosis ( xxxg826xxx  deficiency). in “lysosomes and storage diseases” (h. g. hers and f. van hoof. eds.). pp. 197-216. academic press,
new york.
lullmann-rauch, r. (1975). lipidosislike renal changes in rats treated with chlorphentermine or
with tricyclic antidepressants. virchmc~s arch. (cell pufhol.) 18, 51-60.
lullmann-rauch, r. (1979). drug-induced lysosomal storage disorders. in “lysosomes in applied
biology and therapeutics” (j. t. dingle, p. j. jacques. and i. h. shaw, eds.), vol. 6. pp. 49-130.
north-holland, amsterdam.
l~~llmann-rauch, r. (1981). lysosomal glycogen storage mimicking the cytological picture of
pompe’s disease as induced in rats by injection of an a-glucosidase inhibitor. i. alterations in liver.
virchow,s arch. (cell parld.) 38, 89- 100.
lullmann-rauch. r. (1982). lysosomal glycogen storage mimicking the cytological picture of
pompe’s disease as induced in rats by injection of an a-glucosidase inhibitor. ii. alterations in
kidney, adrenal gland, spleen and soleus muscle. virchows arch. (cell pafhol.) 39, 187-202.
l~~llmann-rauch. r., and reil, g. h. (1973). chlorphentermine-induced
ultrastructural changes
in liver tissues of four animal species. virclrm~s ad. (cell pathol.) 13, 307-320.
madsen, k. m.. and tisher. c. c. (1986). structural-functional
relationship along the distal
nephron. amer. /. phgiol. 250, fl-f15.
papadopoulos, t.. and pfeifer. u. (1986). regression of rat liver autophagic vacuoles by locally
applied cycloheximide. lnb. znl,esr. 54, ioo- 107.
pfeifer. u. (1971). tageszeitliche rhythmik der zellularen autophagie insbesondere der glykogensegregation in leberepithelien unbehandelter ratten. notlrr?c,issensc/zafren 58, 152.

