review paper

j. iwl. pliciriiicicol. tlieml. 9. 1-25, 1986.

phenylbutazone in the horse: a review
t h o m a s t o b i n , * sylvia chay,* s t e v e kamerling,* w i l l i a m e.
woods,* t. j . weckman,* j . w. blake* & p e t e r l e e s t
*kentucky equine drug research and testing programs, department of veterinary science,
university of kentucky, lexington, kentucky, u s a ; and +department of physiology, royal
veterinary college, north mymms, hertfordshire, u.k.

tobin, t., chay, s., kamerling, s., woods, w.e., weckman, t.j., blake, j.w. &
lees, p. phenylbutazone in the horse: a review. j. vel. phurmacol. tlierup. 9, 1-25.
summary
introduction
chemistry and metabolism
analytical methodology
actions and mechanism of action
clinical uses
pharmacokinetics
bioavailability
plasma kinetics
plasma protein binding
plasma and tissue residues of phenylbutazone
urinary residues and effect of‘ ph
relationship between plasma and urinary concentrations of phenylbutazone
and its metabolites
‘detection times’ for phenylbutazone
plasma levels of phenylbutazone and therapeutic effects
interference or masking by phenylbutazone
adverse reactions

t . tobin, kenlucky equine driig research rind testing ptogiattis, de,borlrtient of
veterinuq science, uniuersity of kentircky, lexinglon, k y 40546-0076, u.s.a.

summary
phenylbutazone is an acidic, lipophilic, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory d r u g (nsaid). it
is extensively metabolized in the horse. t h e
metabolites so far identified,  xxxd2815xxx , y- xxxd2815xxx  and y-

published as kentucky agricultural experiment
station article 84-4-231 with the approval o f the
dean and director, college of agriculture and
kentucky agricultural experiment station.
publication 10.5 from the kentucky equine drug
testing and research programs, department of
veterinary science and the graduate center for
toxicology, university of kentucky.

hydroxyoxyphenbutazone. account for some
25-30% of administered dose over 24 h. t h e
plasma half-life of phenylbutazone and
termination of its pharmacological action are
determined primarily by its rate of hepatic
metabolism.
phenylbutazone acts by inhibiting the cyclooxygenase enzyme system, which is responsible for synthesis of prostanoids such as
pge?. it appears to act o n prostaglalidin-h
synthase and  xxxg1880xxx , after
conversion by prostaglandin-h synthase to
reactive intermediates. it markedly reduces
prostanoid-dependent
swelling,
edema,
erythema, and hypersensitivity to pain in
inflamed tissues. its principal use in the horse
1

2 t. tobin et al.
is for treatment of soft tissue inflammation.
phenylbutazone is highly bound (> 98%) to
plasma protein. after i.v. injection, blood
levels decline with an elimination half-life of
3-10 h. th e plasma kinetics of phenylbutazone may be dose dependent, with the
plasma half-life increasing as the drug dosage
level increases. plasma residues of the drug at
24 h after a single i.v. dose of 2 g/450 kg
average about 0.9 pg/ml, but considerable
variation occurs. if dosing is repeated, the
plasma residue accumulates to give mean
residual blood levels of approxiniately 4.5
pg/ml on day 5 after 4 days of dosing.
approximately similar blood levels are found
after a combination of oral and i.v. dosing.
experiments on large numbers of horses in
training have been undertaken to ascertain
the population distributions of residual blood
levels after such dosing schedules.
absorption of phenylbutazone from the
gastrointestinal tract is influenced by the dose
administered and the relationship of dosing to
feeding. access to hay can delay the time of
peak plasma concentration to 18 h o r longer.
under optimal conditions, the bioavailability
of oral phenylbutazone is probably in the
region of 70%. paste preparations may be
more slowly absorbed than other preparations
and yield higher residual plasma levels at 24 h
after dosing, but further controlled studies
are required.
phenylbutazone is easily detected in the
plasma and urine of horses but concentrations
in saliva are low. it is quantitated for forensic
purposes by hplc. the variability of this
method between laboratories is about k 25%.
increasing urinary ph increases the urinary
concentration of phenylbutazone and its
metabolites up to 200-fold. however, urinary
ph has little effect on the plasma half-life of
phenylbutazone, which is determined mainly
by hepatic metabolism and possibly by biliary
secretion.
phenylbutazone has a narrow therapeutic
index in the horse. if the administered dose is
greater than recommended by the manufacturer, toxic effects may be produced, especially if high dose administration is maintained
for more than a few days. signs of toxicity
include anorexia, depression, oral and gi
ulcers, plasma protein losing enteropathy,
and death from shock. other side-effects

include toxic neutropenia, hepatotoxicity and
renal papillary necrosis; the latter may occur
if access to water is restricted. if phenylbutazone is withdrawn in the early stages of
toxicity, the prognosis is good. late withdrawal is associated with delayed recovery.
death may occur up to 50 days after withdrawal of the drug. this toxicity can be
antagonized by administration of prostaglandins.

introduction
phenylbutazone is a classical non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (nsaid) (gilman pl
al., 1980; tobin, 1981). nsaids are a chemically heterogenous group of drugs which
share certain pharmacological actions, therapeutic uses and side-effects. all nsaids
produce their effects by inhibiting the synthesis of prostanoids, including prostaglandins,
and thromboxanes such as txap. while
aspirin is still the most widely used nsaid in
human medicine, phenylbutazone is the drug
used most extensively in equine medicine
(tobin, 1981; lees & higgins, 1985).
phenylbutazone is chemically related t o
aminopyrine and  xxxd192xxx . it was introduced into human medicine in 1949 for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and related
disorders. it produces adverse reactions in
about 40% of human patients and causes
agranulocytosis and death in a very small
percentage of patients. its use in human
medicine is now limited (gilman el ul., 1980);
indeed, the product license for use in man in
the u.k. was revoked in 1984.
phenylbutazone was introduced into
veterinary medicine in the 1950s and soon
became the nsaid of choice in equine medicine. its effectiveness was such that it became
widely used in performance horses. in time, it
was approved for use in racing horses in the
u.s.a (although it is not permitted in some
countries, including the u.k.), and by the
mid-l970s, use of phenylbutazone in racing
horses had spread to most american states
(tobin, 1981).
in 1977, the use of phenylbutazone in
performance horses was reviewed by t h e
veterinary chemists advisory committee to
the national association of state racing com-

phenylbutazone in h e horse 3
missions (gabel et al., 1977), and also in the
equine veterinary journal (jefcott 8c colles,
1977). these reviews were developed in response to the need of regulators of equine
sports to have available information on the
actions, fate and uses of phenylbutazone in
performance horses.
i n the late 1970s, a bill in congress entitled
'the corrupt horse racing practices act'
(h.r. 1694) was sponsored by the humane
societies. passage of this bill would have made
medication of a racing horse with phenylbutazone a felony, under some circumstances.
this event stimulated a substantial research
effort on this drug, and the purpose of this
review is to discuss recent studies on the
actions, fate, uses, detection and contraindications for phenylbutazone in the horse.

chemistry and metabolism
phenylbutazone (4-butyl-1, 2-diphenyl-3, 5pyrazolidinedione, c19h@n20:3) mw 308.37
is an enolic acid with lipophilic properties
(fig. 1). the acidity is due to the presence of a
dissociable proton at c(4) of the fivemembered ring. the lipophilism is attributable to the benzene rings and the butyl group.
it has a pka in water of about 4.5 and a
n-octonallbuffer partition coefficient of about
5.0. its solubility in water is low, so that most
injectable preparations are solutions of the
sodium salt which are alkaline (fig. 1) (faigle
& dieterle, 1977). this low water solubility
may be associated with the renal problems

which can develop in dehydrated horses
receiving this drug (gunson, 1983).
phenylbutazone exists in solution in three
forms, a diketo, an enol, and a mesomeric
anion form. in solution, it exists primarily in
the diketo form and transformations between
the forms are slow. these transformations
probably contribute to its chemical instability
and to the ability of the cyclo-oxygenase
system to generate reactive intermediates and
finally 4-oh-phenylbutazone (reed el al.,
1985). like other acidic drugs, phenylbutazone is highly protein-bound in plasma
(perel et al., 1964), and is found in negligible
quantities in equine saliva (lanibert & kelly,
1978; tobin, 1981). t h e acidic nature of
phenylbutazone will tend to reduce its
reabsorption from the renal tubules if the
tubular luminal fluid is alkaline (faigle 8c
dieterle 1977).
because of its lipophilicity, phenylbutazone
is extensively metabolized before it is excreted. in the horse, less than 270 is excreted
in the urine as parent phenylbutazone over
24 h (maylin, 1974; lees et d.,l983a). some
25% of an intravenous dose is excreted in
urine over 24 h as  xxxd2815xxx  (ring
hydroxylation) and y- xxxd2815xxx 
(side-chain hydroxylation). in addition, the
di-hydroxy
metabolite
(y-hydroxyoxyphenbutazone) has been detected in equine
urine (p. lees and j. b. taylor, unpublished
data) in amounts that will add a few percentage points to the 24-h urinary excretion values
(fig. 2). phenylbutazone has an elimination
half-life of approxitnately 4.5 h, so that less

solubility
phosphoto buffor ph 70 (20')
mrthylrnr chloridr

i

1.88 g/i

> 1.00 g/i

partition coefficient

i
ch2 ch2 ch3

4- butyl- i, 2- diphenyl- 3,spyrazol idinrdionr

mrthylrnr chlorido / buffor ph i 3
n-octonoi/buffor ph 7.4
poonut oil / buffor ph 7.4

acidity
p k a '(lator1

478
5
2.2

4.5

' .

4

4 t. tobin et al.

-

oh
y-hydmxyph.nylbutumw

oh

y-

fig. 2. major metabolites of phenylbutazone in the horse.

than 2% of the dose should still be present in
the body as unchanged drug after 24 h. there
is, therefore, approximately 70% of the drug
which has not been accounted for. undoubtedly, a significant proportion of this will
be excreted in urine as hydroxylated metabolites after 24 h, but another fate that has to be
considered is biliary excretion of phenylbutazone and its metabolites, with or without
subsequent reabsorption. smith et al. (1985)
have shown that 37% of an intravenous dose
and 40% of an oral dose were detected in the
feces. the rate of hepatic biotransformation
and possible biliary excretion are probably the
main factors determining the plasma half-life
of phenylbutazone in the horse. n o glucuronide metabolites have been reported from
the horse. however, according to reed et al.
(1985) 4-oh-phenylbutazone is produced by
the cyclo-oxygenase system, and either this
metabolite or its glucuronide is therefore the
potential metabolite in the horse. in this
regard, it is worth noting that the 4glucuronide of phenylbutazone has been reported in man (dietede et al., 1976).
the plasma half-life of phenylbutazone in
the horse is not affected by chloramphenicol
or quinidine, but it is increased by  xxxd2815xxx  (tobin el al., 1977). the finding that
 xxxd2815xxx  inhibits the metabolism of
phenylbutazone in horses may explain the

reports of dose-dependent kinetics for
phenylbutazone in the horse (piperno et al.,
1968). it is also possible that phenylbutazone
itself saturates mixed function oxidase to
inhibit its own metabolism.
t h e metabolite y- xxxd2815xxx 
exists in two interchangeable forms, the lactone and straight-chain forms. in the crystalline state in storage, the lactone predominates.
in solution, the lactone form changes slowly to
the straight-chain form* (von rechenberg,
1966). it appears likely that y- xxxd2815xxx  found in the horse is the
straight-chain form, but that change to the
lactone form can occur during the drug
testing process. these changes affect the rf
values of this metabolite in chromatographic
systems (w. e. woods, s. chay and t. tobin,
unpublished data).
phenylbutazone is chemically unstable. this
creates problems in quantitative assay of this
drug for forensic purposes, and with the
running of relatively longer time-course experiments (bellward et al., 1972). unfortunately, the degree of degradation of the drug
i

*g. haas and k. scheibli, ciba-geigy ltd, basel,
switzerland, personal cornniunication ( 1984).

phenylbutazone in the horse 5
occurring under laboratory conditions has not
been fully characterized (however, see taylor
et al., 1981).
analytical methodology
as quantitative assays are used to regulate
phenylbutazone in racing and eventing
horses, the accuracy, reproducibility, and
sensitivity of these assays are of considerable
importance. t h e first assays for phenylbutazone employed ultra-violet spectrophotometry (burns et al., 1953). this method
lacked sensitivity (> 10 pg/ml), and a further
problem was that it did not distinguish between phenylbutazone and its hydroxylated
metabolites.
perego et al. (1971) reported a method for
the determination of phenylbutazone by gas
chromatography which was reproducible
(standard error of less than 5%) and sensitive
(lower limit of detection of 1 pg/ml from
serum and urine). although relatively specific
for phenylbutazone, it was unsuitable for
detection of metabolites. other gas chromatographic methods were developed which had
similar limitations.
by the early 1980s, high performance liquid
chromatography (hplc) methods were
developed. they proved to be superior to
previously reported methods. one of the
earliest hplc methods was that of alvinerie
(1980). acidified plasma was extracted into
n-hexane and analysed using a c-18 reversephase column with a uv detector absorbance
of 240 nm. t h e lower limit of detection was
50-100 ng. phenylbutazone extraction recovery was 65 f 2%, while recovered
 xxxd2815xxx  concentrations were lower
and y- xxxd2815xxx  levels were
undetectable. taylor el al. (1981) reported a
method modified from pound’s work (pound
et al., 1974) which employed a normal-phase
column with a u v detector absorbance set at
240 nm. by increasing solvent polarity with
tetrahydrofuran in the mobile phase and the
flow rate to 100 ml/h, they were also to detect
phenylbutazone,  xxxd2815xxx 
and
y- xxxd2815xxx 
simultaneously,
with percentage recoveries of 100,90, and 60,
and limits of detection of 0.01, 0.05 pg/ml,
and 0.1 pg/ml, respectively.
in the interlaboratory studies referred to in

this review, the hplc method usually used
was based on that of marunaka et al. (1980).
with modifications in the extraction procedures, we were able to obtain recoveries of
99% (phenylbutazone), 88% ( xxxd2815xxx ), and 75% (y- xxxd2815xxx ),
with a lower limit of detection of 0.25 pg/ml
(chay et al., 1984).
in these studies, there were no significant
differences in the assay values between laboratories, and within-laboratory variance was less
than 5%. however, the mean range between
estimates from different laboratories was
about 25%. furthermore, when hplc and
electron capture data from one laboratory
were compared, the hplc data were found to
be superior (soma et al., 1985). nevertheless,
despite the accuracy of the hplc method, the
reproducibility of the method is only fair. in a
study of the factors contributing to analytical
errors, mcdonald (1982) determined that he
could not conclude for forensic purposes that
a plasma sample of phenylbutazone was
greater than 2 pglml until the reading from
his assay system was greater than 2.8 pglml.
low resolution mass spectral analysis of
phenylbutazone produces a base peak at m/e
77 and a strong molecular ion at m/e 308. t h e
first neutral loss corresponds with loss of the
butyl group, yielding a m/e 752 fragment.
t h e next loss requires breaking of the pyrazolidinedione ring, to yield a fragment consisting of benzene rings, linked by the double
nitrogen bridge. t he other major peak at m/e
77 represents the phenyl rings(s).
 xxxd2815xxx  shows a base peak at m/e
199 corresponding to the extra oxygen atom
on the major diphenyl fragment, and a
molecular ion at m/e 324. t h e first neutral
loss is of m/e 43 corresponding with loss of a
propyl group, and the next fragment of mass
corresponds with the loss of a butyl group.
t he other major fragments at ni/e 77 and nde
93 represent the phenyl and phenoxy ions,
respectively.
y- xxxd2815xxx  shows a spectrum with a base peak at m/e 183, and a small
molecular ion at m/e 324. t h e first neutral
loss of m/e 62, corresponding with the loss of a
 xxxd3026xxx  group. another small peak at
m/e 252 corresponds with the loss of the butyl
alcohol group. as with phenylbutazone. the
benzene rings at m/e 77 are well represented.

6 t. tobin et al.
a c ti ons and mechanism o f
a c t i on
all classical nsaids probably share a common mechanism of action, and their therapeutic uses and toxic effects are also generally
similar. their actions are due to blockade of
the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme system (fig. 3).
this enzyme utilizes  xxxd208xxx  as a
substrate to form, first, the cyclic endoperoxides pgg2 and pgh2, and then, the classical prostaglandins (such as pgep), prostacyclin (pgi2) and thromboxane a2 by the
action of further specific enzymes (moncada
& vane, 1979). since certain prostanoids
(notably pge2 and pgi2) are important
mediators of the vascular changes in inflammation (ferreira el al., 1974; jones, 1977),
inhibition of their formation suppresses, but
does not abolish, the inflammatory response
(fig. 3). inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase by
phenylbutazone and aspirin is probably irre-

versible, whereas inhibition by  xxxd2815xxx  is thought to be reversible (ku &
wasvary, 1973). t h e precise site and mode of
action of nsaids are still unknown, but the
t w o principal classes of agent, the carboxylic
acids and enolic acids, muy act on different
enzymes, the former inhibiting cyclooxygenase and the latter blocking endoperoxide isomerase (flower, 1974). on this
hypothesis, one would predict that phenylbutazone would block the formation of pgep
but not of pgip (fig. 3). in fact, a therapeutic
dose of phenylbutazone does block the synthesis of both compounds in the horse, so that
final elucidation of its mode of action must
await further studies (higgins & lees, 1984b).
recent work on the inactivation of
prostaglandin-h synthase and prostacyclin
synthase by phenylbutazone has shown that
phenylbutazone undergoes peroxide-dependent co-oxygenation (fig. 4) catalysed by
prostaglandin-h synthase. this work suggests

i cell mambranc phospholipid i
phospholipasea?
corticosteroids

c
?
 xxxd208xxx 

cyclo-oxygenase

lipoxygenase

i

i

5-hpete

i

cyclic
endoperoxides

isomerase

ltb

5-hete

ltc

nsalds
ltd (srs-a)

fig. 5. lnflaniniatory medialors tbrnied from  xxxd208xxx . (;ode: pg, prostaglandin; t x , thronlboxane; lt, leukotriene; sks-a, slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis; hpete, hydropeioxyeicosaretraeii(~i~
acid; hete, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid.

phenylbutcirone in the h , s e

7

fig. 4. prostaglandin-h synthase conversion of phenylbutazone to reactive iiiterniecliates. phenylbutazone
donates a single electron to the peroxidase during hydroperoxide reduction. the resulting phenylbutazone
radical traps niolecular oxygen to yield a  xxxd2298xxx  radical, a phenylbutazone hydroperoxide, and eveiitually
forms the stable end product, 4-oh-phenylbutazone(reproduced w i t h permissioii from reed r / nl., molrciilrr
plico.acirolog?l, 27, 109, 1985).

that it is an oxygenated derivative of phenylbutalone rather than the parent compound
which leads to the inactivation of prostaglandin formation, by inactivating prostaglandin-h synthase and  xxxg1880xxx .
it appears that inactivation of prostacyclin
synthase is probably the more clinically
important inhibition (reed rt al., 1985).
newer compounds, such as bw755c. which
inhibit both the cyclo-oxygenase pathways and
lipoxygenase pathways of  xxxd208xxx 
metabolism, are now being developed (fig. 3).
it is likely that such dual inhibitors will be
more effective anti-inflammatory drugs than
single enzyme inhibitors, since at least one
leukotriene (ltb4) has been detected in
inflammatory exudate in nanogram quantities
(simmons el a/., 1983; higgins & lees, 1984a).
ltb4 is an extremely potent chemotactic
agent, and it may be an important mediator in
chronic inflammatory conditions (davidson rt
al., 1983). nsaids inhibit the synthesis of
prostaglandins arid prostacyclin in many
tissues and in many species, including the
horse (higgins & lees, 1983). t h e potency of
several nsald analogs as anti-inflammatory
agents in vivo correlates with their ability to
inhibit cyclo-oxygenase in vitro. moreover,
stereoisomers of nsaids with widely different anti-enzyme activities vary similarly in
their anti-inflammatory activities (moncada &
vane, 1979).
inhibition of prostanoid synthesis produces

a spectrum of clinical and toxic effects. prostaglandins of the e series produce erythema,
while prostacyclin and pge2 also induce paw
edema in rats. prostaglandins and prostacyclin also sensitize blood vessels to the permeability effects of other inflammatory
mediators, such as histamine and bradykinin,
and the action of nsaids on edema is
associated with blockade of this potentiation.
in addition, prostaglandins possess the ability
to produce hyperalgesia at the low concentrations in which they occur in inflammatory
exudate. furthermore, this hyperalgesic
action of the prostaglandins can be curnulative, since it is related to both the duration and
concentration to which tissues are exposed. as
these actions of the prostaglandins are
exerted locally, their inhibition by antiprostaglandin drugs is also local. therefore,
nsaids do not produce analgesia in noninflamed tissues (moncada & vane, 1979;
gilman et al., 1980).
prostaglandin el is a powerful pyretic
agent, and although it does not occur in
animals, there is a general increase in the
concentration of pge-like substances such as
pge? in the cns during fever. t h e nsaids
inhibit both the generation of prostaglandins
in the cns and the fever caused by pyrogens
o r 5-hydroxytryptamine injected into the
cerebral ventricles. they are all, therefore,
anti-pyretic (moncada & vane, 1979).
when platelets aggregate, they release

8 t. tobin et al.

thromboxane a2, a potent platelet aggregator. formation of thromboxane a2 is
blocked by nsaids reducing thrombosis and
hemostasis (meyers p/ d., 1979). some
nsaids such as aspirin and phenylbutazone
irreversibly inhibit platelet cyclo-oxygenase,
and hence no new cyclo-oxygenase is formed
during the life of that platelet. the effects of
these drugs on platelet aggregation and
hemostasis are therefore especially potent and
long-lasting (moncada & vane, 1979). this
action may, in part, explain the therapeutic
benefit provided by phenylbutazone in
navicular disease.
the side-effects of nsaids can also be
explained by inhibition of prostanoid formation. prominent among these effects is gastrointestinal irritation. reduction of prostacyclin
formation in the stomach is thought to lead to
increased acid secretion and local vasoconstriction leading to tissue hypoxia, both of
which may cause mucosal damage. however,
the principal site of ulcers in phenylbutazonetreated horses seems to be not the stomach but
the caecum and colon (vide infra)
the nsaids also cause varying degrees of
nephrotoxicity, such as renal papillary necrosis. sodium and water retention may also
occur transiently. prostaglandins are known
to be natriuretic, and a result of interference
with this action may be a retention of sodium
and water. analgesic nephropathy is not an
uncommon toxic reaction to extensive nsaid
use in the human (moncada & vane, 1979).
in summary, from their basic mechanism of
action and effects in other species we may
expect the nsaids to reduce erythema,
edema, tissue swelling and the hypersensitivity to pain associated with inflammation in the
horse. it is also predictable that these agents
will affect platelet function and prolong
bleeding times at high dose levels. t h e toxic
effects are likely to involve the gastrointestinal
tract and the kidney. in general, the clinical
actions, side-effects, and toxicities of these
agents follow these patterns in the horse
(tobin, 1979).
clinical uses
t h e several clinical uses of phenylbutazone in
veterinary medicine are encompassed by the

phrase ‘reduction of soft tissue inflammation’.
phenylbutazone can be administered to animals before surgery (mansmann et al., 1982)
to animals with tissue tears of lacerations, or
other tissue trauma (oehme, 1962; ebert,
1962), or to animals with soft tissue injuries
associated with racing or other performance
events. in all these instances, the inflammatory response is non-infective, so that phenylbutazone alone is effective. t h e drug may be
useful in septic soft tissue inflammation as
well, although it should be used in association
with anti-infective (antibiotic) medication.
much of the early work with phenylbutazone
clearly demonstrates this suppression of soft
tissue inflammatory responses (davidson &
franks, 1966; tobin, 1981; snow, 1983;
higgins & lees, 1983).
phenylbutazone and other nsaids have no
direct effect on pain perception, but they
reduce hypersensitivity to pain by reducing
the inflammatory response. they have no
effect on pain perception in non-inflamed
tissues (moncada & vane, 1979). nsaids
such as phenylbutazone are therefore effective against the dull throbbing pain of
inflammation, but not against sharp stabbing
pains, which are produced by the direct
stimulation of sensory nerves (gilman el al.,
1980).

these actions of phenylbutazone on pain
perception have been experimentally demonstrated in the horse. phenylbutazone had no
effect on pain perception in normal cutaneous
tissues (fig. 5 ) , a finding that is consistent with
the concept that it acts to reduce the formation of prostaglandins only in inflamed tissues
(kamerling et al., 1983).
t h e actions of phenylbutazone on soft
tissue inflammation are of particular value in
performance horses. in inflamed joints, more
than 99% of the resistance to movement is due
to soft tissue inflammation (simon, 1981).
reduction of soft tissue inflammation largely
eliminates this resistance, and thus largely
restores normal joint function.
t h e basis for the action of phenylbutazone
on degenerative joint disease and osteoarthritic joint disease is less clear. phenylbutazone is unlikely to affect long-standing
degenerative articular or bony change in or
around joints that reportedly characterize
most cases of ‘racetrack’ lameness. further,

pheriyllnclazune in the horse 9

iphenyl  xxxd2919xxx 
0 saline

;120i00

90

80

i

0

60

120 180
minutes

240

i

i

i

i

i

09001200 1500 1800 2100 2400
doy i

i

0900
day 2

*

fig. 5. comparison of the effects of mepivacaine and phenylbutazone on hoof withdrawal reflex. radiant
light is focused on the coronary bands of horses and the time to hoof withdrawal nieasured. this time is
called the latency, and is a measure of pain perception by the horse. (a) effect of 5 liters of 2%)mepivacaine
injected as a palniar nerve block. the effects on pain perception are maximal within minutes and maintained
for 3 h. the ceiling on the stimulus is an experimental constraint to prevent tissue injury. (b) effect of 3.0 g
phenylbutazone i.v., on the time of hoof withdrawal reflex in horses. (0-0)effect of saline treatment. ( m a )
data for phenylbutazone. n o significant difference was observed between the effects of phenylbutazone and
saline in contrast with the marked effects of mepivacaine (kanierling el al., 1985).

there are no pain receptors in articular cartilage. nevertheless, phenylbutazone is
apparently useful in both osteoarthritic joints
and degenerative .joint disease. while these
effects may be due to actions of phenylbutazone on the relatively permanent structural changes seen in these conditions, it seems
much more likely that the therapeutic responses are attributable to effects of phenylbutazone on soft tissue changes associated
with these conditions.
in man, phenylbutazone is particularly
effective in the enthesopathies. in which tendon insertions become swollen and inflamed.
 xxxg1055xxx  is the best known of
these conditions. to our knowledge, enthesopathies are not recognized as a clinical entity
in the horse.
in racetrack practice in the u.s.a., the
principal use of phenylbutazone is as an
adjunct in the training of ‘sore’ horses (cannon, 1973). horses with chronic arthritic and
ligamentous problems also derive benefit. in
some countries, the use of phenylbutazone to
keep a horse in training and to enable it to
race longer than in the absence of the drug is

regarded as permissible, but others contend
that it can never be acceptable to use phenylbutazone to allow an unsound horse to run.
some equine practitioners believe that horses
race consistently on phenylbutazone, and that
they race for longer (cannon, 1973; gabel et
al., 1977; tobin, 1981). however, these views
are controversial, and there is concern over
possible hazards to the horse arising from this
kind of prophylactic use.
clinical conditions responding to phenylbutazone therapy include sore feet (pedal
osteitis), cunean tendon bursitis (jacks),
spavins, minor sprains and muscle soreness,
splints, navicular disease, osselets and ringbones. further, it is common practice for
many horsemen to administer phenylbutazone after a race, as this is said to prevent
the animals from ‘cooling out sore’. under
these circumstances, when used with great
care, phenylbutazone seems to be beneficial,
and it may allow a horse to run up to his best
form (tobin, 1981).
a major concern regarding the use of
phenylbutazone in performance horses relates to possible long-term effects on joints.

10 t. tobin et al.
t h e joint damage that occurs in rheumatic
disease is related to the intensity and duration
of the inflammatory process, and this may be
exacerbated by the stresses of racing and
eventing. in principle, anything that reduces
the inflammatory response should retard the
rate at which joint deterioration occurs, and
should prolong the period of useful joint
function. in practice, however, there are no
reports in human rheumatology that support
this hypothesis, and this is due, at least in part,
to the unpredictable course of most joint
disease. there is a general belief, however,
that while nsaids relieve the symptoms of
chronic inflammatory joint diseases, in many
they do not retard the rate of development of
the organic disease process. indeed, it is even
possible that the progress of the disease may
sometimes be hastened by treatment with
nsaids; this might be due to ‘substrate
diversion’, i.e. increased availability of  xxxd208xxx  to lipoxygenase when cyclooxygenase is inhibited and a resultant increase
in the production of compounds such as
ltb4 (higgins & lees, 1984a).
hamm (1978) administered the nsaid
naproxen to about 50 quarterhorse yearling
colts during their training and racing careers.
treated horses lost only 3% of their training
time, compared with a 13% loss for nontreated animals. similarly, when the treated
groups reached the racetrack, they raced
more often than the control group, and their
injuries were reduced dramatically, by fourfold during training and by 30-fold during
racing. these results suggest that there may
be a case for using anti-inflammatory medication in training and racing horses, but
others consider the conclusion controversial.
although limited, the available experimental evidence may also support the
horseman’s contention that phenylbutazone
allows a horse to ‘run u p to its potential’.
studying the action of drugs on performance,
sanford administered phenylbutazone t o four
horses and tested them 24 h later (cited in
tobin, 1981). sanford was surprised to find
that performance was improved, and he could
explain the improvement only by assuming
that the horses, which he had considered
sound, were actually subclinically lame. similarly, j.-m. jouany (personal communication,
1982) in france has proposed that small doses

of phenylbutazone improve the performance
of horses, supporting the data of sanford.
one possible interpretation of these findings
is that there is no such thing as a completely
‘sound’horse, and that the closest approximation to this ideal is a ‘clinically sound’ horse
treated with phenylbutazone.
phenylbutazone has been given to breeding
mares for long periods with little apparent
effect on their ability to conceive or to carry
foals to term (ellsworth el al., 1983). it has also
been used at high dose rates in the treatment
of endotoxin shock, when it relieves the acute
symptoms of the condition, but has little effect
on the final mortality associated with this
syndrome (burrows, 1981).
because of the widespread use of phenylbutazone in performance horses, its ability to
influence performance, and the uncertainties
surrounding the risks and benefits for the
horse, the use of phenylbutazone in performance horses is a vigorously debated area.
differing views on the ethics of such usage
have been presented by scott-dunn (1972),
hopes (1972), moss (1972), gerber (l984),
cannon (1974), o’dea (1976) and tobin
(1981). in general, the use of phenylbutazone
in performance horses is a matter for the
regulators of individual sports, rather than a
question in clinical medicine, although the
possible long-term effects on the well-being of
the horse is the concern of clinical veterinarians.

pharmacokinetics

b ioaziailability
studies on the bioavailability of phenylbutazone are complicated by the fact that this
agent may show dose-dependent kinetics.
classical bioavailability studies, comparing the
area under the curve (auc) after oral and i.v.
administration, can only provide approximate
values for bioavailability.
when phenylbutazone was given intramuscularly, the bioavailability was much lower
and the rate of absorption slower than after
oral administration (sullivan & snow, 1982).
this was probably due to precipitation of‘ the
drug in the neutral ph of the muscle. sullivan
& snow (1982) studied the factors affecting

phenylbutazone in 1he horse
absorption of phenylbutazone from the
gastrointestinal tract. in general, access to
feed reduced both the peak plasma concentration and the time to reach this concentration,
both in thoroughbreds and in foals. rose et a1
(1982) studied phenylbutazone following administration with a small bran mash or after a
full feed. prolongation of the time to peak
concentration and reduction of auc under
full feed conditions were recorded. it should
be noted that in both investigations plasma
concentrations were monitored for 12 h only.
in similar studies, lees et al. (1983b) recorded
a profound delay in the time of peak phenylbutazone concentrations in plasma in ponies
allowed free access to hay. the peak level
occurred after a mean time of 13.2 h. however, neither auc nor peak concentration
was significantly affected, and the findings of
rose et a1. (1982) and sullivan & snow (1982)
might therefore simply reflect the shorter
sampling period adopted. lees et al. (1983b)
proposed that delayed absorption might be
due to adsorption on to roughage in the feed,
with subsequent release in the large intestine
as a result of fermentative digestive processes.
it was further suggested that such adsorption
could have several consequences: it could
explain why large doses of phenylbutazone
generally produce ulcers in the caecum and
colon rather than the stomach; it would lead
to delay in the onset of the therapeutic action,
and it would carry major implications for
horses competing under fei regulations, in
view of the 4 pg/ml concentration in plasma
upper limit set by this authority. subsequent
in uitro studies have shown that phenylbutazone adsorption on to hay does occur (j.
b. taylor, p. lees and a. j . higgins, unpublished data).
comparing the bioavailability of paste and
powder preparations, snow & douglas (1983)
concluded that the bioavailability was greater
for the paste, and that a paste preparation
would, therefore, more readily produce
toxicity. in similar studies, rose et al. (1982)
using higher doses of phenylbutazone reported on the bioavailability of paste and
powder preparations. absorption of the drug
by the oral route was very variable, and
readily affected by feeding. one horse in
rose’s group of four showed consistently less
than 25% bioavailability for the drug, no

11

matter which dosage form was used. no
explanation for this phenomenon was
offered.
little is known about the bioavailability of
phenylbutazone preparations marketed in
north america. soma et al. (1983) reported
about 90% bioavailability of phenylbutazone
in their kinetic studies using jen-sal phenylbutazone. chay el al. (1984) reported lower
plasma levels of phenylbutazone after dosing
with one commercial preparation as compared with the jen-sal product, which might
be due to bioavailability differences. according to maitho et al. (1986). approximate
bioavailability values for orally administered
phenylbutazone were 69% and 77%, in fed
and fasted ponies, respectively. these authors
used a powder formulation. breed differences in phenylbutazone absorption may also
occur. sullivan & snow (1982) recorded
higher auc values in thoroughbreds than in
ponies, but unpublished studies (p. lees and
j. b. taylor) in our laboratory have shown the
reverse effect.

plasma kinetics

the first pharmacokinetic study on phenylbutazone in the horse was that of piperno el al.
(1968) (tables i and 11). using a relatively
non-specific analytical method, they reported
on the disposition of phenylbutazone and
 xxxd2815xxx  in a mixed group of
thoroughbreds, standardbreds and quarterhorses. the plasma half-life of phenylbutazone was reported to be 3.5 h at the
clinically recommended dose of 2 g/looo ib
i.v., increasing to about 6 h when the dose of
phenylbutazone was 8 g/1000 ib i.v. piperno
also noted that the plasma levels of phenylbutazone did not increase in proportion to the
dose administered; thus, doubling of the dose
from 4.4 to 8.8 mg/kg increased the 1-h
plasma level by 33%, but quadrupling the
dose to 17.6 mg/kg raised the plasma
concentration by 300%. piperno et al. (1968)
also compared the plasma half-life of phenylbutazone in horses with acidic (ph 5.2) and
alkaline (ph 8.3) urines; plasma half-life was
not affected by urinary ph. this finding is
not unexpected, since binding to plasma
protein (> 99%) greatly limits the amount of

z'ei

6'5
6'11
5'6

8'1 i

8's

691.0

sze'o

1l'p

p'p
p'p
p'p
p'p

9'9

i '9z

p'p

z'€l

9'0z
5 .r~
9'8

9p's

6'8

5'9

99

0'9

e'p

z'9

z'e 1
p'p

o'l

8'8

5.p

1.1

2.7,

01
z
z1
p

8'2

8951'0

zl

sz'o

21 1'0

2.1

56'i p

pz'o

p

9'lz

09
s-€

phenylbulamne in lhe h s e

13

14 t. tobin et al.
phenylbutazone passing into glomerular
ultrafiltrate and hence into urine, irrespective
of urinary ph.
t h e plasma and urinary concentrations of
phenylbutazone and its metabolites after repeated intravenous dosing for 4 days with 4.2
mg/kg were reported by maylin (1974). peak
plasma levels increased from approximately
18 pg/ml o n day 1 to about 31 pg/ml on day 4.
maylin also reported small increases in the
plasma half-life of the drug with repeated
doses, although the increases he observed
were not as large as those observed by piperno
with increasing dose i‘ates.
more recently, soma et al. (1983) has reported on the kinetics of phenylbutazone in
four standardbred and two thoroughbred
mares. t h e dose rate was 8.8 mg/kg, and this
was administered orally for 4 days and intravenously on the fifth day. t he apparent
plasma half-life, which was approximately
6.2 h did not change over the 4-day period of
the experiment. however, the mean residual
plasma level of phenylbutazone at 24 h after
dosing increased from about 1.7 pg/ml on day
1. to 5.3 pg/ml on day 4. this confirms the
earlier report of maylin (1974). n o changes in
the urinary phenylbutazone concentrations
occurred in soma’s study, but the concentrations of  xxxd2815xxx  and the y-hydroxy
metabolite increased. soma concluded that
the kinetics of phenylbutazone were not dose
dependent ‘in the therapeutic range’. lees et
al. (1985) administered phenylbutazone (4.4
mg/kg) intravenously to six welsh mountain
ponies. in three 3-year-old ponies, plasma
clearance was almost twice as rapid as in three
ponies aged 8-10 years. these authors
reached the tentative conclusion that age
might significantly influence phenylbutazone
clearance, although they recognized that
more detailed studies were required. if aged
horses d o eliminate phenylbutazone more
slowly than younger animals, they could also
be much more susceptible to the drug’s toxic
effects, and it might be appropriate to recommend lower dose rates for older animals.
another factor that may influence the
plasma clearance of phenylbutazone is breeding (chay et al., 1984). experiments on
phenylbutazone
kinetics performed in
thoroughbred and standardbred horses versus half-bred ponies showed only one-third

the residual plasma levels of phenylbutazone
at 24 h after dosing in ponies, as compared
with thoroughbred and standardbred horses.
this finding may indicate that ponies are able
to metabolize phenylbutazone more quickly
than thoroughbred or standardbred horses.
in summary, the plasma half-life reported
for phenylbutazone in the horse has ranged
from 3:5 to 10.9 h, increasing with the
administered dose. t he half-life is probably
determined by biliary secretion and hepatic
metabolism, and only small amounts are excreted unchanged in the urine. t h e kinetics
of phenylbutazone may be age dependent, but
further studies are required to clarify this
possibility.

plasm protein binding
phenylbutazone is usually reported to be
highly bound to plasma protein in mammalian blood (at least 98%). gandal et al. (1969)
reported that binding was about 96% at a total
plasma concentration of 69 pg/ml, while gerring et al. (1981) found that therapeutic doses
of phenylbutazone produced at least 98%
binding. similarly,, maitho et al. (1986) were
unable to detect any free drug in plasma when
the concentration was less than 27 pg/ml. only
in the 60-min period following intravenous
dosing (4.4 mgjkg) did the unbound
concentration exceed 0.5% of the total. lambert & kelly (1978) reported similar binding
in horse  xxxg124xxx . they considered that
there were four high affinity binding sites and
1.5 low affinity binding sites for phenylbutazone on the  xxxg124xxx  molecule, but
they did not report the percentage binding.
most plasma protein binding studies with
phenylbutazone have been undertaken with
methods of marginal accuracy (aarbakke,
1978; bellward et al., 1972), so that accurate
comparison of the degree of binding between
species is difficult. nevertheless, it is clear that
phenylbutazone binding in horses is essentially similar to that in other species.

plasm residues vf phenylbutazone
with the increasing awareness of phenyl-

phenylbuluzone in the horse
 xxxd2919xxx 's narrow safety margin in the horse,
and worldwide concern about the administration of drugs to performance horses, a number of studies to determine residues of
phenylbutazone in the plasma and urine of
performance horses have been carried out.
t h e first of these was carried out by the
veterinary chemists advisory committee to
the national association of state racing
commissioners, in 1980. forty-nine horses
received a dose rate of 8.8 mg/kg orally each
day for 3 days, followed by 4.4 mg/kg i.v. on
the fourth day (tobin, 1981). t he mean
plasma level at 24 11 in these horses was 4.1
pg/ml, and the distribution was log-normal, so
that one horse in 1000 would be expected to
have a 24-h plasma level of 24 pg/ml. t he
wide intersubject variation in plasma values
obtained in this experiment was at that time
unexpected.
in another study performed about the same
time, gerring el al. (1981) dosed thoroughbreds, hunters, and polo ponies with 8.8
mg/kg of phenylbutazone daily in two doses
for 4 days, followed by 4.4 mg/kg in divided
doses for the next 4 days, and then 2.2 mg/kg
for the subsequent 3 days. as in the nasrc
study, considerable animal-to-animal variation in plasma levels occurred, and the time to
reach peak plasma levels after oral dosing also
varied considerably. while the mean residual
plasma level at 24 h after the first day of
dosing was 4.4 pg/ml, by the end of the high
dose period the peak blood levels had risen to
20 pg/nil and the 24-h level was 10 yglml.
when the dose was reduced to the 4.4 nig/kg
level for 4 days the mean plasma level on the
fifth day was approximately 4 pg/ml, and
when the dose was reduced to 2.2 mg/kg the
mean residual (24-h) plasma level fell to less
than 1 pg/ml. from this data, it was predicted
that one horse in 20 would exceed the 4 pg/ml
limit set by federation equestre internationale (fei) for phenylbutazone.
in a recent study in the u.s.a., 53 horses
were dosed with 2 g/1000 ib phenylbutazone
24 11 before racing, no phenylbutazone having
been administered 48 h previously, and doses
of phenylbutazone which approximated 2
mg/l000 ib were administered 72 h before
post time. th e residual 24-h plasma levels in
these horses were about 0.9 pg/ml, and the
population distribution was normal. a statist-

15

ical projection suggested that the plasma level
residue for one horse in 1000 dosed with this
schedule would exceed 2.2 pg/ml at 24 h
(table 111) (soma el ul., 1985; houston et ul.,
1985).
in a second study in the u.s.a., 34 horses
were dosed with 2 g phenylbutazone at 48 h,
and approximately 2.3 g 24 h prior to racing.
the mean serum level in these horses was 4.1
pg/ml immediately before racing, and the
distribution was log-normal. a statistical
projection from this data suggested that one
horse in 1000 might be expected to have a
serum level of about 28.2 pg/ml of phenylbutazone (houston al., 1985; see also soma
pi al., 1985).
in a third (keystone racetrack) stydy in the
u.s.a., 43 horses received 2 g/1000 ib i.v. each
day for 4 days. t he mean plasma level 24 h
after the final dose was 4.75 pg/ml, with a
maximum value of 9.9 pg/ml. t h e data were
log-normally distributed, and it was predicted
that one horse in 1000 would have a plasma
level of 16.2 pg/ml (soma el al., 1985; houston
el ul., 1985).
in a fourth study undertaken on 62 horses
in training, a dose rate of 8.8 mg/kg phenylbutazone was administered orally for 3 days,
and this was followed by 4.4 mg/kg i.v. on the
fourth day. t h e mean plasma level 24 h after
the final dose was 5.32 pg/ml. t h e population
distribution was again log-normal, and a
statistical projection indicated that one horse
in 1000 would have a plasma level in excess of
23.5 pg/ml (table 11) (chay et al., 1984). a
survey of plasma and urinary phenylbutazone
plus metabolites was undertaken in 200 horses
racing in kentucky (u.s.a.) in 1983, there
being no restriction on the use of phenylbutazone at the time of the study (houston el
al., 1985). t h e levels were broadly similar to
those obtained after dosing with phenylbutazone following a no-race-day medication
rule. in particular, the mean level of phenylbutazone (4.5 pg/ml) was less than that
reported from the keystone study.
all of these plasma residue studies must be
interpreted in the light of reports that phenylbutazone absorption is considerably delayed
in horses permitted free access to hay. lees e/
al. (1983b) and maitho el al. (1986)found that
t,,,,, values were 5.9, 3.8 and 13.2 h, respectively, in six ponies with no access, partial

16 t. tobin et al.

phenylbulazone in the horse

access and full access to hay, and the mean
24-h plasma levels in these horses, each of
which received a single dose of 4.4 mg/kg
orally, were 0.9, 1.8 and 2.8 pg/nil. t he
profound delay in absorption in hay-fed
ponies was attributed to phenylbutazone
adsorption on to the feed with ultimate
release in the large intestine. in nitro studies
using both chopped hay and equine gut
contents have shown that a high level of
adsorption does in fact occur (p. lees, a. j.
higgins and j. b. taylor, unpublished data).
urinary residues and effect of ph

piperno et al. (1968) were the first to
demonstrate that urinary ph does not affect
the plasma half-life of phenylbutazone. subsequently, moss & haywood (1973) showed
that the ‘“c from [‘“c]phenylbutazone
appeared initially at high concentrations in
basic urines, but persisted for longer in acidic
urines. more recently, houston et al. (1983)
have shown that urine ph greatly affects the
concentrations of phenylbutazone and its
metabolites in post-race urines from horses
racing in kentucky. as the ph of urine
samples increased from 4 to 8.5, the concentrations of phenylbutazone,  xxxd2815xxx , and y- xxxd2815xxx  increased 200-, 65- and 30-fold, respectively.
there were no corresponding changes in the
plasma concentrations. these data are most
readily interpreted in terms of the classic ion
trapping theory, which assumes that acidic
compounds will remain in basic urines because the ionized form of the drug is less
lipid-soluble and hence is not reabsorbed.
since only i-2% of an administered dose of
phenylbutazone is excreted unchanged in the
urine over 24 h, these effects have little
influence on the plasma half-life of phenylbutazone in the horse, as suggested by piperno et al. (1968), maylin (1974), gerring el al.
(1981) and lees et al. (1985).
r e l d i o d i i p beriveen filmmu and iirinci?
r i m en!ru!ionj of

17

 xxxd2919xxx  and its metabolites’ in post-race
urines. most commonly, the maximum permitted level was set at 165 p g h l of phenylbutazone plus its metabolites. in addition,
there were also reports that estimates of the
time of administration of the last dose of
phenylbutazone could be made from the
ratios of the different metabolites to the
parent drug in the urine samples (gabel et al.,
1977). more recently, however, sonia et al.
(1985) showed that there was no correlation
between plasma and urinary levels of phenylbutazone and its metabolites, further supporting the findings of houston (1985) and tobin
(1979, 1981). in spite of this, some authorities
continue to regulate the use of phenylbutazone by means of quantitation in urine.
’detection times’f o r phenylbutazone

it can be readily calculated that about 77
elimination half-lives are required to elirninate completely a dose of phenylbutazone from
99% of horses. this complete ‘clearance time’
is approximately 26 days, depending on the
actual half-life of phenylbutazone in the individual horse (tobin et al., 1982). in performance horses, a number of factors affect
the time for which phenylbutazone can be
detected (‘detection time’). one factor is the
sensitivity of the analytical method used.
when using a sensitive method, the longest
reported ‘detection time’ is 7 days for both
plasma and urine (norheini et al., 1978).
using less sensitive methods, other workers
reported detection times which ranged from
24 to 96 h (tobin, 1979). urinary ph can also
exert a marked effect on the period for which
phenylbutazone and its nietabolites can be
detected in urine. as shown by moss &
haywood (1973), urine ph can extend the
period of detection from 24 to 72 h. because
of this effect, the veterinary chemists advisory committee of the national association
of state racing comniissions (u.s.a.) has
suggested that plasma is the fluid o f choice for
regulating the use of phenylbutazone.

piietiylbutazone and i h metabolites

during the l970s, some racing authorities
regulated the use of phenylbutazone by
quantitating the concentrations of ‘phenyl-

phsnru and exudate 1twl.t c ~ ~ ~ h r , i y l l ~ i i l nnnd
zo~ie
theraperctic t$ferls

estimates of the therapeutic plasma levels

18 t . tobin et al.
of phenylbutazone in man have ranged from
50 to 150 pg/ml. however, some workers have
suggested that there is no relationship between the plasma levels and toxic effects of
this drug in man (aarbakke, 1978).
it is clear that the therapeutic levels of
phenylbutazone in equine plasma are much
less than this, probably being of the order
5-20 pg/ml (gerring et al., 1981; jenny et al.,
1979; gabel el al., 1977). the reason why
much lower plasma levels are effective in the
horse is unclear, although this might be due to
species differences in the structure of cyclooxygenase, the enzyme in equine tissues
possibly having a low inhibitory constant (lees
& higgins, 1985). estimation of the
concentration of phenylbutazone in plasma at
one point in time may only have limited value
in predicting the level of therapeutic effect
according to lees & higgins (1985). these
authors pointed out that the concentration of
both phenylbutazone and its active metabolite,
 xxxd2815xxx , was initially greater in
plasma than in inflammatory exudate after
intravenous administration of phenylbutazone. by 12 h, however, the concentration ratio (plasma : exudate) was less than
unity, and after 24 h it was even smaller. t h e
slower decline in exudate concentration relative to plasma concentration has implications
for therapeutic efficacy; it may partially explain why efficacy persists when plasma concentrations have fallen to very low levels.
according to lees & higgins (1985) the
varying plasma : exudate ratio (initially
greater than and subsequently less than one)
also makes the interpretation of plasma
concentration data much more difficult in
regard to competitive equine sports. from the
plasma concentration at a single time-point, it
is not possible to say whether concentration at
the site of action will be greater or less than
the plasma level. this observation is consistent
with that of piperno et al. (1968) which
implied saturation of a receptor site.
since some authorities consider that horses
may legitimately train on phenylbutazone, but
may not, at least in some jurisdictions, race on
pharmacologically effective levels of phenylbutazone, the concentrations required for
therapeutic effects of phenylbutazone are of
considerable practical importance. it is likely
that this field will be investigated in the near

future, and researchers will have to bear in
mind that phenylbutazone is converted to an
active metabolite,  xxxd2815xxx , and that
an inconsistant relationship exists between
plasma and inflammatory exudate concentrations for both the metabolite and the parent
compound (lees & higgins, 1985).
interference or masking by phenylbutazone

in the u.k. and some other countries, no
level of phenylbutazone in racehorses is permitted in any fluid. in north america, a
major concern regarding the approval of
phenylbutazone for use in racing horses is the
possibility that phenylbutazone or its metabolites can interfere with or ‘mask’ the detection of other drugs in post-race urine samples.
moreover, it has been suggested that horsemen may deliberately administer ‘high’ levels
of phenylbutazone to mask or interfere with
the detection of other drugs (houston et al.,
1983).
while the concept of masking is well established in the racing community and has
considerable forensic currency, there is virtually no published scientific literature on this
subject. more recently, however, studies in
this area have been initiated.
in a survey of the effectiveness of illegal
drug detection in america, woods et al.
(1985b) compared the number of ‘positive call
rates’. t h e medication rules of these jurisdictions were divided into those which did not
allow any level of phenylbutazone, those
permitting approximately 2 pg/ml, and those
allowing even higher plasma concentrations.
in order to ensure accurate comparison of the
‘positive call rates’ from jurisdictions with
differing definitions of illegal medication,
only those drug classes (stimulants, depressants, tranquilizers, narcotic analgesics and
local anesthetics) illegal in all jurisdictions
were included. t h e results indicated that
jurisdictions that did not permit any level of
phenylbutazone had a mean positive call rate
of 1.3 for each 1000 samples tested. on the
other hand, jurisdictions that allowed the use
of phenylbutazone also have a positive call
rate for drugs of 1.3/1000 samples tested.
in another approach to the ‘masking’ problem, woods el al. (1985a) used thin layer

phenylbutuzone in the horse
chromatography to investigate the ability of
phenylbutazone and its metabolites to interfere with the detection of the 55 drugs
classified as illegal in north american racing
since 1980. in these experiments,  xxxd2815xxx  did not extract in detectable concentrations, and y- xxxd2815xxx  either
co-migrated with phenylbutazone or was also
undetectable. hence, only phenylbutazone
had any potential to interfere with illegal drug
detection. it was found that the only drug that
could have been obscured was phenothiazine.
since phenothiazine is an anthelmintic with
no behavioral effects, its abuse potential is
negligible. moreover, phenothiazine is readily
distinguishable from phenylbutazone by its
reaction with visualization reagents. it was
concluded that phenylbutazone and its
metabolites had virtually no ability to interfere
with the detection of illegal drugs under the
conditions of testing in kentucky (woods et
al., 1985a).

adverse reactions
until 1979, phenylbutazone was considered to
be virtually non-toxic to horses. during 20
years of clinical use, there had been only
occasional reports suggesting that its use
might be linked to low pcv and hemoglobin
concentrations, intestinal ulceration, fatal
hemorrhage, depression, and shock (gabriel
& martin, 1962; gabel et al., 1977; jefcott &
colles, 1977; roberts, 1981; chandler, 1979).
in 1979, snow et al.,-(l%l), however,
reported that ponies receiving doses of 8-14
mg/kg phenylbutazone daily for 7-14 days
showed clear signs of phenylbutazone toxicosis, and three of eight ponies died. similar
but less detailed findings were reported by
wanner el al. (1980) at about the same time.
subsequently, several groups have undertaken similar studies, and a well-defined syndrome of phenylbutazone toxicity in the horse
has now been established.
currently available evidence suggests that
toxicity arises when manufacturers' recommended doses are exceeded. in general, the
recommended dose of phenylbutazone in
north america is not more than 4 g/450 kg
orally/day* for not more than 5 days. some

19

manufacturers recommend a maximum dose
of 2 g/horse/day by the intravenous route, and
this is now the recommended dose of the
american association of equine practitioners.
a similar dosage schedule was recommended
by one british manufacturer (8.8 mg/kg daily
for 4 days followed by a reducing dosage)
(lees & gerring, 1983). however, toxicity
occurred with this dose rate, and this group
therefore recommended that a loading dose
of 8.8 mg/kg on day 1 should be followed by a
dose level of 4.4 mg/kg for 4 days and 2.2
mg/kg thereafter (taylor et al., 1983).ponies
may be more susceptible to the toxic effect of
phenylbutazone than thoroughbred horses
(sullivan & snow, 1982). but further studies
are required to clarify this suggestion.
t he initial signs of phenylbutazone toxicity
are inappetence and depression, and decrease
in body-weight. as death approaches, the
extremities are cold, heart rate increases, and
rectal temperature is reduced. these are the
classical signs of hypovolaemic shock. signs of
toxicity can persist for weeks after cessation of
treatment. death can occur weeks after treatment in some animals (snow et al., 1981).
t h e most sensitive biochemical indicator of
toxicity is a decrease in total plasma or serum
protein, caused by plasma protein-losing enteropathy. snow et al. (1 98 1) demonstrated
that animals receiving high doses of phenylbutazone lost 5'cr-labelled plasma protein
into the gut at a rate three to four times
higher than control horses. other changes in
clinical chemistry include decreases in serum
urea nitrogen and plasma calcium, and increases in plasma creatinine and phosphate.
necropsy findings are dominated by the
intestinal lesions. in snow's ponies, these
ranged from shallow erosions to massive
intestinal ulceration in the colon and the
caecum. microscopically, the surface and
glandular mucosa of the erosions were necrotic, and the lamina propria was exposed.
large numbers of bacteria were present in the
necrotic tissue, and there was perivascular
hemorrhage, infiltration with polymorphonuclear leukocytes and thrombosis of submucosal venules. lesions in the stomach were
only occasionally seen. these findings can
*unless otherwise noted. a horse is assunied
weigh 450 kg.

to

20 t. tobin et al.

possibly be explained by phenylbutazone
binding onto feed, providing protection for
the stomach and small intestine, and release of
the drug by fermentative digestion in the
large intestine (lees & higgins, 1985). snow's
experiments with "cr-labelled albumin suggested that loss of protein could occur into the
gastrointestinal tract without grossly apparent
damage.
in experimental animals, bile duct ligation
considerably reduces the intensity of intestinal
lesions, suggesting that it is the presence of
phenylbutazone directly in the gastrointestinal tract that causes the toxic effects
(duggan et al., 1975). similarly, it is thought
that the oral ulcers observed in the horse are
associated with oral administration of the
drug and its direct actions on the oral mucosa
(snow el al., 1981). however, high doses of
phenylbutazone given intravenously can also
cause gut lesions in the horse (meschter et al.,
1984).

mckay et al. (1983), macallister (1983) and
read (1983) have confirmed snow's findings
and additionally reported renal papillary necrosis. the severity of the latter lesion, which
appeared as brownish-green, wedge-shaped
segments of renal papillary necrosis under the
renal crest of papillae in four of the six horses
receiving high dose rates of phenylbutazone,
was dose related (mckay et al., 1983).
micropathology showed these to be areas of
coagulation necrosis, with loss of cellular
definition.
similarly, the
medullaryconnecting tubules showed swelling, necrosis,
and sloughing of tubular epithelial cells.
tubular casts and lymphocytic cortical infiltrations were inconsistently present. some
degree of clinical renal failure was associated
with these lesions in all horses.
renotoxicity of phenylbutazone has been
reported in other species. for example, renal
damage is a consistent finding in phenylbutazone-treated rats, and similar lesions have
been demonstrated in the dog and the cat
(kincaid-smith & fiariley, 1971). a comparable clinical and pathological syndrome in
man which often follows abuse of nsaids is
analgesic nephropathy.
in a retrospective study of renal papillary
necrosis in 16 horses, gunson (1983) and
gunson & soma (1983) reported that the
changes were associated with the administra-

tion of phenylbutazone and concomitant
dehydration in the affected horses. phenylbutazone treatment alone, or water deprivation alone, did not give rise to renal papillary
necrosis. this presumably accounts for signs
of renal papillary necrosis not being seen in
other studies (snow et al., 1981).
while the renal lesions occurring in horses
are not severe and would not normally be life
threatening, they may lead to the loss of renal
tissue and impairment of the horse's ability to
concentrate urine. it is also possible that they
might cause renal colic, as occurs with renal
lesions in man.
mckay et al. (1983). gerber (1984) and
snow & douglas (1983) also reported neutropenia and a toxic left shift in horses given
large doses of phenylbutazone ( 1 6 3 0 mg/kg).
mckay et al. (1983) further showed in bone
marrow aspirates that there was a severe
depletion of marrow and circulating neutrophils. because of the rapid onset of this effect
and the lack of substantial change in the bone
marrow cell morphology, mckay et al. (1983)
suggested that the effect involved more than
simple bone marrow suppression of neutrophilic production. a possible contributory
factor could be absorption of endotoxin from
the damaged gut. unlike the idiosyncratic
bone marrow suppression seen with phenylbutazone in man, this effect appeared to be
dose related and reversible.
in a study on the toxicity of phenylbutazone
in foals, traub et al. (1983) administered 10
mg/kg phenylbutazone orally to foals aged
between 3 months and 10 months. they
described a significant increase in ulcers in the
glandular portion of the stomach and the oral
cavity. however, the principal site of damage
seemed to be the colon.
in a study on the effects of phenylbutazone
on electrolyte balance in ponies, alexander
(1982) reported that sodium and chloride
retention occurred. such side-effects have
been described in other species. in addition,
plasma ph, bicarbonate, and total carbon
dioxide decreased. while alexander felt that
these findings were sufficient to render the
use of this drug in performance horses unwise, others have questioned this conclusion
on the ground that the changes were small
and toxicologically insignificant (lees & gerring, 1983).

phenylbulazone in the horse 2 1
necrotizing phlebitis has been reported in
phenylbutazone-treated horses. this occurs in
the portal veins when the drug is given orally,
and jugular thrombophlebitis and pulmonary
arterial thrombosis are seen in horses treated
with i.v. phenylbutazone (mckay et al., 1983;
gabriel 8c martin, 1962). meschter et al. (1984)
described degeneration of the wall of small
veins in thoroughbreds receiving high doses
of i.v. phenylbutazone (13.6 mg/kg daily for 3
days). th e phlebopathy, which involved
venular dilatation, hyalin degeneration and
phlebothrombosis, was considered to be a
primary change, and other toxic effects were
judged to be secondary to the vein lesions.
lees et al. (1983a), on the basis of serum
enzyme increases (aspartate aminotransferase,  xxxg2186xxx , glutamate dehydrogenase) in a single horse, speculated
that phenylbutazone can produce dosedependent hepatotoxicity in the horse. enzyme levels were raised during 4 days of
treatment with 8.8 mglkg, but decreased
towards normal levels when the daily dose was
reduced.
the fact that these toxic lesions are related
to the action of phenylbutazone as a cyclooxygenase inhibitor is supported by the
observation that administration of  xxxd1903xxx  prevented the appearance of most
of the signs of toxicity seen in ponies (collins
8c tyler, 1984a).
in summary, it is now clear that early
workers underestimated the toxicity potential
of phenylbutazone. when given at high dose
levels, even for short periods, cumulation, and
hence toxic effects, can rapidly and readily
occur. 'toxicity appears as inappetence,
melena, depression, mouth ulcers, diarrhea
and possibly abdominal edema (gerring et ul.,
1981; collins & tyler, 1984b). if the drug is
being administered in food, the condition
tends to be self-limiting, since the animal will
refuse to eat after a few days. if dosing is
maintained, however, more serious toxicity
and death may occur. t he sequence of events
usually involves gastrointestinal ulceration
and a resulting loss of plasma leading to
hypovolemic shock. if the animal's access to
water is restricted, renal lesions may also
occur. alternatively, the cause of death may
be related to colic, and the intestinal changes
may lead to septic (endotoxic) shock. if the

drug is withdrawn at the first signs of toxicity,
the chances of complete recovery are good.
however, signs of toxicity can persist for
weeks after the drug has been withdrawn
(snow et al., 1981).
a major difficulty in evaluating reports of
toxicity induced experimentally by phenylbutazone is that plasma levels of phenylbutazone and  xxxd2815xxx  producing
these effects are unknown. because of uncertainties about the ability of phenylbutazone to
accumulate under the conditions of these
experiments, the plasma levels producing
these toxic responses and their relationship to
the levels likely to be found in horses on
therapeutic regimens of the drug are not
known. careful evaluation of the pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone under conditions
where cumulation and toxicity occurs is
needed. also, the contribution that the dosedependent pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone makes to toxicity should be evaluated. even now, however, it is possible to
speculate that the dependence of phenylbutazone half-life on hepatic metabolism, the
posssiblity that therapeutic doses saturate the
enzyme system involved in metabolism, and
the further possibility that phenylbutazone is
hepatotoxic could lead to a vicious circle of
cumulation and toxicity.
while phenylbutazone is a drug with a
narrow therapeutic index, it should be noted
that none of the toxicity studies has led to
suggestions that the doses of phenylbutazone
recommended for use in north america need
to be changed. in the u.k., however, the
loading doses of this drug recommended by
one manufacturer were reduced from 4.4
mg/kg twice daily to once daily for 4 days
(taylor et al., 1983). similarly, the american
association of equine practitioners has recommended that the dose for racing horses be
not greater than 2.2 mg/kg i.v. each day, with
the last dose occurring not more than 24 h
before post time (harvey, 1983). under these
conditions, and with due precautions to ensure proper hydration, phenylbutazone
should continue to be a safe and effective
medication in the horse. clinical experience
over many years certainly suggests that
moderate doses can be given over prolonged
periods without inducing clinically detectable
side-effects.

22 t. tobin et al.
acknowledgments
this work was supported by a grant entitled
‘masking by phenylbutazone in equine drug
testing: an analysis’ from the kentucky
equine drug research council and the kentucky state racing and harness racing
commission.
references
aarbakke, j. (1978) clinical pharmacokinetics of
phenylbutazone. clinical pharmacokinetics, 3, 36%
380.
alexander, f. (1982) effect of phenylbutazone on
electrolyte metalyaism in ponies. the veteriimry
record, 110(12), 271-272.
alvinerie, m. (1980) reversed-phase highperformance liquid chromatography of phenylbutazone in body fluids. jounial of chroniatography, 181, 132-134.
bellward, g.d., morgan, r.g., beaulne, v.h. &
mitchell, a.g. (1972) effect of phenylbutazone
breakdown products on drug metabolism assay.
(letters to the editor). journal of pharmacy and
phannacology, 24, 338-339.
burns, j.j.. rose, r.k., chenkin, t., goldman, a.,
schulert, a. & brodie, b.b. (1953) the physiological disposition of phenylbutazone ( xxxd2919xxx ) in man and a method for its estimation in
biological material. journal of pharmacology and
experimental therapeutics, 109, 3 4 6 357.
burrows, g.e. (1981) therapeutic effect of phenylbutazone on experiniental acute escherichia coli
endotoxemia in ponies. american journal of
veterinary research, 42( i), 94-99.
cannon, j. (1973) the use of phenylbutazone on
the race track (appendix 11: specialty panels).
american association of equine practitioners, proceedings of the 19th annual convention, 347-349.
cannon, j.h. (1974) phenylbutazone (correspondence). journal of american veterinary medical
association, 164, 367.
chandler ( 1979) phenylbutazone toxicity in ponies
(correspondence). the veterinary record, 11(4),
108.
[:hay, s., woods, w.e., nugent, t., weckman, t.,
houston, t., blake, j.w. & tobin, t . (1984)
population distributions of phenylbutazone and
 xxxd2815xxx  after oral and i.v. dosing in
horses. journal of veterinary pharnmcology and
therapeutics, 7, 265-276.
collins, l.g. & tyler, d.e. (l984a) phenylbutazone
toxicosis in ponies: description of the syndrome
and its prevention with a synthetic prostaglandin
e. 37th annual meeting, american disease research
workshops in southeni states, march 20.
collins, l.g. & tyler, d.e. (1984b) phenylbutazone
toxicosis in the horse: a clinical study. journal of
the american veterinav medical associalton, 184(6),
699-703.

davidson, a.h. & franks, w.c. (1966) antiinflammatory agents in equine surgery. modern
veterinary practice, 47(13), 4 m 9 .
davidson, e.m., rae, s.a., &smith, m.j.h. (1983)
leukotriene b4: a mediator of inflammation
present in synovial fluid in rheumatoid arthritis.
annalf of the rheumatic diseases, 42, 677-679.
dieterle, w., faigle, j.w., fruh, f., mory, h..
theobald, w., alt, k.o. & richter, w.j. (1976) .
metabolism of phenylbutazone in man.
arzneimittel-forscliung (drug research), 26, 572577.
duggan, d.e., hooke, k.f., noll, r.m. 1l kwan,
k.c. (1975) enterohepatic circulation of indimethacin and its role in intestinal irritation.
biochemical pharmacology, 25, 1749-1 754.
ebert,  xxxd1971xxx . (1962) clinical use of phenylbutazone in
large animals. the veterinary record, january,
33-35.
ellsworth, m., archbald, l.f. & godke, r.a. (1983)
estrual behavior and fertility of mares after
chronic administration of phenylbutazone.
veterinary medicineismall animal clinician, 78( i ) ,
83-85.
faigle, j.w. & dieterle, w. (1977) the
biotransformation of phenylbutazone ( xxxd2919xxx ). journal of international medical research, 5,
(suppi 2), 2-14.
farr. m. & willis, j.v. (1977) investigation of
phenylbutazone in synovial fluid. journal of international medical research 5(2), 26-29.
ferreira, s.h., moncada, s. & vane, j.r. (1974)
prostaglandins and signs and symptoms of
inflammation. in prostaglandin synthetase inliibitors, eds robinson, h. j. & vane, j. r., pp.
175-187. raven press, new york.
flower, r.j. (1974) drugs which inhibit prostaglandin biosynthesis. pharmacology review, 26,
33-67.
gabel, a.a., tobin, t., ray, r.s., & maylin, g.a.
(1977) phenylbutazone in horses: a review, journal of equine medicine and surgery, 1, 221-225.
gabriel, k.l. & martin, j.e. (1962) phenylbutazone:
short-term versus long-term administration to
thoroughbreds and standardbreds. jounial of’ the
american veterinary medical association, 140(4),
337-34 i .
gandal, c.p., dayton, p.g., weiner, m. & perel,
j.m. (1969) studies with phenylbutazone,  xxxd2815xxx , and para-paradichloro phenylbutazone in horses. cornell veterinarian, 59, 577580.
gerber, h. (1984) ethical problems for veterinary
surgeons at equestrian events. equine veterinary
journal, 16( l), 25-27.
gerring, e.l., lees, p. & taylor, j.b. (1981)
pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone and its
metabolites in the horse. equine veterinary journal,
13(3), 152-157.
gilman, a.g., goodman, l.s. & gilman, a. (eds)
(1980) the pharnuuological basis 01-therapeutics,
6th edn. macmillan publishing co. inc., new
york.
gunson, d.e. (1983) renal papillary necrosis in

phenylbulazone i n lhe horse
horses. journal of the american veterinary medical
association, 182(3), 263-266.
gunson, d.e. & soma, l.r. (1983) renal papillary
necrosis in horses after phenylbutazone and
water deprivation. veterinary palliology, 20, 603610.
hamm, d. (1978) continous administration of
naproseen to the horse during training. journal of
equine medicine and surgery, 2, 125-128.
harvey, s.k. (1983) a statement by dr s. k.
harvey. atnerican association of equine practitioners
newsletter, 2, 25-26.
higgins, a.j. & lees, p. (1983) phenylbutazone
inhibition of  xxxd1903xxx  production in
equine acute inflammatory exudate. the veterinary record, 113, 622-623.
higgins, a.j. & lees, p. (1984a) detection of
leukotriene b4 in equine inflammatory exudate.
the veterinary record, 115, 275.
higgins, a.j. & lees, p. (1984b) the acute inflammatory process,  xxxd208xxx  metabolism
and the mode of action of anti-inflammatory
drugs. equine veterinary journal, 16, 163-175.
higgins, a.j., lees, p. & taylor, j.b. (1984)
influence of phenylbutazone on eicosanoid levels
in equine acute inflammatory exudate. cornell
veterinarian, 74, 19s207.
hopes, r. (1972) symposium (2) uses and misuses
of anti-inflammatory drugs in racehorses. 1.
equine veterinaiy journal, 4, 66-68.
houston, t., chay, s., woods, w.e., combs, g.,
kamerling, s., blake, j.w., ednionson, a.g.,
vessiney, r. & tobin, t. (1985) phenylbutazone
and its metabolites in plasma and urine of
thoroughbred horses: population distributions
and the effects of' urinary ph. journal of veterinary
phannacology and lherapeutics, 8, 136149.
houston, t., tobin. t. & blake, j.w. (1983) effect
of urine ph on urine levels of  xxxd2815xxx 
in racing horses. drug metabulkrn and dkpositzon,
11(6), 617419.
jefcott, l.b. & colles, c.m. (1977) phenylbutazone
and the horse: a review. equine veterinary journal,
(9)3, 105-1 10.
jenny, e., steinijans, v.w. & seifert, p. (1979)
pharmacokinetic interaction of isopropylaniinophenazone and phenylbutazone in the horse.
journal of veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics,
2, 101-108.
jones. e.w. (1977) inflammation, pain, pyrexia.
prostaglandins, and antiprostaglandins.journnl id
equine medirine and surgery, 1(1l), 364-369.
kamerling. s., dequick, d., chrisman, m., weckman, t., nugent, 'l'., & tobin, t. (1983) phenylbutazone: lack of effect on normal cutaneous
pain perception in the horse. proceeding ($the 5th
international conference on the use of drugs in race
horses, p. 8. toronto, canada.
kameding, s.g., dequick, d.j.. weckman, t.j.,
sprinkle. f.p. & tobin, t. (1985) differential
effects of phenylbutazone and local anaesthetics
on nociception in the equine. european journal of
phannarolog?r, 107, 35-4 1.
kincaid-smith, p. & fiariley. k.f. (1971) renal

23

infection and renal scam'ng, pp. 347-358. mercedes publishing co., melbourne.
ku, e.c. & wasvary, j.m. (1973) inhibition of
prostaglandin synthetase by su-2 1524. federation
proceedings, 32, 3302-3307.
lambert, m.b.t. & kelly, p.p. (1978) the binding
of phenylbutazone to bovine and horse serum
albumin. irish journal of medical science, 147(6),
192-196.
lees, p., creed, r.f.s., gerring, e.e.l., could,
p.w., humphreys, d.j., maitho, t.e. & michell,
a.r. (1983a) biochemical and haematological
effects of phenylbutazone in horses. equine
veterinary journal, 15(2), 158-167.
lees, p. & gerring, e.e.l.(1983) paste preparation
of phenylbutazone (correspondence). the veterinary record, 113(7), 167.
lees, p. & higgins, a.j. (1985) clinical pharniacology and therapeutic uses of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs in the horse. equine veterinary journal, i f , 83-96.
lees, p., maitho, t.e., millar, j.d. & taylor, j.b.
(1983b) pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone in
welsh mountain ponies. american college of
veterinary p h u m o l o g y and therapeutics proceedings, 7, 32-37.
lees, p., maitho, t.e. & taylor, j.b. (1985) pharniacokinetics of phenylbutazone in t w o age
groups of ponies: a preliminary study. the
veterinary record, 116(9), 229-232.
macallister, c.g. (1983) effects of toxic doses of
phenylbutazone in ponies. american jounial vj
veterinary research, 44(12), 2277-2279.
maitho, t.e., lees, p. & taylor, j.b. ( 1986) absorption and pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone in
welsh mountain ponies. journal of veterinaty
phunnacology and therapeutics, 9, 26-39.
mansmann, r.a., mcallister, e.s. & pratt, p.w.
(1982) equine medicine and surgery. ametican
veterinary publication, vol l i , 724-730.
marunaka, t., shibata, t., minami, y., & unieno,
y., (1980) simultaneous determination of phenylbutazone and its metabolites in plasma and urine
by high-performance liquid chromatography.
jounucl of liquid chrornatogtaphv, 183, 33 1-338.
maylin, g.a. (1974) disposition of phenylbutazone
in the horse. proceedings of the 2ut1i a i i t i u ~ l
convention of american assorktiori of equine
practitioners. 243-248.
mcdonald, j. (1982) personal communication.
illinois racing board laboratories.
mckay, r.j., french, t.w., ngiiyen, h.t. &
mayhew, i.g. (1983) effects of large doses of
phenylbutazone administration to horses. a m r ican journal of veterinaiy researrh, 44(5), 774-780.
mercks index, 9th edn, pp. 7072-7087. merck & co.
inc. rahway, nj. (1976).
meschter, c.l., maylin, g.a. lk krook, l. (1984)
vascular pathology in phenylbutazone intoxicated horses. cowtell veteruiariun, 74, 282-297.
meyers. k.m., linder, c., katz, j. & grant, b.
(1979) phenylbutazone inhibition of equine
platelet function. american journal of ve/erina,y
research, 40, 265-270.

24 t. tobin et al.
moncada, s . & vane, j.r. (1979) mode of action of
aspirin-like drugs. advances in intental medicine,
24, 1-22.
moss, m.s. (1972) symposium (3) uses and misuses
of anti-inflammatory drugs in racehorses. 11.
equine veterinary journal, 4, 69-73.
moss, m.s. & haywood, p.e. (1973) persistence of
phenylbutazone in horses producing acid urines.
the veterinary record, 93, 124125.
norheim, g., hoie, r., froslie, a. & bergsjo. (1978)
gas-chromatographic determination of small
amounts of phenylbutazone and  xxxd2815xxx  in horse plasma and urine. fresenim’ zeitschriyt f u r analybche chemie, 289, 287-288.
odea j.d. (1976) a reasoned approach to medication. thoroughbred record, 209( l l), 766b.
oehme, f.w. (1962) phenylbutazone in the treatment of soft tissue reactions of large animals.
veterinary medicine, march, 57, 229-23 1.
perego, r.,martinelli, e. & vanoni, p.c. (1971) gas
chromatographic assay of phenylbutazone in biological fluids. journal of chromatography, 54, 280281.
perel, j.m., mcmillan snell, m., chen, w. & dayton,
p.g. (1964) a study of structure-activity relationships in regard to species difference in the
phenylbutazone series. biochemical pharmacology,
13, 1305-1317.
piperno, e.. ellis, d.j., getty, s.m. & brody, t.m.
(1968) plasma and urine levels of phenylbutazone
in the horse. journal of the american veterinary
medical assvciation, 153(2), 195-198.
pound, n.j., mcgilveray, i.j. & sears, r.w. (1974)
analysis of phenylbutazone in plasma by high
speed liquid chromatography. journal of
chromatography, 89, 23-30.
read, w.k. (1983) renal medullary crest necrosis
associated with phenylbutazone therapy in
horses. veterinary pathology, 20, 662-669.
reed, g.a., griffin, i.g. & fling, t.e. (1985)
inactivation of prostaglandin-h synthase and
 xxxg1880xxx  by phenylbutazone.
requirement for peroxidative metabolism.
molecular pharmacology, 27, 109-1 14.
roberts, m.c. (1981) suspected phenylbutazone
toxicity in an adult stockhorse. australian veterinary practitioner, 11(2), 112-1 13.
rose, r.j., kohnke, j.r., & baggot, j.d. (1982)
bioavailabilityof phenylbutazone preparations in
the horse. equine veterinary journal, 14(3), 2 3 4
237.
scott dunn, p. (1972) symposium ( i ) a clinician’s
views on the use and misuse of phenylbutazone.
equine veterinary journal, 4, 63-65.
simmons, p.m., salmon, j.a. & moncada, s . ( 1983)
the release of leukotriene b4 during experimental inflammacian. biochemical pharnwcology, 32, 1353-1359.
simon, s.r. (1981) biomechanics of joints. in
textbooh of rheumafology, eds kelly, w.n., harris
jnr., e.d., ruddy, s. & sledge, c.b., section 1,
chapter 20. w. b. saunders co., new york.
smith, p.b.w., caldwell, j.. smith, r.l., horner,
m.w., hougton, e. & moss, m.s. (1985) the

disposition of phenylbutazone in the horse. biochemical pharmacology, 34(3), 459-460.
snow, d.h. (1983) nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
agents in the horse. veterinary annual, 23, 157161.
snow, d.h. & douglas, t.a. (1983) studies on a
new paste preparation of phenylbutazone. the
veterinary record, 112(26), 602-607.
snow, d.h., douglas, t.a., thompson, h.. parkins, j.j. & holmes, p.h. (1981) phenylbutazone
toxicosis in equidae: a biochemical and pathophysiologic study. american journal of veterinary
research, 42(10), 17541759.
soma, l.r., gallis, d.e., davis, w.l., cochran, t.a.
& woodward, c.b. (1983) phenylbutazone kinetics and metabolite concentrations in the horse
after five days of administration. american journal
of veterinary research, e4(1 i), 2104-2109.
soma, l.r., sams, r., duer, w., tobin, t., woodward, c. & mcdonald, j. (1985) plasma and
serum concentrations of phenylbutazone and
 xxxd2815xxx  in racing thoroughbreds 24
hours after various dosage regimens. american
journal of veterinary research, 46(4), 932-938.
stella, v.j. & pipkin, j.d. (1976) phenylbutazone
ionization kinetics. journal of the pharmaceutical
sciences, 65(8), 1161-1 165.
sullivan, m. & snow, d.h. (1982) factors affecting
absorption of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents in the horse. the veterinary record, 110,
554558.
taylor, j.b., lees, p. & gerring, e.l. (1981)
analysis of phenylbutazone and its metabolites by
high performance liquid chromatography. equine
veterinary journal, 13(3), 201-203.
taylor, j.b., walland, a., lees, p., gerring, e.l.,
maitho, t.e. & millar, j.d. (1983) biochemical
and haematological effects of a revised dosage
schedule of phenylbutazone in horses. the
veterinary record, 112, 599-602.
tobin, t. (1979) pharmacology review: the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. i. phenylbutazone. journal of equine medicine and surgery,
3, 253-258.
tobin, t. (1981) drugs and the performame horse.
charles c. thomas, springfield, il.
tobin, t., blake, j.w. & valentine, r. (1977) drug
interactions in the horse: effects of chloramphenicol, quinidine, and  xxxd2815xxx  on
phenylbutazone metabolism. american journal of
veterinary research, 38, 123-127.
tobin, t., combie, j. & nugent, t. (1982) ‘detection times’ and ‘clearance times’ for drugs in
horses and other animals: a reappraisal. journal of
veterinary phannacology and therapeutics, 5, 195197.
traub, j.l., gallina, a.m., grant, b.d., reed, s.m.,
gavin, p.r. & paulsen, l.m. (1983) phenylbutazone toxicosis in the foal. american journal of
veterinary research, 44(8) 1410-1418.
von rechenberg, h.k. (1966) phenylbutazone (butawlidin). edward arnold ltd, london.
wanner, f., rollinghoff, w.,cerber, h. & preisig,
r. (1980) a preliminary report: demethylation,

piimylbulawnr in the horse 25
hydroxylation and acetylation in the horse: sideeffects of repeated phenylhutazone medication.
proceedings of the third inlernalional symposiunz on
equine medicalion control, lexington, ky.
woods. w.e., chay, s., houston, t.. blake, j.w. &
tohin, t. (1985a) effects of phenylbutazone and
 xxxd2815xxx  on basic drug detection in high

performance thin layer chromatographic systems. journal of v e t m h a y pharmacology and therapeutics, 8, 181-189.
woods, w.e., chay, s., houston, t., blake, j.w. &
tohin, t. (1985b) efficacy of testing for illegal
medications in horses. journal of thc american
vetennay medical association, 187(9), 927-930.

