br. j. clin. pharmac. (1986), 21, 109s-121s

the mechanism of action of calcium antagonists relative to their
clinical applications
b. n. singh
department of cardiology, wadsworth veterans administration hospital and the department of medicine
ucla school of medicine, los angeles, california, usa

1 as a class of therapeutic agents calcium antagonists have attracted increasing attention
in recent years. their major indications have been in the treatment of ischaemic myocardial
syndromes, certain cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, obstructive cardiomyopathies, and
a number of lesser clinical disorders in which their role is less clearly defined. with the
widening spectrum of therapeutic utility and an increasing plethora of newer agents under
development, it is of importance to relate the overall pharmacodynamics of individual
agents to their clinical effects.
2 calcium antagonists have a variable specificity for cardiac and peripheral activity.
based on such activity, it is useful to construct a classification of these compounds, new
and old, into four categories.
(i) type i agents, typified by verapamil and its congeners (tiapamil and gallopamil)
and diltiazem, prolong av nodal conduction and refractoriness with little effect on
ventricular or atrial refractory period. these actions account for their direct antiarrhythmic
properties.
(ii) type ii agents include nifedipine and other dihydropyridines. in vivo, these agents
are devoid of electrophysiologic effects in usual doses. they are potent peripheral
vasodilators with some selectivity of action for different vascular beds; their overall
haemodynamic effects are dominated by this peripheral vasodilatation and reflex augmentation of sympathetic reflexes.
(iii) type iii agents include  xxxd2125xxx  and  xxxd1704xxx  (piperazine derivatives), which,
in vitro and in vivo, are potent dilators of peripheral vessels, with no corresponding
calcium-blocking actions in the heart.
(iv) type iv agents are agents with a broader pharmacologic profile ( xxxd2884xxx ,
lidoflazine and  xxxd318xxx ); they block calcium fluxes in the heart, in the peripheral vessels,
or both. they may inhibit the fast channel in the heart and have other electrophysiologic
actions.
3 a clear understanding of the varied pharmacologic properties of the different classes of
calcium antagonists is likely to provide a rational basis for the use of these agents in clinical
therapeutics.

keywords calcium antagonists clinical application pharmacodynamics
correspondence: dr b. n. singh, section of cardiology 691/1lle, wadsworth va hospital, wilshire and
sawtelle boulevard, los angeles, ca 90073, usa

109s

ilos

b. n. singh

introduction
it is over 20 years since the prototype of calcium
antagonists, verapamil, was first introduced.
rapid advances in our understanding of the
pharmacodynamics of these agents and their
clinical applications followed only after the important conceptual framework was provided by
fleckenstein in the early 1970s (fleckenstein,
1983). the pioneering work focused attention
on the selectivity of effects of calcium antagonists
on the myocardial slow-channel and the electrophysiologic effects of agents such as verapamil
and  xxxd3007xxx  (fleckenstein, 1983) in cardiac
muscle were found to be similar to those produced
by calcium-free media. the slow-channel could
be blocked markedly with drug concentrations
that had little or no effect on the fast sodium
channel. agents with this selectivity of myocardial
action also had the propensity to block calcium
fluxes in vascular smooth muscle; thus, they
were all peripheral and coronary vasodilators.
however, it soon became clear (epstein et al.,
1985; singh et al., 1982, 1984, 1985 a) that the
so-called calcium antagonist compounds (defined primarily as those agents that produced
excitation-contraction uncoupling in cardiac
muscle by blocking the slow channel) manifested
a bewildering heterogeneity in chemical structure
and were only relatively selective for the myocardial slow-channel. some agents were truly
selective for the slow-channel in extremely low
concentrations (e.g. the dihydropyridines), while
others blocked the slow as well as the fast channel
in approximately the same drug concentrations
(e.g.  xxxd2884xxx ). an appreciation of these differences led fleckenstein to subdivide calcium
antagonists into two categories (fleckenstein,
1983), but such a grouping may no longer be
adequate to account for the diversity of effects of
all calcium antagonists. there now appear to be
differences in the potencies of individual calcium
antagonists with respect to their ability to block
the slow-channels in cardiac muscle and in smooth
muscle. while a truly cardioselective agent (i.e.
one that blocks the slow-channel in the heart and
has no effect in vascular smooth muscle) has not
been described, the converse has been described.
for example,  xxxd1704xxx  and  xxxd2125xxx  in vivo
appear competitively to antagonize calcium fluxes
in vascular smooth muscle while having no effect
in cardiac muscle in the same concentrations
(holmes et al., 1984). in addition, while lidoflazine (shapiro et al., 1982) also selectively
inhibits the slow channel in vascular smooth
muscle as opposed to the myocardial slow
channel, it has the added propensity of blocking
the fast channel in the heart. another dimension

of complexity has been identified by radio-ligand
binding studies, which have demonstrated that
different calcium antagonists display a diverse
spectrum of antagonism towards selective tissues,
a phenomenon that may have far-reaching therapeutic possibilities.
the purpose of this paper is to provide an
expanded and clinically relevant pharmacodynamic classification of calcium antagonists as
a framework for the discussion of the expanding
utility of these agents in clinical therapeutics.

a classification of calcium antagonists

fleckenstein (1983) recently suggested that
calcium antagonists may be classified into two
categories: he placed agents such as verapamil,
diltiazem and nifedipine with its derivatives,
which have a marked selectivity for inhibiting
the slow channel vs the fast sodium channel in
the heart, into one group (group a), and those
such as  xxxd3007xxx , terodiline, fendiline and
 xxxd2884xxx , which also inhibit the slow channel
but have a broad array of other electrophysiologic
actions, into another group (group b). however, the expanding knowledge of the electropharmacology of these and newer agents suggests
a need for an alternative classification. the one
proposed in table 1, developed along clinical
lines, may also eventually need modification due
to the rapidly increasing clinical and experimental data relating to calcium antagonists.

type i: calcium antagonists with in vivo
myocardial effects
the chemical structures of diltiazem, tiapamil
and gallopamil (d-600) are shown in figure 1
relative to that of the reference calcium antagonist, verapamil. except for diltiazem, there
are structural similarities among the other three
compounds. all four are moderately potent peripheral and coronary vasodilators and are effective
in mild to moderate hypertension. their predominant electrophysiologic actions are lengthening conduction time and prolonging refractoriness in the av node, properties which account
for their known antiarrhythmic effects especially
in supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. the haemodynamic effects of verapamil in experimental
animals and in patients with varying levels of
ventricular function are reasonably well defined
(singh et al., 1982); there are modest data for
diltiazem but very little information for either

tiapamil

or

gallopamil. although unpublished

calcium channel blockers in therapy
table 1 clinical classification of calcium antagonists

calcium antagonists with in vivo myocardial,
electrophysiologic and vascular effects
diltiazam
verapamil
tiapamil
gallopamil (d-600)
calcium antagonists with predominant vascular effects in vivo
(dihydropyridines)
 xxxd2718xxx 
nifedipine
niludipine
 xxxd2737xxx 
 xxxd2092xxx 
 xxxd2734xxx 
 xxxd2728xxx 
calcium antagonists with selective vascular effects (piperazines)
 xxxd1704xxx 
 xxxd2125xxx 
calcium antagonists with complex pharmacologic profiles
 xxxd2884xxx 
 xxxd318xxx 
lidoflazine

type i

type ii

type iii

type iv

h3c

ch3
ch3

ch

ch30
ch30

]

ch3o

c-ch2-ch2-ch2-n-ch2-ch2
ci
n
verapamil

h3c

ch3
ch3

ch

ch30
ch3

c-ch2-ch2-ch2-n-ch2-ch2
ci

0

och3

02s

ch30

och3
och3

o

oh3

och3

gallopamil ( xxxd600xxx )

s02

2ch2-ch2-ch2-n-ch2-ch2q

ch3o

tiapamil (ro 11-1781)

jch3
och3

och3

ococh3
n

ch3

ch2-ch2-n<ch
diltiazem

fsgure 1 chenucal structure of calcium antagonists which exert effects on av conduction and refractoriness
in vivo without a significant effect on ventricular refractoriness. note that verapamil and its congeners
(tiapamil, gallopamil) differ in structure.

ills

112s

b. n. singh

data have suggested that gallopamil might be extremely effective in terminating supraventricular
tachycardias and in controlling chronic stable
angina, further data are needed to determine
critically the comparative efficacy of tiapamil
and gallopamil on the one hand and verapamil
and diltiazem on the other.

type ii: the dihydropyridine subgroup of calcium
antagonists
numerous dihydropyridine derivatives (figure
2) are currently under investigation for the control of a variety of cardiocirculatory disorders,
depending upon each drug's presumed specific
pharmacologic properties. of the newer compounds, these are the most closely related structurally. as a group, the potency of the dihydropyridines is much greater in relation to smooth
muscle compared to cardiac muscle; these agents,
in vivo, are nearly or completely devoid of clini-

cally significant electrophysiologic properties,
their overall haemodynamic effects being dominated by striking peripheral vasodilation. from
the therapeutic standpoint this may prove of
particular value in the control of hypertensive
emergencies as well as in the long term management of essential hypertension, either as single
agents or in combination with diuretics, padrenoceptor blocking drugs or other hypotensive agents. it is also emphasized that since all of
these agents produce marked reflex increases
in heart rate and contractility, angina may be
aggravated in some patients with coronary artery
disease if concomitant sympatholytic agents are
not used. the cardioprotective effects of these
agents in experimental animals are less striking
than those of type i agents.
the dihydropyridines may exert tissue selectivity (allen et al., 1983). at present the dihydropyridine that is generally available for clinical
use is nifedipine but numerous others are likely
no2

no2

me

me

n
h

me

cooch2ch2ome

me2chooc

cooet

meooc

 xxxd2737xxx 

1n

h
 xxxd2728xxx 

me

no2
no2

cooch2ch20c3h7

c3h7och2ch200c
n
h

me

1

me2chch200c

1 n it

me

me

coome
me

h

 xxxd2734xxx 

niludipine

n02
no2
ch300c

cooch3

hn

h3h
nifedipine

ch3

co 2ch2ch2n

ch3

<ch

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

i
i
ch3

~

h

h3co2c

ch3

hn

h3

h6nicardipine

figure 2 chemical structure of some of the dihydropyridines discussed in this paper. note that minor

difference in the structure may lead to variations in their pharmacological properties (see text). this class
of calcium antagonists offers the greatest scope for studying structure-activity relationships.

calcium channel blockers in therapy
to be introduced in the foreseeable future.
niludipine and  xxxd2734xxx  are both more potent
than nifedipine as vasodilators, but in vitro have
the same cardiac activity. preliminary data suggest
that  xxxd2728xxx  might have selectivity of action
in the cerebral vasculature (allen et al., 1983).

c1ch-n

nch2 ch=ch

113s

j

 xxxd2125xxx 

type iii: the piperazine derivatives:  xxxd2125xxx 
and  xxxd1704xxx 
ch-n
nch2 ch=chthe properties of the compounds in this type of
calcium antagonist drug, namely  xxxd1704xxx  and
its difluoro derivative,  xxxd2125xxx  (figure 3), are
 xxxd1704xxx 
highly selective for calcium channels in vascular
smooth muscle relative to cardiac muscle (holmes figure 3 structure of  xxxd2125xxx  and  xxxd1704xxx .
these agents have a specificity for vascular tissues.
et al., 1984).
the properties and therapeutic uses of  xxxd2125xxx  have recently been reviewed by holmes et type iv: calcium antagonists with complex
al. (1984).  xxxd2125xxx  has a much longer plasma pharmacologic profile
elimination half-life than does  xxxd1704xxx . the
majority of the therapeutic trials with  xxxd2125xxx  another group of pharmacologic agents may be
have been in the prophylaxis of migraine, occlu- categorized as calcium antagonists that have a
sive peripheral vascular disease, and in vertigo selectivity of action either for vascular tissues
of central and peripheral origin. the preliminary (e.g. lidoflazine) or in the case of  xxxd2884xxx 
data with the piperazine derivatives appear to (vaughan williams, 1980) and  xxxd318xxx  (bianco
offer potentially new and useful pharmacologic et al., 1984) (figure 4) for both cardiac as well as
approaches to the control of a number of circula- smooth muscle while also having the propensity
tory disorders, but the definition of the precise to block the fast-sodium channel in the heart to
role of these compounds in the therapy of such a variable degree (figure 5a and b). some of
conditions must await further stringently con- these agents have yet other electrophysiological
trolled comparative studies.
properties. thus, these agents are not only hetero-

cch2-nch2{

fchch20ch2ch(ch3)2
r~n)

 xxxd318xxx 
n

hc-chq

 xxxd2884xxx 

lidoflazine

figure 4 chemical structure of three calcium antagonists with a broad pharmacological profile. note the

striking differences in their structure.

114s

b. n. singh
a

control

i

0

-80 mv

iioo v s-1

200 ms

ml--'

rpnridii

in

..n

ml

i
ui

b
control

20 mm k+

 xxxd2398xxx 

2 x 10-m

io

0

j

-80 mv
200 v s-i
 xxxd318xxx 

ca++ 7.2 mm
rbenridil

0.1 lg  xxxg1167xxx 

-60 mv
20 v s-

 xxxd318xxx 

200 ms
0.5 lg ml-"

0.5 lla mr,

figure 5 (a) effects of various concentrations of  xxxd318xxx  on canine purkinje fibre action potentials. the
upper traces in each panel indicate zero potential, the middle the transmembrane action potential, the
lower the differentiated rate of rise of phase 0 of the action potential (vmax). voltage and time calibrations
as indicated. note the dose-related shortening of apd5o and apd90 and the reduction in vm. (from kato
& singh, 1986). (b) effects of  xxxd318xxx  on the slow response action potentials of purkinje fibres. the upper
trace in each panel indicates the action potential and the lower the differentiated rate of rise of phase 0.
voltage and time calibrations as indicated-upper: control action potential (left) and slow response action
potential induced by 20 mm k+ and  xxxd2398xxx  (2 x 10e m); lower: effects of  xxxd318xxx  (0.1 and 0.5 ,ug ml-')
and high extracellular ca2+ (7.2 mm). at higher concentration of  xxxd318xxx  (0.5 ,ug ml-') abolished the slow
response action potential completely, which was reversed after elevating extracellular calcium concentration to 7.2 mm. tetrodotoxin had no effect on the action potentials shown (from kato & singh, 1986).

calcium channel blockers in therapy
geneous chemically but, by virtue of their overall
complex pharmacologic properties, they may
exert a somewhat different spectrum of therapeutic effects. this pertains particularly to their
cardiac electrophysiologic actions and to the
control of cardiac arrhythmias;  xxxd318xxx  is the
most important in this regard having a long
elimination half-life (almost 40 h).
electrophysiologically, it is unusual in blocking the slow calcium channel in the heart while
also inhibiting the fast channel and lengthening
the repolarization phase of the cardiac action
potential in all myocardial tissues with the possible
exception of purkinje fibres. these data are
consistent with clinical observations (singh et
al., 1985b); intravenous  xxxd318xxx  was found to
prolong the effective refractory period of atria,
ventricles, and the av node while lengthening
the wenckebach cycle length of the av node
during rapid atrial pacing. the spontaneous sinus
cycle length was not significantly altered nor was
the sinus node recovery time, although patients
with the sick sinus disease were not studied. the
ah interval was prolonged with a trend towards
an increase in the hv interval during electrophysiologic studies.

implications for therapy of cardiovascular
disorders

although a great deal has been learnt about the
pharmacodynamic effects of calcium antagonists
recently, their complete spectrum of therapeutic
applications has still not been fully defined. the
major established indications and the newer
potential ones are listed in table 2. a few of
these disorders will be discussed herein to illustrate the efficacy of various types of compounds
in relation to their pharmacologic properties.

electrophysiologic effects and antiarrhythmic
actions

the role of these drugs in the treatment of
cardiac arrhythmias are reasonably well defined
especially in supraventricular tachycardias (singh
et al., 1984). electrophysiologic data indicate
that the properties of type i and type iii calcium
antagonists are relevant in this regard. the spectrum of clinical activity is in line with the electrophysiologic effects. however, the in vitro and in
vivo effects of these compounds must be emphasized (table 3). for example, in isolated
cardiac muscle, verapamil, gallopamil, diltiazem
and nifedipine block the slow-inward current
without much effect on the fast sodium-channel.
however, nifedipine in vivo has little effect on

115s

table 2 therapeutic applications of calcium

antagonists
established clinical indications
1. ischaemic myocardial syndromes
i. prinzmetal angina
ii. unstable angina
iii. chronic stable angina
2. cardiac arrhythmias
3. hypertension and hypertensive emergencies
4. hypertrophic cardiomyopathies
potential indications
5. cardioprotection
6. pulmonary hypertension and afterload reduction
7. migraine and cluster headaches
8. cerebral insufficiency
9. raynaud's phenomenon
10. disorders of gastrointestinal motility
11. exercise-induced bronchospasm
12. prevention of atherosclerosis

the electrophysiologic properties of the av node
(singh et al., 1985b). whether this is due to the
fact that the marked peripheral vasodilator effects
of the drug inducing reflex sympathetic effect
nullifies or reverses the intrinsic negative dromotropic effects of the compound on the av node
and the negative chronotropic effects on the
sinus node is not certain (singh et al., 1982).
there may be other factors which may contribute
to the differences between the in vitro and in
vivo effects of nifedipine and other dihydropyridines on the sa and av nodes. these effects of
the various compounds are concordant with their
observed clinical electrophysiological actions.
the clinial effects are dominated by the inhibition
of intranodal conduction and the prolongation
of the effective and the functional refractory
period of the av node in the case of type i
calcium antagonists with little or no effects on
the refractory periods in the atria, ventricles or
the accessory tracts of the heart (singh et al.,
1985b). the lack of effect on these tissues is
consistent with the fact that neither type i or ii
nor type iii calcium antagonists exerts significant effects on depolarization or repolarization
phases of the fast-channel dependent cardiac
action potentials (singh et al., 1982). these overall findings provide the basis for the delineation
of the effects of various types of calcium antagonists in different cardiac arrhythmias.
thus, clinically, the major effects of type i
agents are those related to the propensity of
these agents to inhibit predictably or to block
completely but transiently the anterograde impulses across the av node and to lengthen its
effective and functional refractory periods. the

116s

b. n. singh
table 3 comparative experimental and clinical electrophysiological effects of calcium
channel blockers

inhibitory effects of cardiac slow-channel

(in vitro)

verapamil

nifedipine

diltiazem

ttt

tttt

ttt

ttt
ttt

tttt

relaxation ofsmooth muscle

(in vitro)
(in vivo)
non-specific sympathetic antagonism
effect on heart rate

isolated atria
intact organism and man
effect on av conduction

in isolated heart
in intact organism and man
clinical electrophysiologic properties
r-r interval
qrs
q-tc
pr
a-h
h-v
atrialerp
avnode erp
avnode frp
ventricular erp
his-purkinje erp
bypass tract erp
sinus node recovery time
ventricular automaticity

tttt

ttt

t

0

t

i ttt

i tttt

4 ttt
4

i ttt

i tttt
0 to t

4 ttt

t 4

4 tttt
t 4
0
0
0
0
t i
i
0
0
+
o*
0

4
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
+
0
0
0
0
0

i ttt
14
0
0

t
t

0
0
t
0
0
?
o*
0

*prolonged in sick sinus syndrome.
abbreviations: 4 , decrease, t , increase, t4, variable effect, t -. tttt, indicates graded
intensity of effect, erp, effective refractory period, frp, functional refractory period.

psvt is well established, the precise role of the
oral drugs in the prophylaxis of recurrent arrhythmia is less certain. however, there have been a
few studies in which it was found that if the intravenous drug was effective in preventing the reinduction of the psvt in the electrophysiologic
laboratory, subsequent oral therapy was highly
effective in preventing arrhythmia recurrences.
supraventricular arrhythmias when these it should also be emphasized that there is little
agents are given intravenously, paroxysmal re- experience in which the issue of efficacy of veraentrant supraventricular tachycardia (psvt) is pamil and other calcium antagonists versus other
promptly terminated in most cases (especially agents has been systematically studied. neverafter verapamil); the ventricular rate is slowed in theless, it is known that oral verapamil (and preatrial fiutter and fibrillation with rare cases con- sumably other type i calcium antagonists) is
verting to sinus rhythm especially if the arryth- highly effective in reducing the ventricular remias are of short duration and the heart size is sponse in atrial fiutter and fibrillation at rest as
not large. in the acute conversion of psvt, in- well as during exercise. they are effective altertravenous verapamil is now thought to be the natives to 3-adrenoceptor blockers and digoxin
agent of choice once the commonly used vagal in this setting. the effect of calcium antagonists
in multifocal atrial tachycardia is generally
manoeuvres fail.
it is emphasized that while the role of intra- although occasionally ineffective. their role in
venous calcium antagonists for the treatment of ectopic atrial tachycardia is poorly defined

bulk of the experience relates to the effects of
verapamil but the effects of diltiazem and the
congeners of verapamil such as tiapamil or gallopamil (i.e. type i calcium antagonists) are qualitatively similar. the effect of  xxxd318xxx  is similar
to that of verapamil or diltiazem (singh et al.,
1985b).

calcium channel blockers in therapy
(singh et al., 1983).

ventricular arrhythmias as a class of agents
calcium antagonists have a limited role in the
control of ventricular tachyarrhythmias except
in cases in which ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation is due to the coronary artery spasm. these
drugs are weak suppressants of premature ventricular contractions in either normal subjects or
in those with organic cardiac disease; they rarely
suppress ventricular tachycardia inducible by
programmed electrical stimulation. it must nevertheless be emphasized that agents such as  xxxd318xxx ,  xxxd2884xxx  and lidoflazine which do increase
ventricular and atrial refractoriness either by
voltage or time-dependent mechanisms or by
both may exert specific effects on atrial or ventricular tachyarrhythmias. for example, these compounds, unlike verapamil, diltiazem, gallopamil,
tiapamil or the dihydropyridines may effect a
conversion of atrial flutter or fibrillation and
may be effective in controlling life-threatening
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. since lidoflazine
and  xxxd318xxx  also lengthen cardiac repolarization
and delay conduction in fast-channel dependent
fibres, it is likely that under certain conditions
they may produce torsade de pointes which has
not been reported for conventional calcium
channel blocking drugs.
there is also preliminary experience to suggest
that calcium antagonists are effective in controlling ventricular tachycardia induced by exercise
in patients with coronary artery disease; they
appear to be effective also in young patients
without organic heart disease having ventricular
tachycardia with the right bundle branch block
morphology associated with left axis deviation.
the nature of this arrhythmia is uncertain but it
may be due to triggered automaticity responsive
to calcium antagonism induced by such agents as
verapamil, diltiazem, gallopamil, and  xxxd318xxx 
but not by the dihydropyridines.
myocardial ischaemic syndromes
various lines of investigations, including observations from haemodynamic monitoring, radionuclide perfusion studies, metabolic studies,
holter recordings in ambulatory and hospitalized
patients, have established two important findings.
first, it is now clear that over two-thirds of the
transient ischaemic episodes detected by continuous monitoring in variant angina, unstable
angina and chronic stable angina are not associated with chest pain, or equivalents, i.e. they
are 'silent'. second, a somewhat greater number,
perhaps over 80%, of the episodes in unstable
as well as chronic stable angina are not triggered

117s

by increases in heart rate or blood pressure.
the question has therefore arisen whether the
majority of episodes of ischaemia in coronary
artery disease may be due to a primary reduction
in myocardial flow as a result of intermittent
arterial obstruction produced either by thrombus
formation or by coronary vasoconstriction. these
observations have an important bearing on the
mechanism of action of calcium antagonists in
the various syndromes of myocardial ischaemia
in patients with coronary artery disease. as
shown by brown and his colleagues (brown et
al., 1984), the human coronary artery is subject
to numerous neurohumoral influences which
may alter its calibre. if these were to occur in
association with an eccentrically-placed atherosclerotic plaque in juxtaposition to an arc of
normal tissue, the variations in the calibre of
coronary artery of as little as 10% may lead to a
critical reduction in coronary blood flow. calcium
antagonists are potent coronary vasodilators and
may antagonize such a tendency in various  xxxd1914xxx 
syndromes. it has also been shown that these
drugs reverse or negate the vasoconstrictive
effects of  xxxd2021xxx  on the coronary arteries
and they prevent the sympathetically-mediated
vasoconstriction induced by handgrip or other
physiologic interventions. thus, unlike the effects
of 3-adrenoceptor blockers, a significant action
of calcium antagonists in ischaemic syndromes
may be mediated by their effects on coronary
vessels over and above those on myocardial
oxygen consumption. in respect to the latter,
it must be emphasized that the effects on the
myocardial oxygen consumption among various
calcium antagonists may differ significantly.
similarly, the question has arisen whether the
observed differences in the coronary vasodilator
properties among different types of calcium antagonists demonstrated in vitro might be of clinical
significance. this issue may be discussed by
examining the differences in the overall efficacy
of different calcium antagonists in various myocardial ischaemic syndromes.
variant or prinzmetal angina

the advent of calcium antagonists has constituted
a major advance in the control of variant angina.
all the available agents (e.g. verapamil, diltiazem
or nifedipine and those currently under investigation) have been found to reverse coronary
artery spasm, reduce the frequency of ischaemic
episodes as judged by symptoms as well as st
segment deviations documented on holter recordings (johnson et al., 1981; mccall et al.,
1985). the role of abnormal coronary vasoconstruction as a cause of myocardial ischaemia has

118s

b. n. singh

been best demonstrated in the case of variant
angina. experimental studies have indicated that
certain calcium antagonists, e.g. nifedipine,
might exert more potent vasodilator effects in
the coronary circulation compared to the other
compounds. however, clinical studies have shown
no significant differences among various calcium
antagonists with respect to their effects on
coronary haemodynamics in man (singh et al.,
1982). nor has there been evidence that there is
a striking difference in the potency of individual
types of various calcium antagonists (types i, ii,
and iii) in the control of prinzmetal variant
angina (singh et al., 1985a). the overall clinical
impression is that over 80% of patients with
prinzmetal angina respond to calcium antagonism
(mccall et al., 1985).

unstable angina at present the exact mechanisms underlying the development of the unstable
angina syndrome is uncertain. it is known that
the rate of progression of the atherosclerotic
disease may be accelerated in patients with unstable angina; it is also known that in some of them
there is evidence of coronary vasospasm and in
others, especially those who die, the evidence of
antemortem clot formation is convincing. which
of these potential mechanisms that are affected
by calcium antagonists leading to their salutary
effects in unstable angina remain uncertain
although the short term effects of these drugs in
alleviating the symptoms and electrocardiographic abnormalities have been well documented in the case of verapamil, diltiazem, or
nifedipine (mccall et al., 1985). the experience
with the newer agents is, at present, scant. however, there are virtually no controlled data on
the effects of intravenously administered calcium
antagonists in the rapid and effective control of
ischaemia in unstable angina, a setting in which
differences between the potency of different
types of calcium antagonists might emerge.
it should be emphasized that nearly all cases
of unstable angina occur in the setting of advanced
coronary artery disease and, as indicated above,
there may be a significant incidence of abnormal
coronary vasomobility in these patients. as far
as the role of calcium channel blockers is concerned, numerous studies have established the
effectiveness of calcium channel blockers in
relieving symptoms of unstable angina and reducing the electrocardiographic abnormalities
that accompany symptomatic ischaemia.
chronic stable angina the role of calcium antagonists in chronic stable angina has been widely
studied and is now well defined. numerous studies
with verapamil and its congeners, nifedipine and

diltiazem, using blinded placebo-controlled protocols, have shown that these drugs reduce the
frequency of angina and the number of sublingual nitroglycerin tablets consumed while they
increase exercise capacity during treadmill test
and delay the onset of ischaemia as judged by
electrocardiographic parameters. these drugs
also elevate  xxxd1914xxx  threshold and attenuate the
ischaemic manifestations during rapid atrial
pacing in patients with coronary artery disease
undergoing cardiac catheterization (hecht et al.,
1981). they also reduce the extent of fall in left
ventricular ejection due to ischaemia induced
either by exercise or rapid atrial pacing (josephson et al., 1982). it is of interest that the heartrate and blood pressure product, an index of
oxygen demand, tends to be lower at any given
work load under the influence of calcium antagonism although it is not as low as that found
with p-adrenoceptor blockers. however, it
is known that the peak heart-rate and blood
pressure during exercise are not significantly
different during treadmill exercise when a patient
is on or off calcium antagonists, although the
peak effect on these variables is delayed when
the patient is taking calcium channel blockers.
it must be emphasized that it is in the setting of
chronic stable angina that a significant difference
in the overall effects of type i and type ii
calcium antagonists becomes clearly evident.
for example, type i calcium antagonists tend to
have a heart rate-lowering effect whereas the
dihydropyridines (e.g. nifedipine) may induce
significant tachycardia. in a proportion of such
patients this may lead to an increase in oxygen
demand and aggravation of ischaemia and rarely
myocardial infarction may be precipitated. the
increases in the heart rate due to the dihydropyridines are undoubtedly due to the reflex augmentation of sympathetic reflexes due to increasing vasodilation as a function of dose. thus,
the dihydropyridines are best used in combination with p-adrenoceptor blockers in patients
with chronic stable angina although the aggravation of heart rate has not been shown to be of
much clinical significance in either variant angina
or unstable angina, possibly indicating differences in the pathogenesis of iscahemia in prinzmetal and unstable angina versus that in chronic
stable angina.

vasodilator properties of calcium antagonists
and control of hypertension
although the vasodilator properties of calcium
antagonists have been recognised for many years,
it is only in the last 5 years numerous reports
have suggested a significant role of these drugs in

calciunm channel blockers in therapy
the control of hypertensive emergencies and in
the control of mild to moderate essential hvpertension. interest in these drugs as hypotensive
agents has grown pari passu with the developing
concept implicating the role of calcium in the
pathogenesis of hypertension (buhler & hulthen,
1982; frohlich, 1984). the details are provided
elsewhere in these proceedings.
when calcium antagonists are given orally or
intravenously in patients with hypertension, they
reduce systemic vascular resistance, increase
cardiac output and increase stroke volume index.
these properties have been utilized in the treatment of hypertensive emergencies with or without encephalopathy. in this context, it is important to emphasize that the dihydropyridines have
been shown to be markedly effective in most
patients; the most extensive experience has been
with sublingual nifedipine. published and unpublished data suggest that this modality of
therapy may obviate the necessity for the use of
parenteral therapy with nitroprusside and other
agents in most patients.
numerous studies, many blinded as well as
placebo-controlled, have indicated that verapamil, nifedipine, and diltiazem are as potent as
p-adrenoceptor blockers or diuretics in the control of mild to moderate systemic hypertension
(buhler & hulthen, 1982; frohlich, 1984). as
might be expected, there does not appear to be a
significant difference in efficacy among the
different agents. however, in the case of hypertensive emergencies, the strikingly rapid onset
of action and the potent vasodilator properties
of the dihydropyridines are clearly different
from the activity of the other calcium antagonists.

hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and calcium
antagonism
because hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by augmented systolic ventricular performance and impaired diastolic function, calcium
antagonists might be expected to be effective in
normalizing the haemodynamic abnormalities of
the disease and in ameliorating symptoms. the
potential negative inotropic effects of calcium
antagonists is likely to be of direct relevance in
this regard. however, at present it is not entirely
clear whether the observed beneficial effects in
the case of some of the compounds are related to
this property. as indicated elsewhere in these
proceedings, the data with verapamil does indeed
suggest that intravenously and orally administered
drug does produce an improvement in the diastolic function in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; the overall effect is similar to
that found with propranolol (rosing et al., 1985).

119s

however, as in the case of propranolol and other
p-adrenoceptor blockers, there is no evidence
that verapamil alters the incidence of serious
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death or
halts the progression of ventricular hypertrophy.
the effects of other type i calcium antagonists
are likely to be similar but, since the dihydropyridines are much more potent vasodilators,
they are likely to be less effective in this regard.
furthermore, the dihydropyridines usually do
not exert a negative inotropic effect; some of
them such as  xxxd2718xxx  may exert a frankly
positive inotropic effect. thus, while the dihydropyridines may attenuate the diastolic
abnormalities in some cases and improve symptoms, it is unlikely that they will be as effective
as type i calcium antagonists in hypertrophic

cardiomyopathies.
calcium antagonism and other miscellaneous
disorders
numerous studies in a wide variety of cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular conditions have
suggested that the overall spectrum of therapeutic utility of calcium antagonists is exceedingly
wide. it may be wider than that of ,-adrenoceptor blocking drugs. however, unlike padrenoceptor blockers the varying utility of these
compounds may in part be due to their varying
tissue selectivity of action. calcium antagonists
may be effective in the control of migraine and
cluster headaches (gelmer, 1983); they may
prevent or minimize cerebral damage in cases of
developing strokes by reversing cerebral vasoconstriction (allen et al., 1983). from the standpoint of selectivity of effect with respect to regional circulations, there is now data to suggest
that some dihydropyridines (particularly  xxxd2728xxx ) have a markedly selective effect for
the cerebral vessels as compared to the femoral
arteries in the dog. these experimental observations are consistent with the effects in man in
whom the drug was found to decrease significantly the occurrence of severe neurological
deficits from spasm alone in a multi-centre prospective double-blind randomized placebocontrolled clinical trial (allen et al., 1983). experimental data in the case of  xxxd2718xxx  is also
encouraging in this regard but further detailed
studies need to be undertaken to determine
whether varying properties of various calcium antagonists demonstrated in the experimental setting
can be translated into distinct clinical effects.

summary and conclusions
with the increasing number of calcium antagonists becoming available for use in a wide

120s

b. n. singh

variety of clinical disorders, the question has which are due to myocardial ischemia. in the
arisen as to which agent should be used for a case of the dihydropyridines, the in vitro effect
particular clinical indications (singh et al., 1984). on the av node is nullified or reversed by reflex
the question has also arisen as to which property in vivo effects but the coronary dilator effect,
of this pharmacologically diverse group of com- although greater in isolated preparations, does
pounds might be significant in producing a parti- not appear to be of clinical or therapeutic significular clinical and therapeutic effect. for this cance. in the case of the piperazine derivatives,
reason, it appears desirable to categorize cal- the calcium antagonistic actions are confined to
cium antagonists in relation to their fundamental the peripheral vascular tissues; these compounds
actions which are of therapeutic utility. such a do not appear to have significant cardiac effects.
categorization should include observation that the complexity of the overall actions of lidocalcium antagonists block calcium fluxes the flazine,  xxxd2884xxx  and particularly  xxxd318xxx 
muscle cells or in the myocardium or in both. merit their consideration as individual comthe balance between the effects on the myocar- pounds from the standpoint of their therapeutic
dium and on the peripheral circulation in con- effects. a detailed knowledge of the pharmajunction with the other associated properties of cology of the individual agents relative to the
an individual calcium antagonist determine the pathophysiology of the clinical entity under connet in vivo pharmacologic and therapeutic effects sideration may provide the basis for the choice of
of the compound. for example, in the case of the appropriate calcium antagonist for a particompounds such as verapamil, gallopamil, tia- cular clinical indication.
panmil and diltiazem, the myocardial effects predominate with respect to sinus and the av this work was supported in part by grants from the
nodes. the effects of the av node are the medical research service of the veterans' adminprimary determinants of the antiarrhythmic istration and the american heart association, the
effects of calcium antagonists except for those greater los angeles affiliate.

references
allen, g. s., ahn, h. s., preziosi, t. j., battle, r.,
boone, s. c., chou, s. n., kelly, d. l., weir,
b. k., crabbe, r. a., lavik, p. j., rosenbloom,
s. b., doirsey, f. c., ingram, c. r., mellits,
d. e., bertsch, l. a., biosvert, d. p. j., hundley,
m. b., johnson, r. k., strom, j. a. & transou,
c. r. (1983). cerebral anterial spasm-a controlled
trial of  xxxd2728xxx  in patients with subarachnoid
hemorrhage. new engi. j. med., 308, 619-624.
bianco, r., albert, j., katz, r. j., spann, j., chester,
e., ferri, d. p., larcia, l. j., costello, r. b.,
gore, j. m. & eisenman, m. j. (1984).  xxxd318xxx  for
chronic stable angina pectoris: results of a prospective multicenter, placebo-controlled, doseranging study in 77 patients. am. j. cardiol., 33,
35-41.
brown, b. g., bolson, e. l. & dodge, h. t. (1984).
dynamic mechanisms in human coronary stenosis.
circulation, 70, 917-922.
b3hler, f. r. & hulthen, l. (1982). calcium channel
blockers: a pathophysiologically based antihypertensive treatment concept for the future. eur. j.
clin. invest., 2, 1-3.
epstein, s. e., rosing, d. r. & conti, c. r. (1985).
calcium-channel blockers: present status and future
directions. am. j. cardiol., 55, 1b-221b.
fleckenstein, a. (1983). history of calcium antagonists
circ. res., 52 (suppl ii): 1-16.
frohlich, e. d. (1984). calcium channel blockers: a
new dimension in antihypertensive therapy. am. j.
med., 77 (2b): 1-45.

gelmer, h. j. (1983).  xxxd2728xxx : a new calcium
antagonist in the prophylactic treatment of migraine.
headache, 23, 106-109.
hecht, h. s., chew, c. y. c., burram, m. h.,
hopkins, j., schnugg, s. & singh, b. n. (1981).
verapamil in chronic stable angina: amelioration
of pacing-induced abnormalities of left ventricular
ejection fraction, regional wall motion, lactate
metabolism and hemodynamics. am. j. cardiol.,
48, 536-544.
holmes, b., brogden, r. n., heel, r. g., speight,
t. m. & avery, g. s. (1984).  xxxd2125xxx :
a review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic use. drugs, 22,
6-44.
johnson, s. m., mauritson, d. r., willerson, j. t. &
hillis, l. d. (1981). a controlled trial of verapamil
in prinzmetal's variant angina. new engl. j. med.,
306, 862-870.
josephson, m. a., hecht, h. s., hopkins, j., guerrero,
j. & singh, b. n. (1982). comparative effects of
oral verapamil and propranolol on exerciseinduced myocardial ischemia and energetics in
patients with coronary artery disease: single-blind
placebo crossover evaluation using radionuclide
ventriculography. am. heart. j., 103, 978-985.
kato, rinya & singh, b. n. (1986). effects of  xxxd318xxx 
on the electrophysiologic properties of isolated
canine and rabbit myocardial fibers. am. heart j.
(in press).
mccall, d., walsh, r. a., frohlich, e. d. & o'rourke,

calcium channel blockers in therapy
r. a. (1985). calcium entry blocking drugs: experimental studies and clinical use. current
problems in cardiology, 10, 1-80.
rosing, d. r., idanpaan-heikkila, u., maron, b. j.,
bonow, r. 0. & epstein, s. e. (1985). use of
calcium-channel blocking drugs in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. am. j. cardiol., 55, 185b-195b.
shapiro, w., narahara, k. a. & park, j. (1982). the
effects of lidoflazine on exercise performance and
thalium stress scintigraphy in patients with angina
pectoris. circulation, 65 (suppl ii), 1-43-1-50.
singh, b. n., baky, s. & nademanee, k. (1985a).
second-generation calcium antagonists: search for
greater selectivity and versatility. am. j. cardiol.,
55, 214b-221b.
singh, b. n., ellrodt, g. & nademanee, k. (1984).
calcium antagonists: cardiocirculatory effects and
therapeutic applications. in clinical essays on the

121s

heart, volume 2: ed hurst, j. w., pp 65-98. new
york: mcgraw-hill.
singh, b. n., hecht, h. s., nademanee, k. & chew,
c. y. c. (1982). electrophysiologic and hemodynamic effects of slow-channel blocking drugs.
prog. cardiovasc. dis., 25, 103-201.
singh, b. n., nademanee, k. & baky, s. (1983).
calcium antagonists: uses in the treatment of
cardiac arrhythmias. drugs, 25, 125-164.
singh, b. n., nademanee, k., feld, g., piontek, m.
& schwab, m. (1985b). comparative electrophysiologic profiles of calcium antagonists with
particular reference to  xxxd318xxx . am. j. cardiol.,
55, 14c-19c.
vaughan williams, e. m. (1980). antiarrhythmic action
and the puzzle of  xxxd2884xxx ,  xxxd1100xxx -143. london:
academic press.

