 xxxd2647xxx , a new drug with antidepressant properties.   xxxd2647xxx  is a new psychotropic drug which has recently proved to be effective in the treatment of various depressive states. in rodents,  xxxd2647xxx  exhibits an atypical spectrum of antidepressant and dopaminomimetic activities. thus in mice  xxxd2647xxx  antagonizes the effects of reserpine, decreases immobility time in the behavioural despair test and potentiates the effects of 5-htp; in rats it antagonizes muricidal behaviour (blocked by pcpa or raphectomy). however,  xxxd2647xxx  does not affect yohimbine lethality and does not induce anticholinergic effects in mice.  xxxd2647xxx  also activates central dopaminergic transmission. thus at low doses the drug antagonizes neuroleptic-induced catalepsy and induces stereotypies in rats. these stereotypies are blocked by neuroleptics. in addition,  xxxd2647xxx  (like apomorphine) induces contralateral turning in mice with a unilateral lesion of the striatum, whereas d-amphetamine induces ipsilateral rotations. unlike classical dopaminomimetic drugs,  xxxd2647xxx  does not stimulate locomotor activity in rats. the mechanisms by which  xxxd2647xxx  exerts its effects are still unclear, since in vitro  xxxd2647xxx  does not affect monoamine uptake or release and does not interact with monoamine receptors. in vivo,  xxxd2647xxx  (acute doses) increases 5-ht, decreases 5-hiaa levels in various brain areas and weakly and reversibly inhibits type a mao; subacute treatments lead to a decrease in the number of 5-ht1 and 5-ht2 receptors. in addition, in the striatum the drug decreases hva and dopac, and increases 3-mt levels, without affecting da levels.  xxxd2647xxx  also weakly displaces (3h)-spiperone from striatal d2 receptors and increases striatal ach levels. finally,  xxxd2647xxx  fails to affect brain na or mhpg levels in acute doses and does not modify beta receptor density in subacute treatment. thus  xxxd2647xxx  appears to be a chemically and pharmacologically original antidepressant drug which activates both 5-ht- and da-mediated transmission but which is devoid of naergic and anticholinergic effects. this latter statement is confirmed by the good cardiovascular tolerance of  xxxd2647xxx  in dog, monkey and humans, and by the lack of "tricyclic-like" anticholinergic side-effects in man.