antischizophrenic drugs and
brain cholinergic receptors
affinity for muscarinic sites
extrapyramidal effects
solomon

snyder, md;

david

predicts

greenberg; henry

i.

yamamura, phd, baltimore

with

only a few exceptions, the phenothiazines and butyropheused in the treatment of schizophrenia appear to exert antischizophrenic actions to the same or closely similar degrees.
both antischizophrenic and extrapyramidal effects apparently result from dopamine receptor blockade. here, we report the influence
of a variety of such antischizophrenic drugs on the brain's receptor
for the muscarinic action of acetylcholine.
extrapyramidal effects are inversely proportional to affinity for the
muscarinic receptor. thus, drugs such as clozapine and thioridazine
hydrochloride apparently owe their low incidence of extrapyramidal
effects to anticholinergic properties that compensate for their intrinsic extrapyramidal effects. our findings provide a means to predict
extrapyramidal actions of new potential antischizophrenic drugs.
nones

is generally accepted that of the phenothi¬
azine and butyrophenone drugs commonly employed
clinically, all exert fairly comparable antischizophrenic ac¬
tivity. thus, a major criterion in selecting a drug is the
relative frequency of side effects. extrapyramidal actions
are the most frequent and troublesome untoward effects
and seem to occur to a varying degree with all phenothia¬
zines and butyrophenones, despite extensive efforts to
synthesize drugs lacking extrapyramidal effects. because
antischizophrenic and extrapyramidal effects seem inex¬
tricably linked, theories have been advanced ascribing
these two actions to the same or similar mechanisms. the
most heuristic of these notions is the "dopamine hypothe¬
sis."12 the dopamine theory of schizophrenia is predicated
in large part on the interactions of the antischizophrenic
phenothiazines and butyrophenones with brain catechol¬
amines, especially dopamine. briefly, a variety of evidence
argues that the clinically efficacious phenothiazines and
butyrophenones act selectively on the fundamental symp¬
toms of schizophrenia and not simply as sedatives.3-4 ac-

it

accepted

for publication feb 28, 1974.
from the departments of psychiatry and pharmacology, the johns hopkins university school of medicine, baltimore.
reprint requests to the johns hopkins university school of medicine,
department of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics, 725 n
wolfe st, baltimore, md 21205 (dr. snyder).

cording to this reasoning clarifying the mechanism of
their antischizophrenic activity might illuminate the pathophysiology of the schizophrenic process.
of the many biochemical effects exerted by phenothia¬
zine drugs, very few correlate with their antischizophrenic
activity. thus, numerous biochemical actions of these
drugs are produced just as effectively by the antihistaminic phenothiazine promethazine hydrochloride,
which is not an efficacious antischizophrenic agent, as by
chlorpromazine.5 by contrast, influences of these drugs on
catecholamine metabolism indicating that they block
dopamine receptors in the brain correlate closely with an¬
tischizophrenic efficacy.68 recently, blockade of dopamine
receptors in the brain by antischizophrenic drugs has been
directly demonstrated. specific dopamine-induced inhibi¬
tion of neurons receiving dopamine terminals is antago¬
nized by phenothiazines in proportion to their antischizophrenic activity.9 the selective stimulation of cyclic
amp formation by dopamine in areas of the brain rich in
dopamine nerve terminals, thought to reflect dopamine re¬
ceptor activity, is antagonized best by the antischizophrenic phenothiazines.10
besides accounting for their antischizophrenic effects,
blockade by phenothiazines and butyrophenones of dopa¬
mine receptors can explain their extrapyramidal side ef¬
fects, including akathisia, abnormal movements, and par-

kinsonian-like symptoms. these side effects may be
analogous to abnormalities in idiopathic parkinson dis¬
ease, that follows on degeneration of dopamine neurons in
the corpus striatum, a brain region responsible for motor
coordination. phenothiazines induce a functional dopa¬
mine deficiency in the corpus striatum by blocking dopa¬
mine receptors.
besides the dopamine pathway with cell bodies in the
substantia nigra and terminals in the corpus striatum,
dopamine systems exist with cell bodies in the brain stem
close to the interpeduncular nucleus and terminals in the
olfactory tubercle and nucleus accumbens, parts of the
limbic system of the brain that regulate emotional behav-

downloaded from: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a western university user on 06/08/2015

oca

h

<*xt\
=

(spanne)
 xxxd3433xxx 
(vesprm)

(mellaril

clozapine

fig
tively

*
·*
ch2-ch2-ch,-n(ch5)i

_

*

3

c^-c^-ch^rtvch.-chj-oh
chj-chj-chï-n^n-ch.-chroh
ch.-chf-ch2-n~vch.
222

1

^^

2

>_/

*

*

*

*

w

ch2-ch2-ch2-nwn-ch»-ch2-oh

piperidine

sch

are more potent on a milligram basis produce
side effects. however, they are administered in cor¬
respondingly smaller doses and most schizophrenic pa¬
tients are "titrated" to the optimal antischizophrenic dose.
thus, if dopamine receptor blockade, which occurs with
these drugs to a similar extent at all dopamine synapses,
accounts for both extrapyramidal and antischizophrenic
actions, the more potent antischizophrenic drugs should
display the same incidence of extrapyramidal effects as
the weaker ones. some authors have suggested that the
low incidence of these side effects occurring with clozapine
can be explained by data suggesting that dopamine recep¬
tor blockade by this drug is more "surmountable" than
with most phenothiazines.19 a simpler and more drastic
explanation is that the antischizophrenic effects of drugs
are not produced by dopamine receptor blockade and that
the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia is invalid or at
least severely deficient.
an alternative explanation for variations in the inci¬
dence of extrapyramidal effects lies in the anticholinergic
actions of phenothiazines that might, to varying degrees,
attenuate extrapyramidal effects. phenothiazines do bear
structural resemblances to drugs, such as  xxxd247xxx ,
which block muscarinic cholinergic synapses. indeed, "bel¬
ladonna-like" actions such as dry mouth, dizziness, and
difficulty in urination, are frequently complained of side
effects of the phenothiazines. since charcot's introduction
of belladonna in the therapy of parkinson disease, antago¬
nists of muscarinic cholinergic receptors have been major
drugs in the treatment of this condition. stille et al20 ob¬
served that clozapine was a fairly potent antagonist of
acetylcholine actions on the guinea pig ileum and sug¬
gested, as did anden and stock21 that its relative paucity
of extrapyramidal effects might be related to its anti¬

drugs that

piperazine

ch2-ch,-£}\:hs

ior.11 recently, an extensive system of dopamine nerve
terminals have been described in the cerebral cortex, espe¬
cially in limbic areas.12 while most investigators agree
that the extrapyramidal side effects of phenothiazines in¬
volve blockade of dopamine receptors in the corpus stria¬
tum, no definitive evidence exists regarding what dopa¬
mine pathway mediates the antischizophrenic actions of

drugs.
if dopamine receptors throughout the brain respond
similarly to various phenothiazines, at therapeutic antischizophrenic doses similar receptor blockade should occur
in the dopamine systems. horn and co-workers1 have ob¬
tained direct evidence that dopamine receptors (evaluated
in terms of the dopamine sensitive adenylate cyclase) in
the corpus striatum and olfactory tubercle display sub¬
stantially the same responses to different phenothiazine
drugs. accordingly, with antischizophrenic doses of pheno¬
thiazines and butyrophenones, all of these drugs should
exhibit the same amount of extrapyramidal side effects.
while it is true that no clinically utilized antischizophrenic
drug is completely free of extrapyramidal actions, there
are marked differences in frequency of these effects. butyrophenone drugs such as haloperidol (haldol) and piper¬
azine phenothiazines such as  xxxd3431xxx  hydrochlo¬
ride ( xxxd3431xxx ) and perphenazine ( xxxd2889xxx ), produce
considerably more extrapyramidal effects than alkylamino
phenothiazines such as chlorpromazine.11 thioridazine
hydrochloride (mellaril), a piperidine phenothiazine, pro¬
duces fewer extrapyramidal side effects than chlorproma¬
zine, while the recently developed antischizophrenic drug
clozapine manifests the lowest incidence of extrapyrami¬
dal effects of any known antischizophrenic drug (fig 1 and
'

'

might one account for these marked variations in
frequency of extrapyramidal side effects? in general, the
how

haloperidol

2.—structures of clozapine and haloperidol, examples respec¬
of dibenzodiazepine and butyrophenone classes.

ch.-ch.-ch.-nîch,),*

cf *

fig 1.—structures of phenothiazines.

2).16-18

"osq-c
0^c-ch*-ch*-ch*-cvnvc,

ch,

ch,-ch2-chî-n(chj)2

cl

 xxxd67xxx 
(tmdal)
fluphenazine
(prolixin; permitil) 3
 xxxd3431xxx  cf 3
( xxxd3431xxx )
perphenazine c|
( xxxd2889xxx )
thioridazine

ci

i—s. oh

vtt

alkylamino
 xxxd3024xxx 

°

µ

"t
phenothiazines

chlorpromazine
(thorazine)

butyrophenone

dibenzodiazepine

more

cholinergic activity.
we speculate that by blocking muscarinic cholinergic
receptors in the brain, phenothiazines might antagonize
their own tendency to elicit extrapyramidal symptoms via
dopamine receptor blockade. accordingly, we predict that
the potency of phenothiazines and butyrophenones as an¬
tagonists of muscarinic cholinergic receptors in the brain
should vary inversely with their tendency to evoke ex¬
trapyramidal symptoms. for instance, perhaps tri¬
fluoperazine elicits a high incidence of these side effects,
because it is a very weak muscarinic anticholinergic and
thus is unable to counteract its own propensity to produce
extrapyramidal effects. clozapine would be expected to be
the most potent muscarinic anticholinergic; thioridazine
should be highly effective but less so than clozapine; while

downloaded from: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a western university user on 06/08/2015

table 1.—relative affinities of phenothiazines and

butyrophenones for muscarinic cholinergic receptor
binding in brain correlates inversely with
extrapyramidal side effects

drug class
dibenzodiazepine
clozapine
pi pendine
phenothiazine
thiorldazine

ed-50

relative

concen-

affinity for

tration,

muscarinic

m*

2.6 x 10s

side effects
rank by class
(1 = most
side effects)

385
66.7

chlorpromazine
 xxxd3433xxx 
piperazine

6.5 x io"?
1.0 x 10«
1.0 x ip6

15.2
10.0
10.0

thioridazine

chlorpromazine
 xxxd3431xxx 

striatum
410
94.2
14.3
1.35

putamen
378
82.5
11.6

lleum
111

12.5

1.03_2.17

treatment.

phenothiazine

1.0 x
 xxxd67xxx 
1.1 x
perphenazine
1.3 x
 xxxd3431xxx 
1.2 x
fluphenazine
butyrophenone
4.8 x
haloperidol
*
affinity for the muscarinic

clozapine

*
affinity for muscarinic cholinergic receptors, represented by
specific tritiated qnb binding, is defined as the reciprocal x 105 of
the molar concentration that displaces by 50% the specific binding
of tritiated qnb (1 nmol) to homogenates of rat corpus striatum,
monkey putamen, or guinea pig ileum. displacement percentages
were obtained by log probit plots of the effects of three concentra¬
tions of each drug assayed in triplicate. the procedure for homogenizatlon and assay was essentially the same as described for whole
brain23 except for the guinea pig ileum that was minced prior to
homogenization with a conical glass pestle followed by polytron

alkylamino

phenothiazine
 xxxd3024xxx 

affinity for qnb binding sites*
rat corpus
guinea pig
monkey
relative

frequency of
extra pyramidal

receptor

1.5 x io"?

2.—affinity of phenothiazines for muscarinic
cholinergic binding sites in corpus striatum and
guinea pig lleum

table

10s
io"5
10 5
10"5

0.90
0.91

10-5

0.21

0.78
0.83
1

the reciprocal
x 10'5 of the ed-50 value, defined as the molar concentration of
drug that displaced by 50% the specific binding of tritiated qnb
(1 nmol) to whole rat brain homogenates. ed-50 values were ob¬
tained by log probit plots of the effects of four concentrations of
each drug assayed in triplicate. each experiment was replicated twice.

receptor is defined

as

chlorpromazine should be a better anticholinergic than
piperazine drugs such as  xxxd3431xxx  but less potent

than thioridazine.
to evaluate this hypothesis, one must be able to
quantify affinity for muscarinic cholinergic receptors in
the brain. peripheral anticholinergic effects are readily
measured on smooth muscle by traditional pharmacologi¬
cal methods, but these may not correspond precisely to
relative affinities in the brain. recently, techniques have
been developed to identify biochemically the brain's mus¬
carinic cholinergic receptor.22 24 we have measured the
binding of 3-quinuclidinyl benzilate (qnb), a potent an¬
tagonist of muscarinic cholinergic receptors, to membrane
preparations from the central nervous system.23-24 the
binding of highly radioactive qnb represents an almost
exclusive interaction with muscarinic cholinergic recep¬
tors. muscarinic antagonists, such as atropine and scopola¬
mine hydrobromide displace specific qnb binding with a
very high affinity of about io9 m. acetylcholine and drugs
that mimic acetylcholine have affinities for these binding
sites that parallel their known ability to mimic acetylcho¬
line. for instance, oxotremorine, which is considerably
more potent in stimulating muscarinic cholinergic recep¬
tors than acetylcholine, pilocarpine hydrochloride, or carbamylcholine, possesses ten times or more affinity for
qnb binding sites than these other drugs.21 moreover,
drugs that are known to stimulate or block nicotinic but
not muscarinic cholinergic receptors, have negligible af¬
finity for qnb binding sites. in addition, numerous noncholinergic drugs do not bind to the qnb sites. specific

qnb binding largely parallels the distribution of muscari¬
nic cholinergic receptors throughout the brain as deter¬
mined by neurophysiologic techniques.
possessing a simple, sensitive, and specific assay for the
muscarinic cholinergic receptor in the brain, we evaluated
the relative affinities of a variety of antischizophrenic
drugs (table l).25 their affinity for the muscarinic recep¬
tor in whole brain correlates inversely in an impressive
fashion with their tendency to elicit extrapyramidal side
effects. clozapine, which is almost devoid of these side ef¬
fects, has the greatest affinity for qnb binding sites with
a potency similar to standard anticholinergic antiparkinsonian drugs such as benztropine (cogentin)
mesylate and trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride (artane).
thioridazine, which next to clozapine elicits the fewest ex¬
trapyramidal symptoms, displays the second greatest af¬
finity for muscarinic sites in the brain, about one sixth
that of clozapine. the alkylamino phenothiazines  xxxd3024xxx  hydrochloride, chlorpromazine and  xxxd3433xxx 
hydrochloride, whose moderate incidence of extrapyrami¬
dal actions is greater than that of thioridazine, have cor¬
respondingly less affinity for qnb binding sites. the
piperazine phenothiazines,  xxxd67xxx  maléate,
fluphenazine hydrochloride (prolixin),  xxxd3431xxx  hy¬
drochloride, and perphenazine ( xxxd2889xxx ), which produce
considerably more extrapyramidal side effects than chlor¬
 xxxd3024xxx  are one tenth to one fifteenth as effective in
binding to the muscarinic receptors. similarly, the butyro¬
phenone haloperidol, whose frequency of extrapyramidal
effects is as high or higher than the piperazine phenothia¬
zines, has very little affinity for the muscarinic receptor.
the apparent balance of cholinergic and dopaminergic
mechanisms in producing extrapyramidal symptoms is
presumed to operate in the corpus striatum. our initial ex¬
periments employed the whole brain. however, in the cor¬
pus striatum of the rat, the relative affinities of clozapine,
thioridazine, chlorpromazine, and  xxxd3431xxx  for qnb
binding sites are the same as in the whole brain. to deter¬
mine if findings in rat brain are applicable to primates, we
measured the affinities of clozapine, thioridazine, chlor-

downloaded from: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a western university user on 06/08/2015

 xxxd3024xxx , and  xxxd3431xxx  for the muscarinic receptor
site in the corpus striatum of rhesus monkey (table 2).
the relative affinities of these four drugs in monkey puta¬
men (part of the corpus striatum) is the same as in the rat
corpus striatum and whole brain. we wondered whether
the muscarinic receptor site in the periphery would have
similar properties as in the brain. we have demonstrated
specific qnb binding to muscarinic cholinergic receptors
in the guinea pig ileum (yamamura, greenberg and snyder, unpublished data). the relative affinities of clozapine,
chlorpromazine, and  xxxd3431xxx  appear to be fairly
similar in the guinea pig ileum as in the brain (table 2).

the

hypothesis linking anticholinergic activity and ex¬
trapyramidal side effects of antischizophrenic drugs re¬
quires that relative affinities for the dopamine and mus¬
carinic cholinergic receptors not parallel each other. for
instance, if  xxxd3431xxx  had only one one hundredth the
affinity of thioridazine for both dopamine and acetylcho¬

line receptors, the actions on these two transmitter sys¬
tems would balance each other out and the two drugs
should elicit extrapyramidal effects to the same extent.
miller and iversen26 have measured the relative potency of
a variety of phenothiazines and butyrophenones in antag¬
onizing the dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase in the
corpus striatum of rat brain. apparent blockade of dopa¬
mine receptors does not correlate at all with affinities for
the muscarinic cholinergic receptor. thus,  xxxd3431xxx 
is almost ten times as potent in blocking the dopaminesensitive adenylate cyclase as thioridazine, while it is only
one sixtieth as active in blocking the cholinergic receptor
site. this suggests that therapeutic antischizophrenic

dopamine receptor blockade requires almost ten times
higher brain levels of thioridazine than of  xxxd3431xxx .
at these higher brain levels, thioridazine should block
cholinergic receptors, hence alleviate extrapyramidal
symptoms, even more than at equimolar concentrations.
this model provides a simple system to screen drugs for
extrapyramidal side effects. one simply measures the af¬
finity of agents for dopamine and muscarinic receptors.
the most active central muscarinic cholinergics should elic¬
it fewest extrapyramidal side effects with no attentuation
of antischizophrenic activity. the ideal drug would be con¬
siderably more active in blocking brain than peripheral
cholinergic receptors, and therefore provoke fewer periph¬
eral dopamine-like actions such as dry mouth and urinary
retention.

bunney and aghajanian (written communication,) re¬
cently observed that all antischizophrenic phenothiazines
accelerate the firing of dopamine cells in the aio grouping
that projects to the limbic system, while the firing of cells
in the substantia nigra (that projects to the corpus stria¬
tum) could be accelerated only by phenothiazines that elic¬
it prominent extrapyramidal side effects. whether these
varying influences on the two dopamine cell groups relate
to differential anticholinergic actions of the drugs in the

corpus striatum is unclear.

supported by public health service grants mh 18501, da 00266, a re¬
search scientist development award mh 33128 to solomon h. snyder,
grants of the john a. hartford foundation and scottish rite foundation,
and public health service special research fellowship award mh 54777 to
henry i. yamamura.

references
1. kety ss, matthyse s: prospects for research in schizophrenia. neurosci res program bull 10:370-507, 1972.
2. snyder sh: catecholamines in the brain as mediators of amphetamine psychosis. arch gen psychiatry 27:169-179, 1972.

3. cole jo: phenothiazine treatment in acute schizophrenia.
arch gen psychiatry 10:246-261, 1964.
4. davis jm: the efficacy of the tranquilizing and antidepressant drugs. arch gen psychiatry 13:552-572, 1965.
5. guth ps, spirtes ma: the phenothiazine tranquilizers: biochemical and biophysical actions. int rev neurobiol 7:231-238,
1963.
6. carlsson a, lindqvist m: effect of chlorpromazine or haloon formation of 3-methoxytyramine and normetanephrine
 xxxd2260xxx 
in mouse brain. acta pharmacol toxicol scand 20:140-144, 1963.
7. nyback h, borzecki z, sedvall g: accumulation and disappearance of catecholamines formed from tyrosine-14c in mouse
brain: effect of some psychotropic drugs. eur j pharmacol 4:395403, 1968.
8. anden ne, et al: receptor activity and turnover of dopamine
and noradrenaline after neuroleptics. eur j pharmacol 11:303314, 1970.
9. aghajanian gk, bunney bs: central dopaminergic neurons:
neurophysiological identification and responses to drugs, in usdin
e, snyder sm (eds): frontiers in catecholamine research. new
york, pergamon press, 1974, pp 643-648.
10. kebabian jw, petzold gl, greengard p: dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase in caudate nucleus of rat brain and its similarity to "dopamine receptor." proc natl acad sci usa 69:21452149, 1972.
11. ungerstedt u: stereotaxic mapping of the monoamine pathways in the rat brain. acta physiol scand [suppl]367:1-48, 1971.
12. thierry am, et al: some evidence for the existence of dopaminergic neurons in the rat cortex. brain res 50:230-234, 1973.
13. horn as, cuello ac, miller rj: dopamine in the mesolimbic
systems: endogenous levels, uptake and stimulation of adenylate

cyclase activity. j neurochem, to be published.
14. klein df, davis jm: diagnosis and drug treatment of psychiatric disorders. baltimore, williams & wilkins co, 1969.
15. shader ri, dimascio a: psychotropic drug side effects. baltimore, williams & wilkins co, 1970.
16. angst j, et al: ergebnisse eines dopelblindversuchs von
closapin 8-chlor-11-(4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)-5-h-dibenzo(b,e)(1,4)
 xxxd1866xxx  im vergleich zu  xxxd2474xxx . pharmakopsychiatry
4:192-300, 1971.
17. angst j, et al: das klinisch wirkungsbild von  xxxd1733xxx .
pharmakopsychiatry 4:201-214, 1971.
18. stille g, hippius a: kritische stellungsnahme zum begriffe
der neuroleptika (anhand von pharmakologischen und klinischen
befunden mit  xxxd1733xxx ). pharmakopsychiatry 4:182-191, 1971.
19. bartholini g, et al: effects of clozapine on cerebral catecholaminergic neurone systems. br j pharmacol 46:736-740, 1972.
20. stille g, lauener h, eichenberger e: the pharmacology of
8-chlor -1 (4-methyl-1pi erazinyl)-5h-dibenzo(b,e)(1,4)
diaze-

pine (clozapine). il farmaco 26:603-625, 1971.
21. anden ne, stock g: effect of clozapine on the turnover of
dopamine in the corpus striatum and in the limbic system. j
pharm pharmacol 25:346, 1973.
22. hiley cr, young jm, burgen asv: labelling of cholinergic
receptors in subcellular fractions from rat cerebral cortex. biochem j 127:86p, 1972.
23. yamamura hi, snyder sh: muscarinic cholinergic receptor
binding in rat brain. proc natl acad sci usa, to be published.
24. yamamura hi, et al: regional distribution of muscarinic
cholinergic receptor binding in monkey brain. brain res, to be

published.
25. snyder sh,

et al: drugs, neurotransmitters and schizophrenia. science, to be published.
26. miller rj, iversen ll: effect of psychoactive drugs on dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase activity in corpus striatum of rat
brain. biochem j, to be published.

downloaded from: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a western university user on 06/08/2015

