0022-202x/79/7206-0296$02.00/0
the journal of investigative dermatology, 72:296-305
copyright © 1979 by the williams & wilkins co.

vol. 72, no. 6
printed in u.s.a.

effect of dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna

marcella nazzaro-porro, m.d., siro passi, px.d., l. balus, m.d., aodan breathnach, m.d., barry
martin, and giorgio morpurgo

institute of dermatology, s. gallicano, rome, italy; department of anatomy, st. mary’s hospital medical school, (university of london),
london, england (ab and bm); and orto botanico institute, university of rome, italy (gm)

dicarboxylic acids from cx, to ci4 are competitive in-
hibitors of tyrosinase in vitro, and here, the effect of a
cream containing 15%  xxxd269xxx  acid (cy) on 3 cases of
lentigo maligna is described. the lesions were treated
for 90 days, with remarkable clinical and histological
effect, maintained for up to 2 yr after cessation of treat-
ment. progress during treatment of one case was addi-
tionally monitored by electron microscopy, which re-
vealed progressive elimination of abnormal melanocytes
both basally and suprabasally, and their replacement by
essentially normal cells engaged in normal melanoge-
nesis. there was also progressive diminution in the gen-
eral disorganization of the epidermis, and disappearance
of lymphocyte response. it is concluded that dicarboxylic
acids have a direct inhibitory and cytotoxic effect on
abnormally active or structurally disordered melano-
cytes in lentigo maligna, but further investigations are
required to establish their precise mode of action. simi-
lar application of dicarboxylic acids to normal skin af-
fects only a small proportion of melanocytes, suggesting
that some phasic factor, or individual states of activity,
may be concerned in their susceptibility.

focal depigmentation of skin, sometimes preceded by tran-
sient hyperpigmentation, is a characteristic feature of pityriasis
versicolor and is accompanied by cytologic alterations in mel-
anocytes [1]. in previous reports [2,3] we have provided evi-
dence which indicates that the hypochromia may result from
tyrosinase inhibition and damage to melanocytes by products
formed through the oxidation by a pityrosporum enzyme sys-
tem of the double-bond linkages of unsaturated  xxxd2154xxx 
normally present in skin surface lipids. recently [4], we have
conclusively established that in cultures of pityrosporum, sup-
plemented with oleic or vaccenic acid, the oxidation products
in question are competitive inhibitors of, and not alternative
substrates for tyrosinase, and have identified them as dicarbox-
ylic acids, notably,  xxxd269xxx  acid (cy  xxxd2537xxx ) and do-
decandioic acid (cj2  xxxd2537xxx ). we have also estab-
lished that commercial pure standard dicarboxylic acids from
cx to cy, are similarly capable of inhibiting tyrosinase activity
to varying extents, and the overall observations raise the pos-
sibility that these substances might prove of therapeutic value
in the treatment of hyperpigmentary disorders of skin. accord-
ingly, a cream containing cy  xxxd2537xxx  was prepared and
applied to patients with lentigo maligna, and the results are
described in this report.

manuscript received august 4, 1978; accepted for publication decem-
ber 20, 1978.

patent no. 22617-a/77, ministero industria e commercio, rome,
italy, april 19, 1977.

part of this study was supported by a grant to (a. s. breathnach)
from the wellcome trust.

reprint requests to: dr. m. nazzaro-porro, instituto dermatologico
s. gallicano, via s. gallicano, 25a, rome, italy.

materials and methods

three patients, aged 65, 87 and 58, with facial lentigo maligna of 7,
10 and 8 yr duration respectively, were treated. they were given a
cream containing 15%  xxxd269xxx  acid (cy  xxxd2537xxx ) in a standard
base (cetyl alcohol, 3%; tween 80, 5%; sodium-lauryl-sulfate, 10%;
ethanolamine-lauryl-sulfate, 10%; olive oil, 2%;  xxxd228xxx , 1%; distilled
water, q.b.) and instructed to rub it well into the affected areas of the
skin twice daily for 90 days. in 2 cases, progress throughout treatment
and up to 2 yr after its cessation was assessed by clinical and histological
examination. with the third case, progress during treatment was mon-
itored by light and electron microscopic observation of material re-
moved at staged biopsies, taken before commencement, after 6 weeks
application of the cream, and at cessation, after 90 days of continuous
treatment. each biopsy was divided into 2 portions. one portion was
fixed for histological examination in 10% formol saline, and sections
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin; dopa-incubated material
was not prepared, since the condition of the melanocytes was addition-
ally being assessed ultrastructurally. the other biopsy portion was fixed
in buffered 2.5% glutaraldehyde, post-osmicated, dehydrated, and em-
bedded in taab resin for electron microscopy.

a similar 15%  xxxd269xxx  acid cream was applied twice daily for 90 days
to forearm skin of 2 male volunteers—one heavily freckled, the other
of a complexion type which tans moderately,—and material taken at
biopsy before application, and at 2 weekly intervals, was processed as
above for examination by electron microscopy.

results
clinical

the highly satisfactory results achieved by treatment of the
lentigo maligna lesions for 90 days is seen in fig 1, and it may
be emphasized that in the first 2 cases, the affected areas of
skin continue to appear normal 2 years after cessation of treat-
ment.

during the first 10 days or so of treatment, a transitory mild
inflammatory reaction with some desquamation was observed
in all cases but otherwise no side effects of either toxic or
allergic nature were observed. clinical improvement during
treatment was characterized by progressive diminution in in-
tensity of pigmentation, rather than by actual reduction in size,
or shrinkage, of the lesion. apparent shrinkage can result from
the initial existence within lesions of areas of different degrees
of melanization, the lighter of which, revert to normal at an
earlier stage. intensely black areas become brown or yellowish-
brown before entirely losing their pigmentation, and this type
of alteration gave a good early indication that treatment was
likely to be successful.

no effect or reaction whatsoever was observed during appli-
cation of the cream to normal skin of the 2 volunteers, either
on plain naked-eye observation, or on examination under
wood’s light. no hypo- or hyperpigmentation was observed,
nor were freckles altered in any way, and the same applies at
the time of writing, more than one year after cessation of the
experiment.

296
297

dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna

 

fic 1. lentigo maligna treated by daily application of  xxxd269xxx  acid cream for 90 days. a, case 1, of 7 yr duration, before treatment. b, same case
2 yr after cessation of treatment. c, case 2, of 10 yr duration, before treatment. d, same case 2 yr after cessation of treatment. f, case 3, of 8 yr
duration, before treatment. f, same case some months after cessation of treatment. the patient did not use a mirror while applying the cream,
so the posterior and lower areas of the lesion were less effectively treated; a good internal control of the effect of the therapy. (fig la and 6
reproduced, with permission, from nazzaro-porro et al, pigment cell, vol 4, karger, basel, 1979.)

histology

in all 3 patients with lentigo maligna the initial pretreatment .

histological picture was essentially similar. in many sections a
characteristic feature of the lesion was the presence of pleo-
morphic and atypical melanocytes within the junctional zone
of the epidermis with formation of nests surrounded by spaces
(fig 2a). in the superficial dermis there was a round cell

inflammatory infiltrate and many melanophages loaded with
melanin were present. taking the overall appearances, the cases
treated here could be designated as group b lesions of the
classification of clarke at al [5,6], but they might also be
considered to have some features of group c lesions.

after 6 weeks of topical treatment with  xxxd269xxx  acid, in all 3
patients, nest formation was very much less evident, though the
number of melanocytes in the basal layer of the epidermis was
nazzaro-porro et al

se. “, :
4 at +
ya telat ee
peed ‘ ra rs

¥ a

 

2 — - ae 3h pi
lss ™“< at

s as ee:

fic 2. lentigo maligna, case 3, a, before treatment. nests of abnor-
mal melanocytes in epidermis with round cell infiltration and melano-
phages in superficial dermis. b, after 6 weeks treatment with  xxxd269xxx 
acid cream. abnormal melanocytes still present in basal layer of epi-
dermis, but nests no longer evident; dermal inflammatory reaction less
prominent. c, after 3 mo treatment. epidermis appears essentially
normal, and the epidermal-dermal junction is clearly defined. melano-
cytes, if anything, less than normal in number. in the dermis, only a
few lymphocytes and some macrophages are evident.

still evidently greater than normal (fig 2b). some of these
melanocytes exhibited a foamy appearance of the cytoplasm.
the dermal inflammatory reaction was significantly less prom-
inent than before treatment.

vol. 72, no. 6

in all 3 cases, following 3 mo of treatment, the epidermis
appeared essentially normal, though slightly hyperplastic, and
the epidermal-dermal junction was clearly defined and delim-
ited (fig 2c). the inflammatory infiltrate in the upper dermis
was greatly diminished, and represented only by a few lympho-
cytes and macrophages, with an increased number of new
capillaries and fibroblasts. the epidermal melanocytes manl-
festing as “clear cells,” appeared, if anything, reduced in number
and apparently normal. impressions of this latter nature, how-
ever, derived from routinely stained histological sections, must
be treated with caution, but in the present instance they were
further assessed at the ultrastructural level, which provides
clear-cut criteria for pronouncing upon the morphology and
functional activity of melanocytes.

electron microscopy

lentigo maligna before treatment: as may be seen from the
micrographs (fig 3-5), the lesion in the third case before
treatment exhibited the following features: (1) active prolifer-
ation and increase in number of epidermal melanocytes with
formation of basal theques and presence of many melanocytes
suprabasally. (2) lymphocyte response and round-cell infiltra-
tion of epidermis. (3) amorphous material between cells, both
keratocytes and melanocytes; these 3 features led, in places to
considerable disorganization of the epidermis. (4) pleomorphy
of melanocytes with many exhibiting swollen and vacuolated
mitochondria, numerous golgi membranes, foci of necrosis in
the cytoplasm, indented nuclei, with large nucleoli; melano-
somes were in general ellipsoid in form and fully melanized,
though vacuolar or aborted melanosomes were present in some
cells. (5) isolated melanocytes in the dermis just beneath the
epidermis. (6) many dermal macrophages stuffed with mela-
nosomes, and round-cell infiltration of the dermis.

it must be stated that a number of the features listed would
be regarded as indicative of malignancy by some authors
[5-12].

lentigo maligna after treatment for 6 weeks: biopsy was
performed at 2 sites of different degrees of pigmentation. in the
less heavily pigmented area the picture was fairly uniform. the
epidermis was no longer disorganized to any extent, and lym-
phocytes or smaller round cells were only very occasionally
seen; the general level of pigmentation was considerably less
than before treatment (fig 6). whereas more basal melanocytes
were present than in normal epidermis, the ques were absent,
and suprabasal melanocytes few. some melanocytes were
shrunken and surrounded by amorphous material, or exudate,
and the majority of those present had significantly fewer and
less melanized melanosomes than those present previously. a
highly characteristic feature of many melanocytes was the
occurrence of numerous lipid droplets in the cytoplasm, and
most of the mitochondria were swollen and vacuolated (fig 7).

in the more heavily pigmented area the epidermal appear-
ances were more variable. whereas in some blocks they were
similar to that described above, and in places resembled even
more the normal, in others, they resembled more the condition
before treatment, though not nearly to the same degree of
abnormality. in one situation, appearances were as if a theque
of abnormal melanocytes, such as that illustrated in fig 4 of
the control, had ruptured into the dermis as a result of a build-
up of amorphous material or exudate between the cells.

fewer round cells and macrophages were observed in the
dermis, but the occasional dermal melanocyte was still present.
considering the overall appearances, a significant improvement
in the condition at the ultrastructural level was apparent, as
compared with the control before treatment.

lentigo maligna after 3 months of treatment: biopsy per-
formed after a further 8 weeks of treatment showed the general
organization of the epidermis to be practically normal (fig 8,9).
basal melanocytes were present in apparently normal numbers,
and, apart from swelling of some mitochondria of some cells,
june 1979 dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna 299

 

fic 3. lentigo meligna, case 3, before treatment. basal layers of epidermis and epidermal-dermal junctional region. the epidermis is
disorganized by presence of excessive numbers of abnormal melanocytes (m) of variable appearance, lymphocytes (l), and amorphous exudate
(ez) among the keratocytes (k). note also melanocytes in dermis. scale = 8 um (x 2,500).
300 nazzaro-porro et al vol. 72, no. 6

 

fic 4. lentigo maligna, case 3, before treatment. a theque of abnormal, pleomorphic, and heavily melanized melanocytes is present in the

epidermis. arrows indicate epidermal-dermal junction, which is disrupted in places. e, amorphous exudate; k, keratocyte, of which very few are
present. scale = 6.6 um (xx 3,000).
june 1979

 

fie 5. lentigo maligna, case 3, before treatment. melanocyte of
type predominantly and typically present in the lesion. the nucleus is
indented, with prominent nucleolus, golgi membranes (g) are numer-
ous, melanosomes are heavily melanized and mainly ellipsoid in shape,
and there is an area of necrosis (ne) in the cytoplasm. scale = 2 4m
(x< 9,500).

and the occasional vacuole of doubtful origin in others, ap-
peared morphologically normal. some melanocytes exhibited
minimal melanogenic activity, containing only a few stage 1
melanosomes, and on this basis, and by virtue of nuclear and
general cytoplasmic features, could be regarded as “young
cells.” others were moderately active, and melanogenesis ap-
peared to be proceeding normally with the production of mel-
anosomes of normal size, shape, and internal structure (fig 10).
suprabasal melanocytes were not present, and there was no
abnormal lymphocyte response. the epidermal basal lamina
was completely intact, and just deep to it, there were broken
fragments of previous basal laminar material, indicating repair
and reconstitution of the epidermal-dermal junction (fig 9).
melanin-filled macrophages were present in the dermis, and
there were still some melanocytes seen in this location.

normal skin: the great majority of melanocytes of both
subjects observed in all biopsies taken during application of the
cream presented an ultrastructural appearance well within the
range of normality as seen in control specimens taken at the
same time. isolated melanocytes, however, especially in biopsies
taken at 3 and 4 weeks of application (fig 11) exhibited degen-
erative features of a degree not seen in the present controls, nor
in melancoytes of normal skin generally. the ultrastructure of
the epidermal keratocytes appeared unaltered by application of
the cream (fig 11).

dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna 301

discussion

lentigo maligna is not a purely functional hyperpigmentary
disorder, but one in which there is active proliferation of ab-
normal melanocytes, and, ultimately, malignant transformation
[6]. whereas some degree of spontaneous regression can occur
in this condition, it seems highly unlikely that this could ac-
count for the present dramatic results. the lesions were present
for many years in each case, and for spontaneous regression of
this total degree to occur just as the  xxxd2537xxx  cream
was being applied, seems too great a coincidence to accept. it
seems reasonable to conclude that the improvements achieved,
ie., disappearance of abnormal melanocytes, and the re-ap-
pearance of normal ones with return to normal of the general
organization of the epidermis and reconstruction of the epider-
mal-dermal junctional region, was a direct result of therapy.

 xxxd3159xxx  is important from many points of view to establish
the precise mode of action of dicarboxylic acids in destroying or
eliminating abnormal melanocytes, but the present ultrastruc-
tural observations throw little light upon this question. the
abnormal, heavily melanized cells, predominantly present at all
epidermal levels in the untreated lesion had largely disappeared
by the time of the first biopsy, and more frequent biopsies
beginning closer to the start of treatment in future cases will be
necessary to provide further information and grounds for spec-
ulation. however, a feature of many of the melanocytes still
present at the first biopsy may provide a clue. this was the
occurrence of numerous lipid droplets within the cytoplasm.
isolated lipid droplets occasionally occur in normal and malig-
nant melanocytes, but never to anything like the extent seen
here. a similar massive build-up and confluence of lipid droplets
with subsequent cellular disruption has been observed to occur
in malignant melanocytes of harding-passey mouse melanoma
following intraperitoneal injection or oral administration of
dicarboxylic acids [13,14]. it may be that dicarboxylic acids act
by causing some form of fatty, or “lipid” degeneration of the
cell. the apparent association of diminished melanogenic activ-
ity with lipid accumulation within, and ultimate disappearance,
in turn, of this type of melanocyte, suggests a link between the
tyrosinase-inhibitory effect of dicarboxylic acids and a cytotoxic
effect, of, as yet, obscure mechanism. further observations in
this area are necessary.

the fact that application of the cream had no apparent effect
upon the great majority of melanocytes of normal skin, and
that essentially normal melanocytes reappeared within the
lesional area of lentigo maligna even as treatment was contin-
uing, is in line with the observation that, apart from an initial
stimulation of melanogenesis, dicarboxylic acids have no dele-
terious effect on normal human melanocytes in tissue culture
[15]. it would appear that the susceptibility of melanocytes to
the effects of dicarboxylic acids is related to the presence of
some abnormality as in lentigo maligna, and that it may vary
with state of activity or some other, perhaps phasic features.
the latter, whatever they might be, could account for the fact
that some melanocytes of normal skin are affected.

the ultrastructural observations in the present report are
largely confined to the interfollicular epidermis, and melano-
cytes of pilosebaceous units were not extensively investigated
because of the necessarily limited amount of material capable
of being investigated in a reasonable length of time by electron
microscopy. the clinical observations in the present cases
clearly show no recurrence 2 yr after cessation of treatment, so,
it seems reasonable to assume that the posttreatment condition
of the follicles was similar to that of the interfollicular epider-
mis.

the question of dermal melanocytes persisting after three
months of topical treatment obviously presents a matter for
further investigation. it may be that here we are dealing with
a question of depth and permeability, and should it in future
prove possible to administer dicarboxylic acids orally without
deleterious effects, another avenue of approach to this problem

could be provided.
302 nazzaro-porro et al vol. 72, no. 6

 

fic 6. lentigo maligna, case 3, after treatment for 6 weeks. compared with condition before treatment, the epidermis is less disorganized,
lymphocytes are absent, and there is little or no amorphous exudate between the cells. melanocytes (m) are still abnormally numerous in the
basal layer, but are much less heavily melanized, and many contain numerous lipid droplets (li) in the cytoplasm. scale = 8 pm (x 2,500).
june 1979 dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna 303

 

fic 7. lentigo maligna, case 3, after treatment for 6 weeks. this fic 8. lentigo maligna, case 3, after treatment for 3 mo. micrograph
shows typical feature of many melanocytes present at this stage. the of suprabasal regions of epidermis showing essentially normal organi-
cytoplasm contains very few melanosomes, but numerous round lipid zation with absence of suprabasal melanocytes and lymphocytes, and
droplets (these appear as empty vacuoles, the lipid having leached no evidence of amorphous exudate between the cells. scale = 4 um (x
away during processing). scale = 2 um (x 9,500). 2,500).
304 nazzaro-porro et al vol. 72, no. 6

 

fic 9. lentigo maligna, case. 3, after treatment for 3 mo. two fic 10. lentigo maligna, case 3, after treatment for 3 mo. basal
essentially normal looking melanocytes (m) are present in a normally melanocyte engaged in active melanogenesis, and producing melano-
organized basal layer of the epidermis. the basal lamina is intact. note _ somes of normal appearance. scale = 1.6 ym (x 12,500).
fragmented remains of previous basal laminar material (b) indicating
repair and reconstitution of epidermal-dermal junction. scale = 3.6 um
(x 5,500).
june 1979

fic 11. normal epidermis of volunteer following application of di-
carboxylic cream daily for 4 weeks. two basal melanocytes (m) exhibit-
ing degenerative features are present in the basal layer, but the great
majority of melanocytes were unaffected by the treatment; the epider-
mal keratocytes were also evidently not affected. scale = 5um (x
2,000).

 

ll.
12.

13.

14.

15.

dicarboxylic acids on lentigo maligna 305

references

. breathnach as, nazzaro-porro m, martin b: ultrastructure of skin

in pityriasis versicolor. giorn it dermatol 110:457-469, 1975

. passi s, nazzaro-porro m, boniforti l, merli m: determinazione

strutturale degli acidi grassi monoinsaturi della pelle mediante
gas cromatografia—spettrometria di massa. giorn it dermatol
112:463-471, 1977

. nazzaro-porro m, passi s, balus l: the monoene  xxxd2154xxx  of

human surface lipids and their relation to skin melanogenesis. br
j dermatol 97, suppl 15:16, 1977

. nazzaro-porro m, passi s: identification of tyrosinase inhibitors in

cultures of pityrosporum. j invest dermatol 71:205-208, 1978

. clark wh, heggeler b, bretton r: electron microscopic observa-

tions of human cutaneous melanomas correlated with their bio-
logic behaviour, melanoma and skin cancer. edited by wh
mccarthy. sydney, government printer, 1972,  xxxd486xxx -141

. clark wh, mastrangelo mj, ainsworth am, berd d, bellett re,

bernardino ea: current concepts of the biology of human cuta-
neous malignant melanoma. adv canc res 24:267-338, 1977

. mishima y: melanocytic and nevocytic malignant melanomas. cel-

lular and subcellular differentiation. cancer 20:632-649, 1967

. mishima y, matsumaka m: pagetoid premalignant melanosis and

melamoma: differentiation from hutchinson’s melanotic freckle.
j invest dermatol 65:434-440, 1975

. cesarini jp: recent advances in the ultrastructure of malignant

melanoma. rev europ etudes clin biol 16:316-322, 1971

. klug h, giinther w: ultrastructural differences in human malig-

nant melanoma: an electron microscopic study. br j dermatol
86:395-407, 1972 ,

curran rc, mccann bg: the ultrastructure of benign pigmented
naevi and melanocarcinomas in man. j pathol 119:135-146, 1976

hunter, jaa, zaynoun s, paterson wd, bleehen ss, mackie r,
cochran aj: cellular fine structure in the invasive nodules of
different histogenetic types of malignant melanoma. br j der-
matol 98:255-273, 1978

nazzaro-porro m, passi s, morpurgo g, breathnach as: identifi-
cation of tyrosinase inhibitors in cultures of pityrosporum and
their melanocytotoxic effect. proceedings of the xth interna-
tional pigment cell conference boston, 1977, pigment cell, vol.
4, karger, basel, 1979, in press

nazzaro-poro m, passi s, morpurgo g, breathnach as: effect of
dicarboxylic acids on harding-passey melanoma. j invest der-
matol 70:235, 1978

breathnach as, martin b, nazzaro-poro m, passi s, morpurgo g,
mann p, cooper j: effect of dicarboxylic acids on normal human
melanocytes in culture. br j dermatol 99, suppl 16: 19-20, 1978

announcement
the society for investigative dermatology, inc., change
of office address

beginning july 15, 1979, all correspondence relating to activities of the society for investigative
dermatology, inc. should be sent to: kirk d. wuepper, m.d., secretary-treasurer, the society for
investigative dermatology, inc., 14435 s. w. uplands drive, lake oswego, oregon 97034.
this document is a scanned copy of a printed document. no warranty is given about
the accuracy of the copy. users should refer to the original published version of the
material.
