232

is partly located on the exterior surface of the cell and (3) that
this component migrates on sds-polyacrylamide gels in an
anomalous fashion, similar to the glycoprotein. i conclude
that a polypeptide part of the glycoprotein extends through the
cell membrane to the interior surface of the membrane.

proteins in membranes

i have previously shown that component a, a 105,000 dalton
polypeptide, is situated in the lipid bilayer in such a way that
different parts of the polypeptide chain reside on opposite sides
of the membrane barrier®. component a does not rotate in the
membrane®. component 4, the glycoprotein whose molecular
weight is about 31,400, of which only one-third is protein’,
seems to be similarly built into the membrane: that part of it
carrying the carbohydrate is on the external surface of the cell,
while a different part of the same polypeptide chain resides on
the inner surface of the membrane. apart from this similarity
mcs ce tle macro e l (om mocmeaz lcos
molecules: the size of the protein moiety differs by about a
factor of ten. the fact that both of them extend through the
lipid bilayer—-and they seem to be the only major proteins on
the surface of the red cell—suggests that most, if not all,
membrane proteins which are partly on the external surface
of a cell will also extend through the membrane to the inner
surface of the lipid bilayer.

this glycoprotein contains about twenty-eight residues of
sialic acid per molecule’, from which one may estimate that

nature new biology vol. 231 june 23 1971

there are about 7 x 10° copies of it per cell (provided that some
1.2% of the ghost’s mass of 10~!? g is sialic acid?*, of which
about 70% is present in this glycoprotein®), this is very close
to my previous estimate of the number of copies of component
a per cell—about 5 x 105 (ref. 8). assuming that each is evenly
spread out over the surface of the erythrocyte, there must be
roughly one of each of component a@ and glycoprotein per
130 a square.

i thank the regional blood transfusion service in cambridge
for supplies of fresh blood.

received april 19, 1971.

! winzler, r. j., in red cell membrane, structure and function
(edit. by jamieson, g. a., and greenwalt, t. j.), 157 (lippin-
cott, philadelphia, 1969).

berg, h. c., biochim. biophys. acta, 183, 65 (1969).

lenard, j., biochemistry, 9, 1129 (1970).

phillips, d. r., and morrison, m., biochem. biophys. res.
commun., 40, 284 (1970).

5 lenard, j., biochemistry, 9, 5037 (1970).

® bender, w. w., garan, h., and berg, h. c., j. mol. biol., 58,

783 (1971).

weber, k., and osborn, m., j. biol. chem., 244, 4406 (1969).

bretscher, m. s., j. mol. biol., 88, 775 (1971).

bretscher, m. s., j. mol. biol. (in the press).

shapiro, a., vifiuela, e., and maizel, j. v., biochem. biophys.
res. commun., 30, 240 (1967).

zacharius, r. m., zell, t. e., morrison, j. h., and woodlock,
rab? ct ice; ee oe

weber, k., methods in enzymology (in the press).

ear tia s. a., and guidotti, g., j. biol. chem., 244, 5118

969).

sd

inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a
mechanism of action for aspirin-like drugs

j. r. vane

department of pharmacology, institute of basic medical sciences, royal college of surgeons of england,

lincoln’s inn fields, london wc2a 3pn

experiments with guinea-pig lung sug-
gest that some of the therapeutic effects
of  xxxd3219xxx  and aspirin-like
drugs are due to inhibition of the syn-
thesis of prostaglandins.

there have been many attempts to link the anti-inflammatory
actions of substances like aspirin with their ability to inhibit
the activity of endogenous substances. collier!:? calls aspirin
an “anti-defensive” drug, and is largely responsible for studying
its possible antagonism of the activity of endogenous sub-
stances such as kinins?’+, slow reacting substance in anaphyl-
axis (srs-a) (ref. 5),  xxxd83xxx ®, arachidonic
acid’ and prostaglandin f,, (refs. 2 and 7).

a possible mechanism for some of the actions of anti-
inflammatory acids was discovered by piper and vane!® who
found that lungs could release a previously undetected sub-
stance which, because of its action, they called “rabbit aorta
contracting substance” or rcs. when isolated perfused
lungs of sensitized guinea-pigs were challenged, rcs, along

with histamine, srs-a,  xxxd1903xxx , (pge;) and prosta-
glandin f,, (pgf.,) (ref. 11), were released. the release of
rcs, which could also be provoked by bradykinin and srs-a,
was antagonized by aspirin-like drugs, as was the evoked
bronchoconstriction. because rcs has a short half-life
(<5 min) it has not been isolated and its chemical nature is
unknown. however, the finding that  xxxd208xxx , a pro-
staglandin precursor which induces bronchoconstriction, also
teleases rcs from perfused lungs’? makes it possible that
rcs is a prostaglandin or has a structure intermediate between
 xxxd208xxx  and pge, or pgf,,. this release of rcs
and the associated bronchoconstriction are also antagonized
by aspirin-like drugs.

prostaglandin release can often be equated with prostaglan-
din synthesis'*, for many tissues can be provoked to release
more prostaglandin than they contain. the possibility arises,
therefore, that anti-inflammatory substances such as aspirin
inhibit the enzyme(s) which generate prostaglandins. the
experiments described below were designed to test this pos-
sibility. aspirin and indomethacin strongly inhibit prosta-
glandin synthesis; this may be the mechanism underlying
some of their therapeutic actions.

cell-free homogenates of guinea-pig lung synthesize prosta-

 
nature new biology vol. 231 june 23 1971

glandins e, and f,, from  xxxd208xxx  and the following
is based on the procedure of anggdrd and samuelsson!+.
lungs from four adult guinea-pigs were excised rapidly and
washed in ice-cold medium (a modified bucher medium
containing 20 mm kh.2pq,, 72 mm k.,hpo,, 27.6 mm
nicotinamide, and 3.6 mm mgcl,; ph 7.4). the lung tissue
was homogenized in an mse blade homogenizer at full speed
for 1 min with a tissue: medium ratio of 1:4. the resultant
suspension was transferred to a potter-elvehjem homogenizer
and further homogenized by six up and down strokes of the
‘teflon’ pestle. the homogenate was then centrifuged at
900¢ for 15 min and the supernatant fluid was used. fresh
homogenates were made on the morning of each experiment.

 xxxd208xxx  was dissolved in ethanol (0.1 m!./mg) and
diluted with a 0.2% (w/v)  xxxd3212xxx  solution (0.9 ml./
mg), thus giving a solution of  xxxd208xxx  of 1 mg/ml.
this was further diluted to 200 pg/ml. with the modified bucher
medium.

percentage inhibition

y
ao

bbo re teolae ney ti) bd)

fig. 1 concentration (4g/ml.) of indomethacin (@), aspirin

(m) and salicylate (@) plotted on a log scale against the percen-

tage inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis (assayed as pgf2,

on rat colons). the lines are those calculated for best fit.

numbers by the points indicate number of experiments. when

three or more estimates were averaged, the standard error of the
mean is shown.

flasks containing 10 pg of  xxxd208xxx  (0.05 ml.) and
lung homogenate (1 ml.) were incubated aerobically at 37° c
with gentle shaking for 30 min. a zero-time sample was taken.
the reactions were stopped by heating the flasks in a boiling
water bath until the protein in the sample coagulated (30-60 s)
and then diluting five or ten-fold with 0.9% (w/v) saline. the
samples were frozen if kept overnight, or kept on ice until
ere r ee

prostaglandin-like activity was assayed'* on isolated stomach
strips'® and colons!” from the rat, superfused'® in series with
krebs solution containing a mixture of antagonists’? to make
the assay more specific. activity was assayed by bracketing the
contractions induced by injections of diluted samples between
smaller and larger contractions induced by the standards. in
the dose range used (2-20 ng), pge, contracted the stomach
strips, but had no effect on the colons, whereas pgf2, con-
tracted the colons but had a much weaker effect than pge, on
the stomach sirips. activity was assayed on the rat colons in
terms of pgf,, and on the stomach strips in terms of pge).
but because pgf,, had a small effect in the pge, assay and
the enzyme preparation also partially inactivated the pge,
generated!*, less emphasis has been placed on the pge>-like
activity assayed in these experiments.

in some experiments, the reactions were terminated by
acidifying to ph 3 with hydrochloric acid and extracting twice
with ethyl acetate. the combined extracts were evaporated to
dryness under reduced pressure. the residue was taken up in
0.2 ml. ethanol and chtomatographed in the a i system?° on
thin-layer chromatography plates?! with markers of 5 ug
authentic  xxxd1903xxx , and f,, . the strips on the developed

pek

chromatograms corresponding to the marker spots were
separated, as was the area in between them. the rest of the
chromatogram was divided into 1-3 cm strips. each section
was scraped into a test tube and shaken with 2 ml. krebs
solution. the supernatant was assayed on the rat colons and
stomach strips.

the zero-time samples contained (per ml.) 60-150 ng of
pgf,,,-like activity and 120-750 ng of pge,-like activity.
this activity varied between samples of the same enzyme pre-
paration by less than 5% and did not increase when the enzyme
was incubated without  xxxd208xxx  for 30..min. incu-
bation with  xxxd208xxx  for 30 min increased pgf,,-
like activity by 220-520 ng/ml. and pge,-like ‘activity by
100-500 ng/ml., according to the enzyme preparation. varia-
tion between different control samples of the same preparation
was less than 7%.

tests for inhibition

results were expressed as the generation of pgf,, or
pge,-like activity (30 min sample activity minus zero-time
sample activity). to test for inhibition of prostaglandin syn-
thesis, varying amounts of indomethacin, sodium acetylsali-
cylate,  xxxd3219xxx  or other substances were added to the
incubation flasks in volumes of 0.1 ml. or less; inhibition of
generation by a drug was expressed as the percentage inhibition
of the control generation.

indomethacin, sodium aspirin and  xxxd3219xxx  all
inhibited the generation of pgf, -like activity. the degree of
inhibition varied from one enzyme preparation to another, but
with any batch there was a linear relationship between per-
centage inhibition and log concentration of indomethacin or
aspirin. the media used to dissolve the anti-inflammatory
substances did not influence prostaglandin synthesis. the
results from all experiments are shown in fig. 1. the idso
mtl col ecr aan es bee omy orrlu oem ic lm ny
aspirin was 6.3 pg/ml. (35 4m). thus, on a weight basis,
indomethacin was twenty-three times more potent than aspirin
as an inhibitor of synthesis of pgf,,, and on a molar basis
forty-seven times more potent.  xxxd3219xxx  was less
potent than aspirin as an inhibitor of synthesis of pgf2, -like
activity and there was much more variation in the results
(fig. 1). similar results were obtained when the activity of
the samples was assayed on stomach strips in terms of pge>.

hydrocortisone (50 pg/ml.) inhibited synthesis of pgf2,
and pge,-like activity by less than 20%; morphine (50 pg/ml.)
or  xxxd3050xxx  (50 jg/ml.)-had no effect. none of the drugs
tested decreased the contractions of the assay tissues induced
by pge, or pgf.,,; indeed there was sometimes a small
potentiation of the responses.

two samples (1.0 ml.) of enzyme were incubated. without
 xxxd208xxx : 1 pg pgf., was added to one and 1 pg
pge, ‘to the other. after 30-min of incubation, the activity
remaining was equivalent to 0.85 wg pgf,, and 0.6 4g pge>.

in experiments with two different lung homogenates, samples
containing  xxxd208xxx  (10 pg/ml.) were incubated,
extracted and the activity was separated by thin-layer chrom-
atography in the a i system as described. in the first experi-
ment, the zones corresponding to the prostaglandin markers
showed substantial activity in the control 30 min incubation
sample (160 ng pgf,, and 50 ng pge,/ml. original sample),
whereas the zero time sample showed much less (40 ng pgf2.,
and 5 ng pge,/ml.). similar samples incubated with indo-
 xxxd2817xxx  (5 pg/ml.) or aspirin (40 pg/ml.) showed little or no
increase in pgf,, or pge,-like activity over the zero-time
sample.

in the second experiment, lower concentrations of indo-
 xxxd2817xxx  (1 pg/ml.) and aspirin (20 pg/ml.) were used. -as
fig. 2 shows, indomethacin reduced the generation of activity
in the pgf, zone to 25% of that in the control incubation but
the activity in the pge, zone was only reduced to 78%. with
aspirin (20 pg/ml.) activity in the pgf, zone was reduced to

 
234

about 56% and in the pge, zone to 50%. further identification
of the pg-like activity in these experiments was considered
unnecessary, for the enzyme system was the same as that used
by anggard and samuelsson?*, who identified pge, and
pgf,, as the active products of the incubation.

fig.2 prostaglandin-like activity in samples of lung homogenate
incubated for 30 min with  xxxd208xxx  (10 pg/ml.), extracted
with ethyl acetate and separated by thin-layer chromatography
in the a i system. the chromatogram was divided into strips
and the zone corresponding to the  xxxd1902xxx  marker was assayed
on rat colons in terms of pgf 2. the other zones were assayed
on stomach strips in terms of pge,. the dotted lines represent
the amount of pg-like activity in the sample at the start of
the incubation. indomethacin (1 pg/ml.) and aspirin (20 pg/ml.)
reduced the generation of  xxxd1902xxx  and pge. a, control; 4,
indomethacin; c, aspirin.

the results show that the three anti-inflammatory acids
tested inhibit the synthesis of prostaglandins. it is not yet
known how the inhibition is brought about. if it is by com-
petition with  xxxd208xxx  for the active site of the enzyme,
this might explain why all of these anti-inflammatory substances
contain an acidic group. it would also explain why hydro-
cortisone, an anti-inflammatory substance of a different type,
has little or no inhibitory action against the prostaglandin
synthesizing enzyme(s).

correlation with therapeutic actions

anti-inflammatory acids have three principal actions; anti-
pyretic, anti-inflammatory and analgesic. they also antagonize
bronchoconstriction and some other smooth muscle contrac-
tions induced by substances such as bradykinin’ and have a

tendency to induce gastro-intestinal irritation. can any of
these actions be explained by a direct inhibition of prosta-
puedes ant ices

first, we consider antipyretic action. when injected into the
third ventricle of cats, pge, induces fever??:?3. it is the most
potent substance yet found with this action, being much more
active than 5-hydroxytryptamine, pge, or pgf24; pgfo,
has little pyretic activity. the antipyretic substance 4-acetamido-
phenol does not antagonize fever induced by pge,. these
carec ree esl mummies mmol eoe aes
in a fever is induced by synthesis and release of rcs or of a
known prostaglandin such as pge,, either in the temperature-
regulating area of the hypothalamus or at a place from which
it can reach this area. anti-inflammatory substances might
potts elt ccrt mh (o mya oca lcted arles mo rocie ta cengedh|
synthesis. a necessary corollary of such a mechanism of action
is that a prostaglandin whose synthesis is inhibited by these
drugs does not regulate normal body temperature, which is
unaffected by antipyretic drugs.

anti-inflammatory action can also be explained. an e-type
prostaglandin is found in exudate** during the secondary phase

nature new biology vol. 231 june 23 1971

of inflammation induced by carageenin in the rat. prostaglan-
dins, identified as a mixture of pge,, pge,, pgf,, and pgf,,,
have also been isolated from fluid perfusing the skin of patients
with allergic eczema?>. in rat or man, pge, or pge, injected
intradermally induces an inflammatory response?®. thus
abolition of prostaglandin synthesis by this group of acidic
substances may be a basis for their anti-inflammatory action.

analgesic action is less easily explained. although pge,
and pge, and larger doses of pgf,, and pgf., induce a
weal and flare response similar to that caused by histamine
release when injected intradermally in man?°, the only sub-
jective effect reported was a sensation of warmth and a slight
itching. it is unlikely, therefore, that any of these prostaglan-
dins mediate skin pain. thus, unless another untested prosta-
glandin or rcs is involved, there seems no link between a
peripheral analgesic action of the anti-inflammatory acids and
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.

prostaglandin infusions, however, induce headache’, so the
relief by aspirin-like drugs of such pain (or of pain induced
by inflammation) may be explained by an inhibition of prosta-
glandin synthesis. collier?* develops further the possible link
between prostaglandin production and pain.

the anti-bronchoconstrictor action may also be due to
inhibition of the synthetic pathway for prostaglandins.
we have already shown that challenge of sensitized guinea-pig
lungs or injection of bradykinin or partially purified srs-a
into ussensitized lungs induces the release of rcs, pge, and
pgf,, (refs. 10 and 11). because the release of rcs was
abolished by anti-inflammatory acids, as was the broncho-
constriction induced by bradykinin and srs-a (ref. 1), we
postulated that rcs may be the mediator of the broncho-
constrictor response. vargaftig and dao’? have shown that
 xxxd208xxx  also releases rcs and that the release is
inhibited by aspirin-like drugs and we have confirmed this
(unpublished work). at the time of our first publication on
rcs (ref. 10), we were unsure of the contribution that this
substance made to the contractions of the tissues used to assay
simultaneously the release of prostaglandins. we have
assessed this contribution recently; whereas rcs contracts
rat stomach strip, it has much less effect on chick rectum or rat
colon (piper and vane, unpublished work). re-examination of
the tracings from these experiments shows that aspirin-like drugs
not only prevented rcs release but also reduced activity on
chick rectum and rat colon, indicative of a reduced output of
pge, and pgf 24 (see, for instance, fig. 7 in piper and vane'®).

prostaglandin f,, is bronchoconstrictor*:?°, so the  xxxd2180xxx -
ism of bronchoconstriction induced by bradykinin, srs-a,
 xxxd208xxx  and so on may be due to antagonism of
release (which probably means synthesis) of rcs or of synthesis
and release of pgf, or both. the ratio of activities against
bradykinin-induced bronchoconstriction (indomethacin 2;
aspirin 1,  xxxd3159xxx  0.03; ref. 1) certainly fits with the
relative lack of activity of  xxxd3219xxx  against the form-
ation of pgf.,. until rcs can be stabilized or generated in a
pure form, however, its contribution to the process of anaphy!-
axis and to bronchoconstriction induced by anaphylactic
foie cl coy arece sts elm ere ier t

side effects

the aspirin-like drugs all induce gastro-intestinal symptoms
which may include peptic ulceration*®. prostaglandin synthesis
and release can be provoked by many different forms of
mechanical stimulation, including gentle massage’. con-
tractions of the gastro-intestinal tract churn the contents. it is
possible, therefore, that the associated mechanical stimulation
of the mucosa leads to synthesis intramurally of a prostaglandin
which in some way protects the mucosa from damage. inhibi-
tion of prostaglandin synthesis by aspirin-like drugs would
remove this protective mechanism.

whether inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis accounts for
all the activities of the anti-inflammatory acids remains to be

 
nature new biology vol. 231 june 23 1971

elucidated. clearly, the blood concentrations?! of indometha-
cin in man after an oral dose of 200 mg (7.5 pg/ml. at peak;
3.2 pg/ml. after 4 h), even when 90°% binding?! to plasma
proteins is allowed for, are higher than concentrations needed
to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis in these experiments.

one fact that needs explanation is the apparent lack of
activity of  xxxd3219xxx  as an inhibitor of prostaglandin
synthesis, for this substance has about the same potency as
aspirin in anti-pyretic and anti-inflammatory tests'. one
possibility is that salicylate is more potent as an inhibitor of
synthesis of pge, from dihomo-y- xxxd2490xxx  than it is of
the synthesis of pge, from  xxxd208xxx . certainly, with
the probability of a series of iso-enzymes synthesizing from
different substrates various prostaglandins (perhaps including
rcs) with widely different pharmacological properties, the
number of degrees of freedom is more than sufficient to allow
explanation of the variations in potencies and properties within
the whole group of aspirin-like substances.

there are several other implications of these results, some of
which are listed below. first, inhibition of prostaglandin
synthesis, perhaps using a more active enzyme preparation>?
than the one used here, together with different substrates, may
provide a simple and rapid primary screen for anti- xxxd2315xxx -
matory drugs of the indomethacin type. second, one of the few
simple in vitro antagonisms shown by aspirin-like drugs is
against  xxxd208xxx -induced contractions of some isolated
smooth muscle preparations such as the guinea-pig ileum’.
this suggests that some of the contractile actions of arachidonic
acid may be brought about by an intramural synthesis of a
prostaglandin. this problem deserves attention, as does the
possibility that bioassay of prostaglandins may be improved by
addition of a synthesis inhibitor, such as indomethacin, to the
fluid bathing the assay tissues.

there is also the possibility that use of anti-inflammatory
acids could be extended to ameliorate conditions thought to be
brought about by prostaglandin release. for example, some
evidence*? suggests that release of pgf, occurs during labour.
it may therefore be worthwhile testing an anti-inflammatory
acid as an inhibitor of unwanted abortion or miscarriage. it
would also be interesting to know whether these drugs reduce
the efficacy of the intra-uterine device which may work as a
contraceptive through prostaglandin release?*.

these results show that biologists now have a simple means
of preventing prostaglandin synthesis and release and thereby
assessing the functions of prostaglandins in individual cells or
tissues, or in the body as a whole. the conclusions described
here are supported by the results discussed in the next two
py a d(el (cae

235

t thank mr n. pitman for technical help and the wellcome
trust and medical research council for grants.

received may 6, 1971.

1 collier, h. o. j., adv. pharmacol. chemother., 7, 333 (1969).

collier, h. o. j., nature, 223, 35 (1969).

collier, h. o. j., and shorley, p. g., brit. j. pharmacol, chemo-
ther., 15, 601 (1960).

collier, h. o. j., and shorley, p. g., brit. j. pharmacol. chemo-
ther., 20, 345 (1963).

5 berry, p. a., and collier, h. o. j., brit. j. pharmacol. chemother.,
23, 201 (1964).

collier, h. o. j., james, g. w. l., and schneider, c., nature, 212,
vires) j

jacques, r., helv. physiol. pharmacol. acta,'23, 156 (1965).

8 berry, p. a., thesis, council for national academic awards,
london, 91 (1966). .

collier, h. o. j., and sweatman, j. f., nature, 219, 864 (1968).

piper, p. j., and vane, j. r., nature, 223, 29 (1969).

piper, p. j., and vane, j. r., in prostaglandins, peptides and
amines (edit. by mantegazza, p., and horton, e. w.), 15
(academic press, london, 1969).

vargaftig, b. b., and dao, n., pharmacology (in the press).

piper, p. j., and vane, j. r., in prostaglandins (edit. by ramwell,
p., and shaw, j.) (ny acad. sci., in the press, 1971).

anggard, e., and samuelsson, b., j. biol. chem., 240, 3518 (1965).

ferreira, s. h., and vane, j. r., nature, 216, 868 (1967).

vane, j. r., brit. j. pharmacol. chemother., 12, 344 (1957).

regoli, d., and vane, j. r., brit. j. pharmacol. chemother., 23,
351 (1964).

gaddum, j. h., brit. j. pharmacol, chemother., 8, 321 (1953).

aay n., vane, j. r., and wyllie, j. h., nature, 218, 1135

1968).

gréen, k., and samuelsson, b., j. lipid res., 5, 117 (1964).

willis, a. l., brit. j. pharmacol., 40, 583p (1970).

milton, a. s., and wendlandt, s. j., j. physiol., 207, 76p (1970).

feldberg, w., and saxena, p. n., j. physiol. (in the press, 1971).

willis, a. l., in prostaglandins, peptides and amines (edit. by
mantegazza, p., and horton, e. w.), 31 (academic press,
london, 1969).

greaves, m. w., sendergaard, j., and mcdonald-gibson, w.,
brit. med. j.,2, 258 (1971).

26 crunkhorn, p., and willis, a. l., brit. j. pharmacol., 41, 49 (1971).
7 bergstrom, s., carlson, l. a., and weeks, j. r., pharmacol.
reyv., 20, 1 (1968).

collier, h. o. j., nature (in the press).

james, g. w. l., j. pharm. pharmacol., 21, 379 (1969).

goodman, l. s., and gilman, a., the pharmacological basis of
therapeutics, fourth ed. (collier-macmillan, london, 1970).

hucker, h. b., zacchei, a. g., cox, s. v., brodie, d. a., and
cantwell, n. h.r.,j. pharmac. exp. therap., 153, 237 (1966).

nugteren, d. h., beerhuis, r. k., and van dorp, d. a., reel.
trav. chim. pays- bas belg., 85, 405 (1966).

33 karim, s. m. m., brit. med. j., 4, 618 (1968).

34 chaudhuri, g., lancet, i, 480 (1971). ;

35 smith, j. b., and willis, a. l., mature new biology, 231, 235
(eczaee

36 ferreira, s. h., moncada, s., and vane, j. r., nature new
biology, 231, 237 (1971).

aspirin selectively inhibits prostaglandin

production in human platelets
j. b. smith & a. l. willis*

department of pharmacology, institute of basic medical sciences, royal college of surgeons of england,
lincoln’s inn fields, london wc2a 3pn

platelets in the blood of volunteers who
have taken aspirin can no longer pro-
duce prostaglandins.

* present address: department of physiology, stanford  xxxd3504xxx -
sity, stanford, california 94305.

aspirin reduces the adhesiveness to glass of platelets in
citrated plasma’, reduces platelet aggregation by washed con-
sua cme ncl cmt etase lel cemmr-dece mb tcl usm gamo e cmy a meo)
aggregation induced by adp, adrenaline and thrombin?~°.
aspirin also inhibits the release from washed pig or human plate-
lets of permeability factors which differ from 5-hydroxytrypt-
amine and histamine and cause contraction of the guinea-pig
ileum®. one of these factors could be  xxxd1903xxx ,
(pge,). this compound increases vascular permeability’’*
and contracts guinea-pig ileum®. when washed human

 
