international journal of group psychotherapy

issn: 0020-7284 (print) 1943-2836 (online) journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujgp20

group supervision: an experiential approach
elizabeth e. mintz
to cite this article: elizabeth e. mintz (1978) group supervision: an experiential
approach, international journal of group psychotherapy, 28:4, 467-479, doi:
10.1080/00207284.1978.11491638
to link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00207284.1978.11491638

published online: 29 oct 2015.

submit your article to this journal

article views: 2

view related articles

citing articles: 3 view citing articles

full terms & conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalinformation?journalcode=ujgp20

group supervision:
an experiential approach

elizabeth e . mintz , ph .d .

this paper presents an approach to supervision that has been
developed and utilized by the writer over the past twelve years and
is based on the following principles :
1. given certain basic skills in psychodiagnosis and technique,
difficulties with group and individual therapy are most often due
to unrecognized emotional conflicts in the therapist, including, but
not limited to , countertransference in its usual sense .
2 . with the exception of the traditional "control analysis" for
candida tes in classical psychoanalytic training, supervision is most
effective when conducted in a group .
3. experiential methods for identifying and working through
these conflicts are frequently more effective than the conventional
supervisory approach, which is essentially didactic and is geared
primarily or exclusively toward enhancing the cognitive and technical abilities of the therapist.
before undertaking a fuller discussion of these considerations,
let me present a clinical anecdote in which they are exemplified.
the setting is a group of five therapists , ranging in experience
from one to six years, who meet weekly in my office. dorothy is
dr. mintz is in private practice, new york, n .y.

467

468

elz'zabeth e. mintz

presenting her patient , susan , whom she is seeing in group after a
preliminary period of individual treatment and who is an attention-stealer. susan comes in late , interrupts whatever is going on,
and offers unwanted advice. when group members express their
irritation, susan apologizes , withdraws, and hints that she may
leave the group. dorothy is aware of this interaction, but thus far
has found no way of handling it.
for ten or fifteen minutes, the supervisory group discusses the
situation . they can see - and they point out to dorothy - that deep
insecurity and dependency must underlie susan's behavior; they
can even suggest possible therapeutic stratagems, such as direct
confrontation in the group . but dorothy already understands
susan's neediness , and she fears that confrontation might drive her
away altogether. finally, i ask the supervisory group to behave and
react as if they were a therapy group while dorothy role-plays her
patient.
dorothy goes out of the room and comes back in the role of
susan. she is late ; she is clutching her handbag and does not
relinquish it when she sits down ; she makes a great show of paying
attention but interrupts inappropriately. the group, predictably ,
reacts with annoyance . as susan , dorothy remains unreachable
and behaves more and more obnoxiously.
every member of the supervisory group has at least one patient
who is somewhat like susan, and before long they forget their roles
and burst into laughter. dorothy laughs also. she says, "you do
understand that was a caricature? susan isn 't really all that horrible. she's much more subtle ."
" but you f eel she 's that horrible ."
" yes, right. i'm really sore at her . maybe i didn't know how
sore i was. well , i feel better. now i feel i can find a way to work
with her."
the therapist seems satisfied . by caricaturing susan , she has
vented her own irritation and now believes that she can handle the
situation objectively . but for the group and myself, there is still
no sense of closure . dorothy is capable and experienced and has
seen other patients resembling susan. why has susan triggered off
this countertransference?
we try another stratagem . "this time, dorothy , be susan

group supervision

469

again , but this time don't behave like her. instead, try to feel your
way into her . identify with her ; speak for what 's going on inside of
her instead of acting like her. "
again in the role of susan , dorothy goes out and comes into the
room . this time she says nothing , though she still clutches her
handbag. sensing her tension , the group is silent. dorothy bursts
into tears.
in the discussion that followed , dorothy achieved cognitive insight regarding her difficulties with susan with only minimal help
from the group and myself. susan's father for some years had been
a vegetable in a nursing home , unable to communicate. this was
not a reality deprivation for susan, an independent woman in her
twenties , but it was a psychological deprivation since her father
h ad never been emotionally available to her and now all possibility
of communication was gone. unconsciously the group, to susan,
represented her unavailable father whose attention she was
demanding in self-defeating, inappropriate ways. dorothy had
missed this dynamism , concealed as it was by obnoxious behavior,
beca use dorothy herself had lost her own father in early infancy ,
u nder tragic circumstances , and on an unconscious level had identified with susan , not only in terms of the emotional loss but in
terms of an ongoing need to deny the pain .
our work with dorothy centering around her patient susan had
gone th rough three phases. first , she had released and
acknowledged her irritation. second, she had gotten in touch with
her own pain, against which , like her patient, she had been using
the defenses of repression and denial. third , she recognized that
the use of her professional skills had been blocked by this unconscious identification with susan. understanding that susan was trying to use the group to gain the attention of which she had been
deprived , dorothy was now free to use the supervisory session to
work out an appropriate technical approach to susan's feelings
and her group behavior.
in conventional one-to-one supervision, if the supervisor were
sufficiently well-acquainted with dorothy's personal history to infer
th at there might be an unconscious identification with the patient ,
all this material m ight well have been brought to light on a cognitive level and discussed as countertransference . however , it seems

470

elizab eth e. m intz

unlikely that such a procedure would have had the effectiveness of
dorothy's immediate emotional experience.
there are two approaches to supervision. the traditional approach is that supervision should focus primarily , or even exclusively, on individual and group dynamics and on therapeutic techniques . the therapist is viewed as capable of taking an entirely objective position , and if the supervisor becomes aware of countertransference difficulties , the therapist is advised to work them
through in further personal treatment.
even in traditional psychoanalytic thinking , the concept of
countertransference has been extended to connote every conscious
or unconscious reaction of the therapist to the patient, including
those evoked by the patient 's character structure as well as those
evoked specifically by the transference . typically , countertransference is viewed as a hazardous roadblock to therapeutic progress ,
although there is also recognition that it can be a uniquely
powerful therapeutic tool in helping the therapist understand the
patient through deciphering his own reactions as evoked in the
therapeutic situation (racker, 1968).
as experienced group therapists know, the group situation does
not by any means preclude the development of countertransference . 1 indeed , in groups it is an even more complex phenomenon,
requiring great skill and integrity on the part of the therapist in
dealing with it. moreover, just as we know that a group member
may see the entire group as an accepting mother , a rejecting
mother, a protective father, a demanding father , or a gang of hostile or critical siblings (durkin, 1964), so the therapist also may
have a global group countertransference. we have all heard colleagues speak , perhaps casually, of "my favorite group ," "my most
difficult group ," or even "my most boring group. " in my opinion ,
no therapeutic relationship , group or individual , psychoanalytic or
encounter or gestalt or t .a ., can possibly be free of either transference or countertransference .
furthermore, given a minimal level of psychodynamic sophistication and technical skill, it is my contention that most impedi1
the term "countertransference" is used rather than the alternative term
"therapeuti c rel ationship" because in common usage the latter usually refers primarily to ove rt and conscious aspects of the therapeutic situation.

group supervz'sz'on

471

ments to effective psychotherapy are based on countertransferential reactions in the broadest sense , not only on specific reactions to
individual patients but on the evocation of the therapist's character
defenses. in a more positive sense, all of us know more about our
patients and about our groups than we usually realize. our theoretical knowledge, our subliminal perception of cues from the
patients' behavior, and our intuition teach us more than we are
consciously aware of. in effective supervision, this knowledge
comes to consciousness and can be utilized fully after the personal
projections, identifications , repressions, and other defenses inevitably evoked in the therapist have been identified . nor do i believe
that any therapist, however emotionally healthy and however
"thoroughly analyzed, " can possibly b e entirely free of his own personal reactions , even if this were desirable, which it is not since a
computer would not make a good therapist.
let me emphasize, however , that supervisory groups conducted
in accordance with these principles are not therapy groups. personal reactions are dealt with only insofar as they affect the therapeutic relationship, and no supervisee is ever required to reveal
more of himself than he chooses . with dorothy, for example, the
group did not try to explore her residual pain about her father's
death . it was left to her whether or not she wished to seek further
personal therapy.
in p r actice , once an atmosphere of mutual trust and ease has
been established in the supervisory group , supervisees are consistently willing to reveal and explore their feelings. often they
become aware that what seems to be a purely technical problem
conceals countertransference, and in some groups it has become
the occasion for good-natured laughter when a supervisee says,
"this time i'm sure it's really a technical problem." indeed, sometimes it is a purely technical problem; we do not make the assumption that all problems are based on unrecognized countertransference . as in traditional supervisory groups, considerable emphasis is
given to exploring diagnosis and character structure of the patients
a nd to the development of therapeutic skills.
the type of emotional catharsis followed by insight which was
experienced by dorothy is representative of what can happen more
readily in group than in individual supervision . it is sometimes

472

elizab eth e. m intz

assumed that a beginning therapist will find it more comfortable
to reveal personal anxieties and inadequacies in the traditional
supervisory dyad . in my experience , the reverse is true. the young
therapist , and often the more mature therapist, is supported and
encouraged by recognizing that his problems are shared by other
therapists and even by the supervisor. 2 also , his experience is
broadened by sharing the experience of others and by the
creativity which other supervisees often display in suggesting solutions for therapeutic dilemmas . perhaps most important of all, the
supervisory group as a whole serves as a balance to whatever doc trinaire , authoritarian , or personal blind spots the supervisor may
possess. no more than the therapist is the supervisor immune to
personal pitfalls. he must deal not only with the supervisee but
with the group and the individual patients whom the supervisee is
treating, and the complexity of this situation can well threaten his
own enmeshment in a countertransferential network. if the
tradition is established that supervisees may feel free to criticize the
supervisor as well as one another , this risk is minimized (mintz,
1968).
group supervision also offers special advantages in the supervision of group therapy , as indicated by some of the following
clinical examples , which may be subsumed under three technical
categories found useful in this supervisory approach .

1. the therapist role-plays the patient
this technique, as in the example of dorothy and her patient ,
susan, reveals the personality of the patient more quickly and
vividly than can be done by the conventional verbal presentation .
an extension of the technique , also exemplified by the dorothysusan incident, requires the therapist to identify with the patient
and to express the patient's inner feelings as he senses them, thus
bringing into fuller consciousness his own empathic awareness.
the technique of identifying with the patient also may enable
the therapist to make a clearer distinction between his own anxieties and those which belong primarily to the patient. jeffrey , a
• in beginning a new supervisory group , i frequ ently serve as a role model by
p resenting a grou p or p atient with whom i am experiencing difficulty.

g roup sup ervision

473

t alented therapist with six years of experience , 1s presenting
and rew , a young man who functions in society but is
unquestionably a borderline schizophrenic . andrew's social isolation h as been somewhat ameliorated through group therapy, and
in h is concomitant one-to-one sessions he is beginning to indicate a
readiness to deal with deep-lying anxieties. specifically, he speaks
of a fantasy that he is entering a long dark tunnel "leading to a
place unknown ."
j effrey recognizes that this is a signal that andrew is ready to
enter the tunnel in imagination and explore his fears. the tunnel
may le ad to the discovery of a buried childhood memory, a fear of
outrigh t psychosis , or possibly even the recollection of a birth
traum a . since andrew is borderline , jeffrey is uncertain whether
or not it is safe to encourage this patient to enter the tunnel.
in conventional supervision , we would have evaluated the
degree of andrew's present ego-strength and reviewed the techni ques by which a patient threatened with psychotic breakdown
can , hopefully, be brought back into contact with reality . but
jeffrey is already aware of these considerations . he is therefore requested to close his eyes and imagine himself entering a long dark
tunnel , "leading to a place unknown. "
jeffrey closes his eyes, goes down into the tunnel, and recounts a
series of anxious fantasies. at the end, he opens his eyes , smiles,
and says, "and i am a psychotherapist in a supervisory group!"
through the symbolic trip , jeffrey has explored some of his deep
fears and has returned to reality. he is then able to turn back to
andrew and decides - quite correctly , as a satisfactory therapeutic
ou tcome later proved - that his patient had offered a clear signal
of readiness to explore his suppressed anxieties but that in the
coun tertransference the therapist had become confused between
his own anxieties and those of the patient .
my firm belief is that when this type of confusion arises , it by
no means need imply that the therapist's personal anxiety renders
him ineffectual. countertransferential anxiety in the therapist ,
when based on empathy, is a sign of emotional responsiveness and
h u m an concern . only when the therapist 's anxiety remains
unacknowledged is it dangerous to the therapeutic interaction.
on e of the aims of experiential supervision , therefore , is to make

474

elizab eth e. m intz

this type of anxiety conscious and to help the therapist distinguish
between what is personal to him and what belongs to the patient.
in this group , since supervision rather than therapy was our concern , jeffrey was never asked to explore his own tunnel any
further. as with dorothy, we left it up to him whether or not he
wished to deal with its meaning in personal psychotherapy.

2. the therapist speaks his mind to the patient
despite increasing experimentation with authenticity (jourard ,
1964) , most of us deem it unwise to express our negative feelings
unreservedly toward patients . yet, such feelings do sometimes
exist. if they are unconscious , or only partially acknowledged, they
may be expressed indirectly and thus hinder the therapeutic
process . experiential supervision offers a means by which these
feelings can be ventilated and neutralized .
here is an example of what can happen when the supervisee is
instructed , in an approach suggested by the familiar gestalt
empty-chair technique , "speak to your patient. but don't talk the
way you'd actually talk in therapy . don't be responsible. just say
what you would really like to say, what's in your feelings , not
what's in your mind ."
the supervisee , john , was deeply concerned about a young
woman whom he had seen for previous treatment for more than a
year , and which had terminated with the patient apparently in
good condition . now two years later , she had reappeared for further therapy . under life-stress, she had regressed. she was spectac ularly promiscuous ; she was experimenting with hard drugs ; and
john was distressed because he felt he had failed in the previous
treatment. indeed , he felt so guilty that it was difficult for him to
discuss the case . w e had to spend some time reassuring him that
all of us had failures before it was possible to deal with his feelings .
finally he was able to imagine his patient in the empty chair and
speak freely:
"you little ingrate! i worked my ass off with you for over a year ,
charged you a ridiculously low fee , and look what you're doing to
yourself! why , you 're practically a streetcorner whore , and what's
more , you 're on your way to an o .d . and after all i did for you! "
it was a classical example of the gestalt principle that guilt can be

group supervision

475

resentment in disguise (perls, 1969) . with his resentment openly
vented and therefore diminished, it became less probable that john
would allow these feelings to color his management of the
therapeutic process . the air was clear, and we could now deal with
the patient's psychodynamics (which , of course, included a need to
defy authority as represented by the therapist) and with appropriate therapeutic stratagems.
this same technique (let yourself go, speak your mind) can be
dramatically useful when the therapist is having trouble with the
group as a whole. in supervision, jane presented her difficulty with
a group consisting of wives of alcoholics in a community situation.
jane finds this group extremely difficult, though she has had
several years of experience as a group therapist. despite her best
efforts, none of the women seems willing to discuss anything except
the personal hardships of marriage to an alcoholic husband. they
compete with one another as to whose lot is most tragic and show
no interest in obtaining insight or exploring behavior. jane finds
the group unrewarding and feels stymied .
the supervisor says to jane, "now please imagine that everyone
in this room, including myself, is one of the women in this group.
call us by their names. pretend that we're the wives of alcoholics.
but forget all about your therapeutic responsibilities and tell us
what you really think of us ."
it takes only a moment for jane to get into the fantasy . zestfully , she says, "of all the whining, irritating, martyred faces that i've
ever seen, yours take the prize! of all the nagging, complaining,
self-righteous ways of acting! you just make me sick!"
at this point the supervisor has a flash of insight and says,
" now at the end of every sentence, add the words, 'and what's
more , you drive me to drink!' "
jane complies, and after a few more accusations, she begins to
laugh . summarizing the insight which she spontaneously achieved
and which we now discussed in the group, she had been caught in
an unconscious countertransference. jane herself had no drinking
problem, but her father had been semi-alcoholic and her mother
was a martyr. however, jane's father was warm and vital and jane
had identified with him. she was unconsciously seeing the wives in
her group as mother figures who were to blame for the family situ-

476

elizab eth e. mintz

ation , as she had once blamed her mother for her father 's drinking
problem. with this awareness , and with her irritability relieved by
catharsis , she was better able to utilize her personal empathy and
her professional skills in the group.
the supervisor's flash of insight is worth noting. 3 she was aware
of jane's family background and was also sufficiently attentive to
recognize that jane's irritability with the wives in her group must
stern from a personal feeling-source , since it was out of proportion
to the actual situation . she also knew that alcoholics frequently
blame their families , especially the spouses, for their problem. she
put together all this information in what appeared as a purely
intuitive insight but which was actually a quick and creative synthesis of available data , much as all of us do as psychotherapists
when we are working effectively. in conventional supervision,
perhaps the supervisor might have arrived at the same insight , but
it is doubtful whether verbal exploration and theoretical discussion
would have had a comparable impact on jane .

3 . group members engage in fantasy about the patient
after a supervisee has presented a case which seems especially
difficult to understand , and usually after the supervisee has roleplayed the patient , everyone (including supervisor and therapist)
closes his eyes and spends several minutes in free fantasy about the
patient , which usually takes the form of pictorial images. this
method , of course, cannot be assumed to yield data which are
necessarily valid. it does , however , focus the creativity and
intuitive powers of the group members upon a therapeutic prob lem on which they already have considerable information , and surprisingly often the group fantasies are found to have a common
theme which offers a valuable new approach to understanding the
patient, the transference , or the countertransference. 4
here is an illustration of group fantasy following a special
variation of the role -playing technique in which the therapist is

3

in this inst ance t he su pervisor was t ina mand el , a fo rm er supervisee ,
using the experiential approach discussed in this paper.
• it h as been p ointed out (reik , i 936 ) that the a nalyst's fa ntasies may provide
a clu e to the p a t ien t's d yn a m ics. for inst a nce , if t he ana lyst finds himself hum m ing a tu ne , its t hem e ma y be re la ted to th e pat ie nt 's sit u a tion .

group supervision

477

asked to identify with the patient, then to describe the therapist as
the patient might perceive him.
martin is presenting his patient , carol, with whom he has difficulty in establishing therapeutic contact. carol is passive in the
group and remains so when criticized or challenged. in individual
sessions, she answers questions and assents to comments but seems
uninvolved. in her outside life, also, she is withdrawn and passive.
when martin is asked to identify with carol, he can produce
nothing except passive acquiescence.
all of us agree that carol is a classic passive-aggressive type, but
we can think of no solution. we feel stuck, just as martin feels
stuck with his patient.
to explore the therapeutic relationship, martin is asked to continue identifying with his patient and to describe himself as carol
might see him. eyes closed, lethargic, martin says, "well, he's a
nice guy, i suppose . . . trying to help me . . . he can't be really
interested."
"why not ?"
"well .. . i'm not very interesting. i'm not very attractive . he
probably has all sorts of girls interested in him. he's an awfully
attractive man ."
opening his eyes, martin looks surprised. "i never thought of
that ," he says . "she does complain that no desirable man could be
interested in her . it never entered my head that she would include
me!"
the group is now asked to close their eyes and allow fantasies to
drift into their minds, with no other instructions than that they try
in the beginning to center upon martin and his patient. this
process is usually allotted about five minutes , after which the fantasies are shared.
elinor sees a doll lying on its back, raising one leg after another
mechanically, like a walking doll which is lying down.
gary sees a person hanging from a tree.
tina sees a pierrot or harlequin in a white costume, possibly a
marionette , with a huge red heart on its costume.
martin sees a baby in a crib .
and i see a scene from the ballet "sleeping beauty" in which
the enchanted princess is doomed to sleep until wakened by the
prince 's kiss.

478

elizab eth e . mint z

there was an implicit common denominator in these fantasies .
in all of them, the central figure was helpless, passive , or
dependent upon outside forces. assuming that these fantasies
represented our intuitive response to carol, we agreed that she
probably saw herself as a marionette waiting to be manipulated by
her therapist. on the basis of martin's role-playing carol's perception of him , it also seemed that there was an unexpressed sexual
transference and possibly even a wish on carol's part that her therapist would bring her to life by a sexual involvement.
most important , martin himself could see the relationship
between carol's behavior in therapy and the hypotheses which had
emerged in the group. what he had seen as stubborn resistance
could now be better understood as a belief that her salvation lay in
total passivity , and he looked forward to working with carol along
these lines. as for the possible sexual transference , he did not think
that it would be wise to offer direct interpretations but felt that he
could work more tactfully and effect ively with this awareness.
here is another example of how group fantasy may further
therapeutic understanding . marya has worked for several years with
angela , whose progress has been gratifying. she functions well in
her profession , and after intensive exploration of her fear of com mitment , is enjoying a happy and stable marriage .
therapy, however , has come to a standstill because angela at
34 is constantly obsessing over her wish and fear to have a child.
consciously both partners want a baby, and they are financially
comfortable . the obvious possibility that angela does not really
want a family but is affected by social pressure has been explored,
to no avail.
the group discusses angela , getting further information about
her background , which in childhood had involved heavy responsibility for the care of three younger brothers. we saw that this must
be related to angela 's ambivalence about motherhood , but we
shared marya's feeling that some element in the situation was still
not understood . therefore , we tried a group fantasy , closing our
eyes and thinking of angela and waiting for images to emerge .
elinor saw angela as a child , chained to a tree in her backyard .
gary saw angela taking a sailboat out into blue water and
turning back .

group supervision

479

frank saw a young girl standing in a kitchen, stamping her foot
in frustration.
i saw an extremely large and unattractive plastic doll.
most significant, the therapist saw angela thrusting a knife into
the neck of her first-born sibling, whom she had experienced as
unbearably troublesome.
all the images were clearly related to angela's natural resentment at having to serve as baby-sitter when she herself was only a
child. this resentment had been explored in treatment . what had
remained unrecognized, however, was angela's unconscious fear
that she might hate her own baby as she had hated the first of her
three younger siblings. perhaps the baby would resemble this
troublesome brother! this was the element which marya had
missed for reasons having to do with her own personal history. she
was now ready to return to her patient and deal with the
therapeutic impasse.
supervision, of course, is not to be confused with treatment, yet
in some respects the processes are similar. most of us see selfactualization as the goal of therapy; in supervision, the goal is also
the fullest possible development of the therapist not only as a
technician but also as an empathic human being. supervision
should be experiential as well as cognitive, and in this respect the
supervisory group is of unique value .
references
durkin , h . e. (1964), the group in depth. new york: international universities
press.
jourard , s. m . (1964) , the transparent self princeton: van nostrand.
mintz , e. e. (1968), group supervision for mature therapists. ]. group psychoanal. & proc. , winter: 63-70 .
perls, f. s. (1969), gestalt therapy verbatim. lafayette, cal.: real people
press .
racker , h. (1968), transference and countertransference . new york: international universities press .
reik, t. (1936) , surprise and the psychoanalyst. london : kegan paul.

dr. mintz 's address:
500 w est end avenue
new york, n.y. 10024

