(cancer research (suppl.) 42. 3424s-3429s.
0008-5472/82/0042-oooos02.00

august 1982]

antiestrogen treatment of breast cancer: an overview1
olof h. pearson, andrea manni, and baha'uddin m. arafah
department of medicine, case western reserve university school of medicine, university hospitals, cleveland, ohio 44106

abstract
the nonsteroidal antiestrogen tamoxifen has emerged as a
highly effective, nontoxic endocrine therapy for women with
stage iv and ii  xxxg730xxx -positive breast cancer. ta
moxifen appears to act by blocking endogenous estrogen
action at the target tissue level rather than by suppression of
circulating estrogen levels.
in a series of 113 consecutive, selected patients with stage
iv breast cancer, tamoxifen induced objective remissions in
50% lasting an average period of 21 + months and a median
period of 16 months. these results are comparable to previous
results with surgical hypophysectomy.
recent randomized
studies comparing pharmacological doses of estrogen versus
tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with stage iv breast
cancer have shown comparable results with these two treat
ment modalities.
antiestrogen therapy has been shown to be effective in some
patients after prior endocrine additive therapy and, in particu
lar, after ablative procedures, such as ovariectomy, adrenalectomy, and hypophysectomy. it has been shown that circulat
ing estrogens are not completely eliminated following ablation
of these endocrine glands, which may account for the effec
tiveness of antiestrogen in this setting.
other endocrine therapies have been shown to be effective
after prior treatment with antiestrogen. hypophysectomy can
induce remissions in 60% of patients who initially responded
to tamoxifen and in 25% of patients who failed to benefit from
tamoxifen. recent studies have shown that  xxxd147xxx 
plus hydrocortisone may also induce remissions in some pa
tients after prior treatment with tamoxifen. this latter finding is
of particular interest since  xxxd147xxx  is thought to work
by blocking estrogen production, and the finding suggests that
tamoxifen does not completely block all endogenous estrogen
activity.  xxxd2136xxx  has been shown to induce remis
sions after tamoxifen or after tamoxifen plus hypophysectomy,
and there was no correlation between the response to anties
trogen and subsequent response to androgen.
because of its effectiveness and minimal side effects, tamox
 xxxd2315xxx  is considered to be an initial endocrine therapy of choice
in women with breast cancer. however, it has its limitations, as
demonstrated by the results of secondary endocrine therapies
such as hypophysectomy, medical adrenalectomy, and andro
gen therapy.
nonsteroidal antiestrogen drugs were first reported to be
effective antitumor agents in women with advanced breast
cancer a decade ago (1, 2). these drugs were novel in that
their mechanism of action appeared to be competitive binding
to the  xxxg730xxx  and blocking the entry of estrogens
1 presented at the conference "aromatase: new perspectives for breast
cancer." december 6 to 9. 1981. key biscayne. fla. supported in part by
usphs grant ca-05197 and american cancer society, inc.. grant pdt-48w.

3424s

into the target tissue rather than suppression of circulating
estrogen levels. the antiestrogen tamoxifen has emerged as
the favored drug because of its minimal toxicity, and a large
number of clinical trials have been carried out with tamoxifen
in women with stage iv and ii breast cancer which indicate that
it is a highly effective therapeutic agent. the purpose of this
report is to review some of the clinical studies with antiestrogens which may help to evaluate their role in relationship to
other modalities of endocrine therapy.
early studies showed that tamoxifen could induce objective
remissions in 30 to 40% of women with advanced breast
cancer most of whom had previously been treated with other
endocrine and/or chemotherapeutic
modalities (1, 27). the
results of our initial study in 113 consecutive, selected patients
with stage iv breast cancer (16), recently updated (15), are
shown in table 1. fifty % of these patients obtained objective
tumor regression lasting for an average period of 21+ months
with a median duration of 16 months. survival after the onset
of tamoxifen treatment was significantly longer in those patients
who responded to treatment as compared to those who failed
to benefit. overall survival from the onset of metastasis was
significantly prolonged in those patients who benefited from
antiestrogen therapy as compared to those who failed to re
spond (chart 1). tumor regression occurred in visceral, os
seous, and soft tissue sites with about equal frequencies.
patients with  xxxg730xxx -positive tumors had a signifi
cantly higher remission rate (63%) than did those in whom
 xxxg730xxx  measurements were not done (44%).
women who were more than 10 years postmenopausal had a
significantly higher remission rate (58%) than did those who
were less than 10 years postmenopausal (41 %). these results
of tamoxifen therapy in women with stage iv breast cancer
indicate a high order of effectiveness, which are quite compa
rable to our results in 200 women with surgical hypophysec
tomy where the incidence of objective remissions was 42%
with an average duration of 18+ months and a median of 16
months (14). tamoxifen administration did not alter serum
estrogen levels in postmenopausal women but did induce a
slight decrease in serum gonadotrophin levels. serum prolactin
and growth hormone levels were unaffected by antiestrogen
therapy (10).
tamoxifen induces remissions in premenopausal women with
stage iv breast cancer with an incidence and duration of
remissions which appear to be comparable to those of surgical
ovariectomy (13, 21). it is of interest that tumor regression
occurs despite continued cyclic menstrual bleeding in most of
the patients. this suggests that it is not necessary to eliminate
all estrogen action to obtain mammary tumor regression. ta
moxifen has been shown to induce a marked increase in
ovarian estrogen secretion, perhaps mediated by increased
pituitary gonadotropin secretion, which may counteract to
some extent the effects of the antiestrogen (10). thus far, all
cancer

research

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

vol. 42

antiestrogens

in breast carcinoma

table 1
overall results of tamoxifen therapy in 113 patients
reproduced

from breast cancer research and treatment (15) by permission of martinus nijhoff publishers.

patientsremissionsno

(mos.)mean

median21+
1623 (4-54+)a
(9-45)
changefailuresno.56849%50743duration

(mos.)mean'(11-71+)'(13-65+)(2-75+)median443311alive2023

+0
19remission5

40
39
'15+
+survival

a numbers in parentheses, range
6 p < 0.0005 versus "failures" group.

1.0

ãœo.
0.8

>
>
ac
d
(/*
z0.6

g

i

o 0.4
o.

remissions +
, no change

uj

>

<0.2

failures
1

23456789
years

chart 1. life table plots of survival from onset of metastasis for patients who
benefited from tamoxifen (remissions plus no change) and for those who failed to
respond, p < 0.001 (generalized wilcoxon test). bars, 2 s.e. reproduced from
breast cancer research and treatment (15) by permission of martinus nijhoff
publishers.

patients who failed to benefit from tamoxifen have subsequently
failed to respond to ovariectomy. although further studies are
needed, these preliminary results suggest that antiestrogen is
an effective initial endocrine treatment for premenopausal
women with stage iv breast cancer.
randomized studies
kiang ef al. (8) compared the results of tamoxifen versus
hypophysectomy in 26 women who had previously responded
to ovariectomy or to additive hormone therapy (estrogen or
androgen). in this small series of patients, the incidence and
duration of remission were similar for these 2 modalities of
treatment.
two studies comparing the effects of tamoxifen versus phar
macological doses of estrogen in postmenopausal women with
advanced breast cancer have been reported (6, 25). in both
studies, no prior endocrine therapy was used, and cross-over
studies were attempted. no significant difference in incidence
or duration of remission was found between estrogen versus
tamoxifen therapy in these 2 studies. the incidence of side
effects was much greater with estrogen therapy, and both
groups of investigators felt that antiestrogen was the preferred
initial therapy for postmenopausal patients.
randomized trials of  xxxd147xxx  versus antiestrogen
are reported in this supplement (9).
antiestrogen therapy after prior endocrine therapy
early studies with tamoxifen indicated that a response to
previous endocrine therapy (usually additive hormonal treat
august

ment) improved the chance of a second remission on antiestro
gen to 31 of 46 (67%) (20). in 34 women who failed to respond
to previous endocrine therapy, 5 (15%) achieved a remission
on antiestrogen treatment. similar findings were noted in our
initial study (16). when tamoxifen was used as a secondary
treatment after  xxxd1880xxx , stewart ef al. (25) noted the same
incidence and duration of remissions as when antiestrogen was
used as a primary treatment. two patients who failed on
 xxxd1880xxx  therapy responded to tamoxifen. ingle ef al. (6)
reported that, of 25 patients who had had objective tumor
progression without a regression on  xxxd1880xxx , only 3 (12%)
had a partial regression with tamoxifen as secondary therapy.
of 6 patients in whom disease progression occurred during the
withdrawal phase after  xxxd1880xxx  therapy, 4 patients re
sponded to tamoxifen treatment. kiang ef al. (8) obtained
remissions with tamoxifen as secondary treatment in 4 of 6
patients who had initially responded to  xxxd1880xxx  therapy. in
addition, 2 of 3 patients responded to tamoxifen after previous
remission on androgen therapy.
it has now been well documented that antiestrogens can
induce tumor regression in some patients after initial endocrineablative procedures, such as ovariectomy, adrenalectomy, and
hypophysectomy. in our study, 8 of 9 premenopausal women
who obtained objective remissions following ovariectomy re
sponded to tamoxifen as a secondary therapy. two of 4 pa
tients who had undergone combined ovariectomy-adrenalectomy subsequently responded to antiestrogen treatment. the
results of tamoxifen therapy in 29 patients who had initially
responded to surgical hypophysectomy followed by relapse
are shown in table 2. one-fourth of these patients obtained
objective tumor regression, and one-fourth had no progression
of disease on tamoxifen treatment with a median duration of
16.5 months. the completeness of hypophysectomy was doc
umented by finding undetectable levels of serum prolactin,
thyroid-stimulating
hormone, and growth hormone after pro
vocative stimuli. nevertheless, serum estrone and estradiol
were detectable at low levels (5 to 40 pg/ml) in these patients.
these results suggest that estrogens, even in small amounts,
can directly stimulate tumor growth in the absence of the
pituitary gland and that antiestrogens can counteract this ef
fect.
from these studies, it is apparent that antiestrogens are very
effective when used as a secondary form of endocrine therapy.
a response to initial, additive, hormonal therapy appears to
have predictive value for a response to antiestrogen as a
secondary therapy. it is now well documented that endocrineablative procedures such as ovariectomy, adrenalectomy, and
hypophysectomy do not eliminate circulating estrogens and
that low levels of circulating estrogens after endocrine gland
ablations may be effective in stimulating tumor growth as

1982

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

3425s

o. h. pearson et al.
evidenced by the high incidence of response to antiestrogen
used as a secondary therapy.

other endocrine therapy after antiestrogen treatment
the question as to whether antiestrogen in the dosages used
therapeutically (about 40 mg tamoxifen per day) can block all
estrogen action in vivo has been approached by observations
in premenopausal women and by observations of the effects of
other endocrine therapy after antiestrogen treatment. it has
been noted above that antiestrogen as primary treatment in
premenopausal women with stage iv breast cancer induces
remissions with an incidence and duration of remissions com
parable to the results of surgical ovariectomy (13, 21). these
tamoxifen-induced
remissions occur despite the fact that the
patients continue to have cyclic menstrual bleeding, and es
calation of the dosage of tamoxifen up to 120 mg/day some
times failed to induce complete cessation of menstrual bleed
ing. these observations indicate that antiestrogen does not
block all estrogen action at least in the uterus of women with
high circulating estrogen levels.
the results of surgical ovariectomy in premenopausal pa
tients who were initially treated with tamoxifen also provide
evidence that antiestrogen does not block all estrogen action
in the mammary cancers (12, 13). in these 2 reports, there
were 16 patients who failed to respond to initial tamoxifen
therapy, all of whom failed to benefit from subsequent ovarian
ablation. of 9 patients who responded to tamoxifen initially and
followed by relapse, 7 women subsequently responded to
ovarian ablation. thus, the response to tamoxifen seems highly
predictive of subsequent response to ovariectomy. since re
sponse to ovariectomy is considered to be due to lowering of
serum estrogen levels, these results would suggest that anties
trogen therapy was not capable of blocking all estrogen action
at the tumor level in premenopausal patients.
table 2
results of tamoxifen therapy in 29 patients posthypophysectomy
reproduced from endocrinology of cancer (12) by permission of crc press.
patientsremission
(mos.)19+
duration3

still
in remis
sion1

(4-63.5+)*
2152mean19.5+ (11-32 + )no.
no progression
6
15%27
failuresno.8
' median. 16.5 months (regression plus no progression).
' numbers in parentheses, range.

reproduced

1

surgical hypophysectomy has been carried out in 61 women
with stage iv breast cancer who were treated previously with
tamoxifen (12). the results are shown in table 3. of 28
postmenopausal women who initially responded to tamoxifen,
16 (57%) obtained further remission from hypophysectomy
lasting for an average period of more than 1 year. of 22
patients who initially failed to benefit from tamoxifen, 6 (27%)
obtained objective remissions following hypophysectomy last
ing for an average period of 8.5 months. the mechanism by
which hypophysectomy induced remissions in these patients is
not known, but, if antiestrogen therapy was capable of blocking
all estrogen action in these postmenopausal women, it would
seem likely that a pituitary factor was involved. there is new
evidence (see below) that antiestrogen may not be capable of
blocking all estrogen action in postmenopausal women and
that the effects of hypophysectomy might be due at least in
part to reduction in circulating estrogen levels.
a recent report by murray and pitt (18) has evaluated the
response of 53 women with stage iv breast cancer, who were
previously treated with antiestrogen, to  xxxd147xxx -cortisone therapy ("medical adrenalectomy"). of 16 patients who
initially responded to tamoxifen, 11 patients (69%) obtained a
remission from  xxxd147xxx . of 32 patients who failed to
benefit from tamoxifen, 13 (35%) had objective remissions on
 xxxd147xxx  therapy. the median duration of the  xxxd147xxx -induced
remissions was 12 months. these re
sults are virtually identical to the results shown above for
surgical hypophysectomy after tamoxifen therapy. additional
results of  xxxd147xxx  therapy after tamoxifen are pre
sented in this supplement (7). santen ef al. (22) have shown
that  xxxd147xxx 
not only suppresses adrenal steroid
synthesis but also inhibits extraglandular estrogen production
in postmenopausal women with breast cancer and thus lowers
circulating estrogen levels in postmenopausal women.
androgen therapy ( xxxd2136xxx , 10 mg p.o. twice a day)
was given to 33 women with stage iv breast cancer who had
been treated previously with tamoxifen and 17 of whom had
also undergone hypophysectomy (11 ). objective remissions
were obtained in 13 patients (39%) with an average duration of
11 + months. of 17 patients who had previously been treated
with tamoxifen and hypophysectomy, 7 obtained further remis
sions from  xxxd2136xxx 
for an average period of 10
months.there was no correlation between the initial response
to tamoxifen (or hypophysectomy)
and the subsequent re
sponse to androgen therapy. although the mechanism by which
pharmacological doses of androgen induce remissions in some
women with advanced breast cancer is unknown, these results

table 3
response to hypophysectomy after tamoxifen
from endocrinology of cancer (12) by permission of crc press.

remissionsremissions

stillsion1012failures1216937
(mos.)13+

tamoxifenfailures
to
tamoxifenarrest
to
ontamoxifentotalno.28221161no.16"6224%57271839duration3
of disease

(3-29)c8.5
(5-16)21+
)13 (20, 22 +
+no.

median, 11.5 months.
6 in 3 patients, only arrest of disease was documented.
c numbers in parentheses, range.

3426s

cancer

research

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

vol. 42

antiestrogens
suggest that it is probably not an antiestrogen effect or an
indirect effect mediated through the pituitary gland.
estrogen therapy (diethylstilbestrol,
5 mg p.o. twice a day)
has also been shown to induce remissions in a few patients
after previous treatment with antiestrogen. stewart ef al. (25)
noted remissions in 4 of 17 patients who had previously been
treated with tamoxifen with a median duration of about 6
months. ingle ef al. (6) observed that 9 of 33 patients (22%)
had a partial regression during secondary treatment with  xxxd1880xxx . this group included 5 of 11 (45%) with a prior response
to tamoxifen and 4 of 22 (18%) without a prior response to
tamoxifen. the duration of remissions was apparently rather
short since the "median time to treatment failure" was only 56
days.
virtually no information is available on the use of progestins
as secondary therapy after tamoxifen. we have observed ob
jective remissions in 2 of 12 patients who received  xxxd2557xxx  (40
mg 4 times a day p.o.) after previous treatment with tamoxifen.
these results of various endocrine treatments after tamoxifen
therapy indicate that ovariectomy, hypophysectomy, and med
ical adrenalectomy can induce a high percentage of significant
secondary remissions, particularly in those patients who have
had an initial response to antiestrogen therapy. thus, ovariec
tomy appears to be the secondary treatment of choice for
premenopausal patients who have responded to tamoxifen.
the impressive results with medical adrenalectomy in postmenopausal patients after tamoxifen as reported by murray and pitt
(18) appear to justify their conclusion that  xxxd147xxx 
is the secondary treatment of choice in patients who have
initially responded to antiestrogen. further studies of surgical
hypophysectomy after antiestrogen and  xxxd147xxx  are
needed to determine whether there is any further role for this
procedure in the management of women with advanced breast
cancer. of the responses to additive hormone therapy after
antiestrogen, the remissions induced by androgen appear to
be the most effective, and thus the drug constitutes the tertiary
endocrine therapy of choice.

in breast carcinoma

combination of antiestrogen with other modalities of
treatment
there have been very few studies in which antiestrogen has
been combined with other modalities of endocrine therapy.
mouridsen ef al. (17) studied the effect of tamoxifen (30 mg
daily) versus tamoxifen plus diethylstilbestrol (3 mg daily) in
122 postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer.
they found no significant difference in the incidence or duration
of remissions with these 2 regimens. ward (28) reported that
addition of a prolactin-lowering agent to antiestrogen therapy
of patients refractory to tamoxifen resulted in further stabiliza
tion of the disease, and 2 of 45 patients had an objective
response. in a small randomized study, settatree ef al. (23)
found no clear differences between tamoxifen versus tamoxifen
plus  xxxd372xxx . tormey ef al. (26) studied the effects of
combining antiestrogen and androgen therapy. subsequent
follow-up of this study2 indicates that there was some additional
benefit from this combination, but the results did not suggest
a synergistic effect or any advantage over the sequential use
of these therapies.
a comparison of antiestrogen versus antiestrogen plus ami
noglutethimide is reported in this supplement (7, 24).
a number of studies have combined antiestrogen therapy
with cytotoxic chemotherapy, and the results of these studies
recently have been reviewed by patterson (20). the early trials
suggest that there is no apparent antagonism between these 2
classes of agents. other studies have suggested that there is
no advantage in combining these agents and that sequential
use of these modalities may enhance the quality of life. osborn
(19) has postulated that the apparent lack of synergism with
combined endocrine and cytotoxic chemotherapy could be due
to the effect of endocrine therapy on tumor cell kinetics, which
could inhibit the activity of the cytotoxic drugs. he has pro
posed alternative designs for chemoendocrine therapy in which
hormones might be used as synchronizing or recruiting agents
to enhance the effectiveness of cytotoxic drugs.
discussion

antiestrogen as adjuvant treatment in women with stage ii
breast cancer
tamoxifen is an ideal drug for systemic therapy in women
with earlier stages of breast cancer (stage i and ii) because of
its high order of effectiveness and lack of significant side
effects. hubay ef al. (4, 5) have reported a prospective, ran
domized clinical trial of tamoxifen plus 3-drug chemotherapy
(cytoxan-methotrexate-5-fluorouracm)
versus cytoxan-methotrexate-5-fluorouracil
alone in 318 women with stage ii breast
cancer. the results of this study indicate that tamoxifen plus
chemotherapy was more effective than chemotherapy alone in
delaying recurrence in women with  xxxg730xxx  positive
cancers. fisher ef al. (3) have recently reported similar findings
with the use of tamoxifen plus 2-drug chemotherapy ( xxxd2562xxx -5-fluorouracn)
versus chemotherapy alone
in women with  xxxg730xxx -positive stage ii breast can
cer. further follow-up periods are needed to determine whether
antiestrogen can prevent recurrence in some patients or
whether relapse is simply delayed. these results suggest that
antiestrogen has a significant role in the systemic treatment of
less advanced stages of this disease.
august

the nonsteroid antiestrogen tamoxifen has emerged as a
highly effective, nontoxic endocrine therapy for women with
breast cancer. at present, it is probably the initial endocrine
treatment of choice for both pre- and postmenopausal women
with stage iv breast cancer. it has also been shown to be
useful as adjuvant endocrine therapy for women with estrogen
receptor-positive stage ii breast cancer.
clinical studies have shown that there are limitations to the
effectiveness of this antiestrogen in the endocrine management
of patients with breast cancer. the data suggest that tamoxifen,
with the therapeutic dosages used, does not block all endog
enous estrogen action in either premenopausal or postmeno
pausal patients. in premenopausal patients, although antiestro
gen may induce tumor regression comparable to ovarian abla
tion, these patients may continue to have cyclic menstrual
bleeding, and ovariectomy may induce further remissions in
women who have initially responded to tamoxifen. these re
sults suggest that optimal antiestrogen treatment in premeno
pausal patients may require ovarian ablation, aminoglutethim
ide, and antiestrogen. in postmenopausal patients, although
2 d. c. tormey. personal communication.

1982

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

3427s

discussion
tamoxifen may induce remissions comparable to those of sur
gical ablative procedures such as adrenalectomy or hypophysectomy, the aromatase inhibitor  xxxd147xxx  has been
shown to induce further remissions after initial antiestrogen
therapy, particularly in those patients who initially responded
to antiestrogen. these results suggest that tamoxifen does not
block all estrogen action even in postmenopausal women
whose circulating estrogen levels are lower than in the premenopausal patient. for the future, it seems possible that other
antiestrogen drugs, which bind with a higher affinity to the
 xxxg730xxx , might prove to be more effective in blocking
the peripheral action of estrogens in vivo. aromatase inhibitors,
which could lower circulating estrogen levels to virtually nil,
might also prove to be most effective. for the present, studies
on the combination of aromatase inhibitors and antiestrogens
would be most interesting.
clinical studies with antiestrogen have also provided some
insight into the endocrinology of human breast cancer. it seems
clear that estrogens play a major role in maintaining the growth
of some breast cancers, and this action appears to be direct at
the level of the tumor. whether other hormones, such as
pituitary hormones, play a role in stimulating tumor growth
remains to be established. the observation that androgen
therapy may be effective after antiestrogen treatment and
hypophysectomy suggests that other endocrine factors may be
involved in tumor growth.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

references
1. cole. m. p., jones, c. t. a., and todd, i. d. h. a new antiestrogenic agent
in late breast cancer. an early clinical appraisal of ici 46474. br. j. cancer,
25. 270-275, 1971.
2. european breast cancer group. clinical trial of  xxxd2692xxx , an oestrogen
antagonist in advanced breast cancer. eur. j. cancer. 8. 387-389, 1972.
3. fisher. b., redmond, c., brown, a.. wolmark, n., wittliff, j., fisher. e. r.,
plotkin, d., bowman. d., sachs. s., wolter. j., frelick, r., desser, r..
licalzi. n., geggie, p., campbell, t., elias, e. g.. prager, d., koonyz, p.,
volk, h., dimitrov, n., gardner, b.. lerner, h., shibata h., and other nsabp
investigators. treatment of primary breast cancer with chemotherapy and
tamoxifen. n. engl. j. med., 305. 1-6, 1981.
4. hubay. c a.. pearson. o. h.. marshall. j. s.. rhodes. r. s.. debanne. s.
m.. mansour. e. g., hermann. r. e.. jones, j. c.. flynn, w. j., eckert, c.,
and mcguire, w. l. antiestrogen, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and bacillus
ca/mette-guerin vaccination in stage ii breast cancer: a preliminary report.
surgery, 87: 494-501.
1980.
5. hubay. c. a., pearson, o. h.. marshall, j. s. stellato. t. a., rhodes, r. s..
debanne, s. m., rosenblatt. j., mansour, e. g., hermann, r. e., jones. j.
c., flynn, w. j., eckert, c., mcguire, w. l., and 27 participating investi
gators. adjuvant therapy of stage ii breast cancer: 48-month follow-up of a
prospective randomized clinical trial. breast cancer res. treat., 1: 77-82,
1981.
6. ingle, j. n.. ahmann, d. l., green, s. j., edmonson, j. h., bisel, h. f.,
kvols, l. k., nichols, w.c.. creagan, e. t., hahn, r. g., rubin, j., and
frytak. s. randomized clinical trial of diethylstilbestrol versus tamoxifen in
postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. n. engl. j. med. 304:
16-21, 1981.
7. ingle, j. n., green, s. j., ahmann, d. l., edmonson, j. h.. nichols, w. c.,
frytak, s., and rubin, j. progress report on two clinical trials in women with
advanced breast cancer. trial i: tamoxifen versus tamoxifen plus aminoglu
tethimide; trial ii:  xxxd147xxx  in patients with prior tamoxifen expo
sure. cancer res. (suppl.), 42: 3461s-3464s,
1982.
8. kiang, d. t., frenining, d.h., vosika, g. j., and kennedy. b. j. comparison

discussion
dr. naftolin: dr. pearson, the rate at which these lesions repair
themselves in the bone is very impressive. we have not heard about
the effects of depleting estrogen, either by binding receptors or by
preventing its manufacture, with regard to bone and bone mass. i
wonder whether in any of your studies you looked at bone turnover?
dr. pearson: we have not done special calcium studies. we simply
3428s

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

of tamoxifen and hypophysectomy
in breast cancer treatment. cancer
(phila.), 45: 1322-1325,
1980.
lipton, a., harvey, h. a., santen, r. j., boucher, a.. white, d., bernath, a.,
dixon, r., richards, g., and shafik, a. a randomized trial of aminogluteth
imide versus tamoxifen in metastatic breast cancer. cancer res. (suppl.)
42: 3434s-3436s, 1982.
manni, a., arafah, b., and pearson, o. h. changes in endocrine status
following antiestrogen administration to premenopausal and postmenopau
sal women. in: r. l. sutherland and v. c. jordon (eds.), non-steroidal
antiestrogens, pp. 435-452, new york: academic press, inc., 1981.
manni, a., arafah, b. m., and pearson, o. h. androgen-induced remissions
after antiestrogen and hypophysectomy in stage iv breast cancer. cancer
(phila.), 48: 2507-2509.
1981.
manni, a., arafah, b. m., and pearson, o. h. medical hypophysectomy in
advanced breast cancer. in: e. p. rose (ed.). endocrinology of cancer, vol.
3. west palm beach, fla.: crc press, in press, 1982.
manni, a., and pearson. o. h. antiestrogen-induced
remissions in premen
opausal women with stage iv breast cancer: effects on ovarian function.
cancer treat. rep., 64. 779-785. 1980.
manni, a., pearson, o. h., brodkey, j., and marshall, j. s. trans-sphenoidal
hypophysectomy in breast cancer: evidence for an individual role of pituitary
and gonadal hormones in supporting tumor growth. cancer (phila.), 44:
2330-2337,
1979.
manni, a., pearson, o. h., marshall, j. s., and arafah, b. m. sequential
endocrine therapy and chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer: effects
on survival. breast cancer res. treat.. 1: 97-103, 1981.
manni, a., trujillo, j. e., marshall, j. s., brodkey, j., and pearson, o. h.
antihormone treatment of stage iv breast cancer. cancer (phila.), 43: 444450, 1979.
mouridsen, h. t., salimtschik, m., dombernowsky, p., gelshoj, k.. palshof.
t., rorth, m., daennfeldt, j. l., and rose, c. therapeutic effect of tamoxifen
versus combined tamoxifen and diethylstilbestrol in advanced breast cancer
in postmenopausal women. in: h. t. mouridsen and t. palshof (eds.). breast
cancer: experimental and clinical aspects, pp. 107-110. elmsford, n. y.:
pergamon press, 1980.
murray, r. m. l., and pitt, p. medical adrenalectomy in patients with
advanced breast cancer resistant to anti-oestrogen treatment. breast cancer
res. treat., ã•.91-95, 1981.
osborn, c. k. combined chemo-hormonal
therapy in breast cancer: a
hypothesis. breast cancer res. treat. ). 121-123, 1981.
patterson, j. s. "nolvadex" (tamoxifen) as an anti-cancer agent in humans.
in: r. l. sutherland and v. c. jordan (eds.), non-steroidal antiestrogens,
pp. 453-472. new york: academic press, inc., 1981.
pritchard, k. i., thomson, d. b., myers, r. e.. sutherland, d. j. a., mobbs,
b. g., and meakin, j. w. tamoxifen therapy in premenopausal patients with
metastatic breast cancer. cancer treat. rep., 64: 787-796. 1980.
santen, r. j., santner, s. j., davis, b., veldhuis, j., samojlik, e., and ruby,
e.  xxxd147xxx 
inhibits extraglandular estrogen production in post
menopausal women with breast cancer. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 47:
1257-1265,
1978.
settatree, r. s., butt, w. p.. london, d. r., holme, g. m., and morrison, j.
m. tamoxifen and bromocriptine combination in advanced breast cancer.
in: proceedings of the twelfth international congress on cancer, buenos
aires, pp. 3-79, 1978.
smith, i. e., harris. a. l., morgan, m., gazet, j.-c.. and mckinna. j. a.
tamoxifen versus  xxxd147xxx  versus combined tamoxifen and ami
noglutethimide in the treatment of advanced breast carcinoma. cancer res.
(suppl.), 42: oooos-oooos,1982.
stewart, h. j., forrest, a. p. m., gunn, j. m., hamilton, t., langland, a. o.,
mcfadyen, i. j., raab, g., and roberts, m. m. the tamoxifen trial. a double
blind comparison with stilbesterol in postmenopausal women with advanced
breast cancer. in: h. t. mouridsen and t. palshof (eds.), breast cancerâ€”
experimental and clinical aspects, pp. 83-88. elmsford. n. y.: pergamon
press, 1980.
tormey, d. c., simon, r. m., lippman, m. e. bull, j. m., and myers, c. e.
evaluation of tamoxifen dose in advanced breast cancer: a progress report.
cancer treat. rep., 60. 1451-1459,
1976.
ward, h. w. c. anti-oestrogenic therapy for breast cancer: a trial of tamox
 xxxd2315xxx  at two dose levels. br. med. j.. 1:13-14,
1973.
ward, h. w. c. combined anti-prolactin and anti-oestrogen therapy for
breast carcinoma. clin. oncol.. 3. 91-95, 1977.

observed that the bone heals, can remodel itself, and can return to
normal. results in bone are about the same as in visceral lesions and
soft tissue lesions with the antiestrogens.
dr. naftolin: when people are on tam' tor years at a time, do they
show any evidence of osteoporosis?

1the abbreviations

used are: tam. tamoxifen; er,  xxxg730xxx .
cancer

research

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

vol.

42

antiestrogen treatment of breast cancer: an overview
olof h. pearson, andrea manni and baha'uddin m. arafah
cancer res 1982;42:3424s-3428s.

updated version

e-mail alerts
reprints and
subscriptions
permissions

access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/42/8_supplement/3424s

sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
to order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the aacr publications
department at pubs@aacr.org.
to request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/42/8_supplement/3424s.
click on "request permissions" which will take you to the copyright clearance center's (ccc)
rightslink site.

downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on october 15, 2019. © 1982 american association for cancer
research.

