downloaded from http://adc.bmj.com/ on february 27, 2015 - published by group.bmj.com

archives of disease in childhood, 1980, 55, 857-860

penicillin allergy: anti-penicillin ige antibodies and
immediate hypersensitivity skin reactions employing
major and minor determinants of penicillin
r k chandra, s a joglekar, and e tomas
department ofpaediatrics, memorial university of newfoundland, and dr charles a janeway
child health centre, st john's, newfoundland, canada

300 children considered to have had adverse reactions to penicillin were examined.
informed consent was obtained from the parents. skin tests were conducted by the scratch/prick
and intradermal techniques, using  xxxd316xxx  conjugate and a mixture of minor
determinants of penicillin. specific anti-penicillin ige antibodies were estimated by the radioallergosorbent test. there was a good correlation between the two methods. the overall frequency of
positive tests was 19%. 11 children showed cutaneous reactivity only to the minor determinants
mixture. positive results were found more often in those with accelerated adverse reactions, particularly anaphylaxis, serum sickness, angio-oedema, or urticaria. the validity of penicillin-negative
results was confirmed by drug challenge in 56 subjects, only 2 of whom showed a slight skin rash.
of 5 patients with positive tests, inadvertent administration of penicillin produced accelerated
urticaria in all. 14 of 42 children with positive tests had lost hypersensitivity to penicillin one year
later. in a separate group of 50 children with a history of adverse response to ampicillin, the overall
frequency of positive tests was 12%; 38% showed evidence of recent e-b virus infection. it was
concluded that penicillin allergy is often overdiagnosed. the diagnosis can be reliably confirmed by
skin tests using major and minor determinants of  xxxd2871xxx  and by the radioallergosorbent
test; such hypersensitivity is not permanent.
summary

allergy to penicillin is the most frequently diagnosed
drug adverse reaction. in our hospital, 8 % of all
patients are alleged to have hypersensitivity to
penicillin. since the penicillin group of antibiotics is
the safest and most effective antibacterial, it is
desirable to find out whether a patient is allergic to
the drug. apart from clinical history, there are two
methods for confirming or excluding the diagnosis:
(1) skin tests using major and minor determinants
of penicillin*.l3 (2) penicilloyl-specific ige anti-

bodies measured by the radioallergosorbent test

(ra,sr).4 we have investigated a large series of
children using both these methods and find that
penicillin allergy is frequently overdiagnosed; only
19% of them showed positive tests.

subjects and methods

300 children attending the hospital as outpatients or
inpatients were referred to one of us (rkc) for
*the generic term penicillin is used for the entire group of evaluation of suspected allergy to penicillin. an
natural and semisynthetic penicillins. the basic structure of additional 50 children with alleged allergy to
the compound consists of a thiazolidine ring connected to a ampicillin were tested separately. any child who was
beta-lactam ring to which is attached a side chain. the
integrity of the penicillin nucleus, 6-aminopenicillanic acid, known to have had penicillin without any adverse
is essential for biological activity. penicillinase breaks down reaction since the earlier diagnosis of penicillin
the molecule to penicilloic acids. hypersensitivity can occur hypersensitivity was excluded. informed consent was
to the 'major determinant' penicilloyl polylysine (called obtained from the parents. the study protocol had
'major' because of the frequency with which hyperactivity
to this compound underlies allergic reactions to penicillin), been approved by the human experimentation
to the 'minor determinants' (metabolic degradation products committees of the hospital and the university.
of penicillin; these are called 'minor' because of the relative
a detailed history of the suspected adverse reaction
infrequency of allergy to these compounds, although the to penicillins was obtained from the parents; this
severity of adverse reaction can vary from slight to fatal), or was supplemented by information obtained from the
to both. for further information on immunochemistry of
attending physician or hospital records, or both. the
penicillin hypersensitivity, see clarke et al.6
857

downloaded from http://adc.bmj.com/ on february 27, 2015 - published by group.bmj.com

858 chandra, joglekar, and tomas
indications for treatment with penicillin were upper
respiratory infection (in 153), otitis (101), sore throat
(54), pneumonia (26), urinary infection (18), and
skin infection (12). the following reagents were used
for skin tests:  xxxd316xxx  (kremersurban) in a concentration of 6 x 10-5 mol/l, minor
determinant mixture (mdm) containing sodium
 xxxd2871xxx , sodium d-benzylpenicilloate, and
sodium d-benzylpenilloate each in a concentration
of 1 x 10-2 mol/l. in some children, mdm of
ampicillin was also used. all test reagents were
dissolved in sterile 0.01 mol/l phosphate buffer and
0 15 mol/l  xxxd3213xxx . phosphate-buffered
saline was used as a negative control and to rule out
skin reactions due to dermatographism.
skin testing was done on the inner volar surface of
the forearm. in each child, a scratch or prick test was
performed initially. if there was no reaction to the
scratch or prick test within 10 minutes, an intradermal
test was performed by injecting 0 03 ml of the
material intracutaneously with a 26 gauge needle on
a tuberculin syringe. the patients were observed for
at least 20 minutes. a weal reaction of 3 mm larger
than that of the saline control was considered to be
positive. skin tests were deferred if the adverse
reaction to penicillin had taken place within the
previous month, or if the patient had received antihistamines or corticosteroids within the preceding
48 hours.
blood was obtained from each patient and the
serum stored at -200c for up to 4 weeks until the
in vitro tests were performed. immunoglobulins were
estimated immunochemically by the method of
single radial diffusion in agar or nephelometry using
monospecific antiserum (hyland). ige was estimated
by radioimmunoassay (pharmacia). rast was
performed using  xxxd316xxx  and phenoxymethylpenicilloyl conjugated to human serum
albumin, and coupled to cyanogen bromideactivated cellulose paper discs (pharmacia).

significant correlation between immediate hypersensitivity skin tests and the in vitro technique for
estimating ige antibodies to penicillin, both were
positive or negative in 7800 of patients. 11 children
showed a positive reaction only to mdm. positive
results were obtained more often in those who had
recently been treated with penicillin (table 2), in
those with an accelerated adverse reaction (table 3),
and if the hypersensitivity manifested as anaphylaxis,
angio-oedema, serum sickness, or urticaria (table 4).
total serum ige was raised in 42 subjects but this
did not correlate with the presence of antipenicillinspecific ige antibodies or with positive skin tests.
many individuals with total serum ige within the
normal range had evidence of penicillin hypersensitivity as judged by rast or cutaneous reactions.
the validity of the testing procedures was shown
by subsequent drug challenge in 56 children with
negative tests; only 2 showed a slight erythematous,
non-itchy skin rash. the inadvertent administration
table 2 relationiship of positive r-esults to tiimte
elapsed since adver-se reaction
percentage of children with
positive results

time interval (months)

18-6

1 -3
4-12

9.3
4-5
1-9

13-60
>60

table 3 relationship of positive results to speed of

adverse reaction
duration of treatment with

penicillin before adverse reaction

percentage of children with
positive results

(hours)
12
13-24
25-48
49-72
>72

21-2
11.9
6.3
2-1
1*9

<

results

the overall frequency of positive tests skin reaction,
rast, or both-was 190% (table 1). there was a
table

1

table 4 relationship of positive r esults to the nature
of adverse reaction
manifestation

no tested

incidence of positive tests for penicillin allergy

procedure
skin tests
major determinant
minor determinants

both
rast
skin tests + rast
skin tests only
rast only

children with positive

accelerated skin rash*
delayed skin rasht
urticaria
angio-oedema
serum sickness
anaphylaxis
others

48 (16)*
11

7
42 (14)

)

9 (3)

j

*percentage of the total number of 300 children.

no

%

17
9
18
8
2
3
_

25
5.6
36.7
54.4
100
100
_

tests

30

33 (11)
15 (5)

children with positive
results

68
159
49
15
2
3
4

.57 (19)

*skin rash appearing within 24 hours of starting treatment with
penicillin.tskin rash observed more than 24 hours after starting
treatment with penicillin.

downloaded from http://adc.bmj.com/ on february 27, 2015 - published by group.bmj.com

penicillin allergy 859

of penicillin in 5 patients with positive tests resulted discussion
in rapid generalised urticaria in each (table 5).
in 42 children with positive tests, the procedures estimates of the incidence of allergy to penicillins
were repeated one year later. 14 showed negative range from 1 to 10% of all patients given this antiresponses at the time of rechallenge and were given biotic. in addition to its extensive use in medicine,
there is constant human exposure to penicillin from
penicillin without any adverse reaction.
of foods and from penicillincontamination
to
response
adverse
with
the data on 50 children
ampicillin were analysed separately (table 6). it was producing ubiquitous organisms in the environment.
found that 38% of children who had developed a many different degradation products of penicillin
maculopapular skin rash after the administration of are implicated in penicillin allergy. the most
ampicillin had evidence of past epstein-barr virus frequently incriminated is the penicilloyl group, the
infection, as shown by positive mono spot test or by so-called 'major determinant'. it should be stressed
immunofluorescent demonstration of antibody to however, that reactivity to degradation products of
e-b virus. the use of mdm ampicillin did not penicillin, the so called 'minor determinants', may
be severe. there is the suggestion that mdm
increase the number of positive tests.
the various allergic and immunological disorders reactivity is more often associated with severe
incidentally found in the study group are shown in anaphylactic reactions. in our study group, the
diagnosis of penicillin hypersensitivity might have
table 7.
been missed in 11 patients if mdm had not been
included as a test substance. there was a significant
table 5 drug challenge
correlation between skin reactions and rast, both
tests were positive or negative in 78 % of patients. in
children with adverse reaction
rast
total skin
no
tests
another
report, skin tests performed with penicilloylno
clinical features
polylysine slhowed an overall correlation of 91 -5%
erythematous non-itchy skin
56
negative negative 2
with rast results.6
rash
in this study, several clinical correlates of obaccelerated urticaria, one with
3
positive positive 3
taining positive tests were observed. positive tests
angio-oedema
1
accelerated urticaria
negative positive 1
were seen more often in those with a recent history of
1
accelerated urticaria
positive* negative 1
drug adverse reaction. moreover, of 42 children with
*this child had reacted only to mdm.
positive tests who were checked again a year later,
14 had lost their reactivity to penicillin. this may
reflect the progressive decline in the titre of penicillintable 6 incidence of positive tests in children with
adverse reaction to ampicillin
specific ige antibodies with time. in some studies, the
of positive skin reactivity had declined
frequency
chlildren with positive tests
procedure
greatly when the tests were done several years later.
5 (10)*
skin tests
wide and jublin7 obtained positive skin tests and
3
major detenininant
anti-penicillin ige antibodies in all of 11 patients with
2
md'.1---riylpenicillin
2
mdm-am',icilin
a recent episode of anaphylaxis or urticaria after
4 (8)
rast
treatment with penicillin but in none of the 12 patients
3 (6)
skin tests + rast
2 (4)
-6 (12)
skin tests only
with similar reactions 7 months to 14 years before
1 (2)
j
rast only
testing. in another study, the frequency of positive
19 (38)
antibodies to e-b virus
skin reactions decreased from 77 % at 3 months after
*percentage of the total number of 50 children.
the adverse reaction, to 25 % after 5 years.8 on the
two children reacted to mdm- xxxd2871xxx  as well as to mdmother hand, the american academy of allergy study
ampicillin.
group9 found a lack of strong correlation between
the
results of skin testing and the interval of time
table 7 associated allergic and immunological
since the earlier penicillin reaction. we did not find
disorders
any correlation between age and the frequency of
no ( 7)
disorder
positive reactions.
27 (7. 7)*
eczema
we observed that penicillin hypersensitivity tests
26 (7.4)
asthma
were more often positive in individuals with a history
19 (5.4)
rhinitis
of accelerated adverse reactions occurring within 24
17 (4*8)
urticaria
9 (2-5)
allergy to other drugs
hours
of starting treatment with penicillin. delayed
common varied immunodeficiency 16 (4*5)
reactions are likely to be mediated by immuno7 (2-0)
selective iga deficiency
other than ige-related hyper*percentage of the total number of 350 children. some children had logical mechanisms
sensitivity. these symptoms include frequently
more than one clinical manifestation.

downloaded from http://adc.bmj.com/ on february 27, 2015 - published by group.bmj.com

860 chandra, joglekar, and tomas

encountered polymorphic skin rashes, including
erythema multiforme, and maculopapular and
erythematous rashes.
the relatively small number of positive responses
obtained in this study may be due to a number of
factors. in some patients, tests were performed
several months to 7 years after the suspected penicillin adverse reaction. penicillin-specific ige antibodies could have declined to a level insufficient to
produce a skin reaction or to be detected by rast.
however, it is  xxxd3237xxx  whether further
exposure to penicillin might once again induce
clinically relevant hypersensitivity. the most common
adverse reaction was a skin rash, a symptom with the
least yield in terms of positive skin tests or rast,
it is quite probable that many of these skin rashes,
particularly maculopapular and polymorphic forms,
are integral components of the clinical features of
illness for which penicillin was administered. skin
rashes commonly occur in the course of various viral
or streptococcal infections. similarly, vague gastrointestinal symptoms are most unlikely to be due to
penicillin hypersensitivity. this is particularly
relevant for alleged reactions to ampicillin. in
patients with infectious mononucleosis or subclinical
e-b virus infection, treatment with ampicillin is
often associated with skin rashes. we found evidence
of previous e-b virus infection in 38% of patients
with adverse reactions to ampicillin. moreover, our
data do not support a compelling need for the use of
antigenic determinants other than those derived
from  xxxd2871xxx  for cutaneous reactivity. none
of the patients showed greater hypersensitivity to
ampicillin or its derivatives than to products prepared from  xxxd2871xxx .
the frequency of occurrence of other allergic disorders and of common varied immunodeficiency and
selective iga deficiency in the group was somewhat
higher than might be expected in an unselected
general population, although the true incidence of
these states in various communities is not known.1012
moreover, the occurrence of allergic disease is
related to patterns of infant feeding.m-15 it may
reflect a fortuitous selection; alternatively igemediated allergy to drugs may develop more often
in atopic individuals and in those with immunodeficiency. on the other hand, kraft et al.6 did not
note the presence or history of atopic disease in any
of the patients with proved penicillin allergy.
we conclude that penicillin allergy is frequently
overdiagnosed and that such hypersensitivity is not
necessarily permanent. the diagnosis of clinically
significant allergy to penicillins can be reliably
excluded on the basis of both skin tests using major
and minor determinants of  xxxd2871xxx  and
rast.

we thank drs c hobeika, d simms, w sprague,
d hillman, e hillman, s chakrabarty, r dominic,
d vaze, and many other colleagues for referring
patients, dr n franklin adkinson for technical
information on the preparation of skin testing
reagents, and greg woodford, joan dwyer, and
bing au for excellent technical support.

pharmacia, montreal partly financed this study.
this paper was presented to the canadian paediatric
society, halifax, 20-22 june 1978.
references
rosenblum a h. penicillin allergy. j allergy clin immunol
1968; 42: 309-18.
2 levine b b, zolov d m. prediction of penicillin allergy
by immunological tests. j allergy clin immunol 1969; 43:
231-44.
3adkinson n f, jr, thompson w l, maddrey w c,
lichtenstein l m. routine use of penicillin skin testing on
an inpatient service. n engl j med 1971; 285: 22-4.
4 wide l. clinical significance of measurement of reaginic
(ige) antibody by rast. clin allergy 1973; 3: 583-95.
clarke h t, johnson j r, robinson r, eds. the chemistry
of penicillin. princeton: princeton university press,
1949: 563-73.
6 kraft d, roth a, mischer p, pichler h, ebner h. specific
and total serum ige measurements in the diagnosis of
penicillin allergy. a long term follow-up study. clin allergy
1977; 7: 21-8.
7wide l, jublin l. detection of penicillin allergy of the
immediate type by radioimmunoassay of reagins (ige)
to penicilloyl conjugates. clin allergy 1971; 1: 171-7.
8finke s r, grieco m h, connell j t, smith e c, sherman
w b. results of comparative skin tests with penicilloylpolylysine and penicillin in patients with penicillin allergy.
am j med 1965; 38: 71-8.
9green g r, rosenblum a. report of the penicillin study
group-american academy of allergy. j allergy clin
immunol 1971; 48: 331-43.
10 soothill j f. immunity deficiency states. in: clinical
aspects of immunology. gell p g h, coombs r r a,
lackman p j, eds. oxford: blackwell scientific, 1975:
649-87.
11 chandra r k, ghai 0 p. primary immunodeficiency
states in indian children. indian j med res 1976; 64:
68-75.
12 world health organisation. immunodeficiency. technical
report series no 630. geneva: who, 1978.
13 mathew d j, taylor b, norman a p, turner m w,
soothill j f. prevention of eczema. lancet 1977; i:
321-5.
14 chandra r k. breast feeding and prevention of atopic
eczema (abstract). pediatr res 1978; 12: 478.
15 chandra r k. prospective studies of the effect of breast
feeding on incidence of infection and allergy. acta
paediatr scand 1979; 68: 691-4.

correspondence to professor r k chandra,
clinical research center, massachusetts institute of
technology, 50 ames street, cambridge, massachusetts 02142, usa.
received 18 september 1979

downloaded from http://adc.bmj.com/ on february 27, 2015 - published by group.bmj.com

penicillin allergy: anti-penicillin
ige antibodies and immediate
hypersensitivity skin reactions
employing major and minor
determinants of penicillin.
r k chandra, s a joglekar and e tomas
arch dis child 1980 55: 857-860

doi: 10.1136/adc.55.11.857
updated information and services can be found at:
http://adc.bmj.com/content/55/11/857

these include:

email alerting
service

receive free email alerts when new articles cite this
article. sign up in the box at the top right corner of the
online article.

notes

to request permissions go to:
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
to order reprints go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
to subscribe to bmj go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/

