sodium-dependent norepinephrine-induced currents in norepinephrine-transporter-transfected hek-293 cells blocked by cocaine and antidepressants.  transport of norepinephrine (ne+) by cocaine- and antidepressant-sensitive transporters in presynaptic terminals is predicted to involve the cotransport of na+ and cl-, resulting in a net movement of charge per transport cycle. to explore the relationship between catecholamine transport and ion permeation through the ne transporter, we established a human  xxxg2148xxx  (hnet) cell line suitable for biochemical analysis and patch-clamp recording. stable transfection of hnet cdna into hek-293 (human embryonic kidney) cells results in lines exhibiting (1) a high number of transporter copies per cell (10(6)), as detected by radioligand binding and hnet-specific antibodies, (2) high-affinity, na(+)-dependent transport of ne, and (3) inhibitor sensitivities similar to those of native membranes. whole-cell voltage-clamp of hnet-293 cells reveals ne-induced, na(+)-dependent currents blocked by antidepressants and cocaine that are absent in parental cells. in addition to ne-dependent currents, transfected cells posses an ne-independent mode of charge movement mediated by hnet. hnet antagonists without effect in non-transfected cells abolish both ne-dependent and ne-independent modes of charge movement in transfected cells. the magnitude of ne-dependent currents in these cells exceeds the expectations of simple carrier models using previous estimates of transport rates. to explain our observations, we propose that hnets function as ion-gated ligand channels with an indefinite stoichiometry relating ion flux to ne transport. in this view, external na+ and ne bind to the transporter with finite affinities in a cooperative fashion. however, coupled transport may not predict the magnitude or the kinetics of the total current through the transporter. we propose instead that na+ gates ne transport and also the parallel inward flux of an indeterminate number of ions through a channel-like pore.