0 1994 j. pharm. pharmacol.

j. pharm. pharmacol. 1994,46: 618-630
received february 23, 1994
accepted april 22, 1994

review

menthol and related cooling compounds
r. eccles

common cold and nasal research, department of physiology, university of wales college of cardiff, cardiff cf1 iss,uk

production and chemistry of menthol

618

metabolism

619

structure-activity relationships

619

mechanism of action

620

pharmacology
respiratory system
 xxxd2565xxx  activity
respiratory reflexes
antitussive properties
mucus production and mucociliary clearance
pulmonary function
skin
oral cavity
gastrointestinal tract
effects on olfaction
sensory impact of menthol
miscellaneous

62 1
62 1
622
623
623
623
624
624
625
625
626
626
626

toxicology

627

summary-menthol and related cooling compounds such as ‘coolant agent lo’, are widely used in
products ranging from common cold medications to toothpastes, confectionery, cosmetics and pesticides.
the review brings together a range of information on production and chemistry of menthol, and its
metabolism, mechanism of action, structure-activity relationships, pharmacology and toxicology. in
particular, the coolant action and carminative actions of menthol are discussed in terms of actions on
calcium conductance in sensory nerves and smooth muscle. the actions of menthol on the nose,
respiratory reflexes, oral cavity, skin and gastrointestinal tract are reviewed.

menthol and related cooling compounds are widely used in a
wide range of products ranging from common cold medications to toothpastes, confectionery and pesticides. menthol
was at first considered as a flavouring agent or a fragrance
which enhanced the palatability of medications and confectionery, but pharmacological studies have uncovered a range
of biological activity on sensory nerves and smooth muscle.
menthol has been used for medicinal purposes for over one
hundred years in the west, but our knowledge of this
fascinating compound is still very limited despite its very
widespread use. research on menthol is a fertile area for
those interested in developing new drugs for the treatment of
respiratory, dermatological and gastrointestinal disturbances.
production and chemistry of menthol
menthol is a naturally occurring compound of plant origin
which gives plants of the menfha species the typical minty

smell and flavour. the plant oil, often referred to as
peppermint oil (from mentha pipevita) or cornmint oil
(from mentha arvensis), is readily extracted from the plant
by steam distillation. before world war i1 menthol was
obtained primarily from plant sources, with china and
japan being the main producers. during the disruption of
trade routes during world war 11, brazil took over as the
main producer of raw plant oil and became the largest
producer and supplier of menthol (anon 1984).
cornmint oil obtained by steam distillation from the
flowering shrub menfha arvensis contains 70-80% of (-)menthol, which can be crystallized out from the cornmint oil
mixture. since the crystalline product contains traces of
cornmint oil, menthol obtained from this plant source has a
slightly herbal minty smell. mentha arvensis is grown commercially in brazil, japan, paraguay and china as a source of
cornmint oil. pure (-)-menthol can be obtained from cornmint oil by recrystallization from low-boiling point solvents.

menthol and related cooling compounds

peppermint oil made from mentha piperita contains up to
50% menthol, but due to its high price, peppermint oil is not
used for the production of menthol. peppermint oil is mostly
produced in the usa and is used mainly as a flavouring for
toothpastes, other oral hygiene products and chewing-gum.
menthol can also be extracted or synthesized from other
essential oils such as cirtonella oil, eucalyptus oil and indian
turpentine oil, and synthesis of menthol from thymol competes with isolation from natural mint oils.
menthol (c,,h,,o, mol. wt 156.27) is a cyclic terpene
alcohol, and although this type of alcohol occurs widely in
nature very few of these alcohols have the chemical properties that make them important fragrance or flavour compounds. menthol has three asymmetric carbon atoms in its
cyclohexane ring, and therefore occurs as four pairs of
optical isomers; (-)- and (+)-menthol, (-)- and (+)neomenthol, (-)- and (+)-isomentho1 and (-)- and (+)neoisomenthol, as illustrated in fig. 1 (bauer et a1 1990).
(-)-menthol is the isomer that occurs most widely in nature

(+)-menthol

(-)-menthol

(+)+eo

(-)-neo

(+)-is0

(-)-is0

619

in the liver. in the liver, menthol is hydroxylated by microsoma1 enzymes to form mainly p-menthane-3,8 diol, which is
metabolite i1 as illustrated in fig. 2. the hydroxylated
menthol compound is then conjugated with glucuronide
and then circulated to the kidneys for excretion in the
urine. madyastha & srivatsan (1988) in studies on the
metabolism of (-)-menthol in rats demonstrated that there
were four hydroxylated menthol compounds in rat urine
following oral administration of 800 mg menthol kg-' per
day for 20 days. the major metabolites werep-menthane-3,8
diol(i1) and 3,8-dihydroxy-p-menthane-7-carboxylic
acid (v)
as shown in fig. 2. minor metabolites 3,8-oxy-p-menthane-7carboxylic acid (iv) and p-menthane-3-9-diol (111) were also
found. oral administration of 800 mg menthol kg-' per day,
for up to seven days was also shown to induce the liver
microsomal enzymes cytochrome p450 and nadph- xxxg569xxx  (p450) reductase.

(+)-isoneo

(-)-isone0

fig.1. the four pairs of optical isomers of menthol. (-)-menthol is
the most common naturally occurring isomer and also the isomer
with the subjective cooling action.

and is the one assumed by the name menthol. it has the
characteristic peppermint odour and exerts a cooling sensation when applied to skin and mucosal surfaces (watson et a1
1978). the other isomers of menthol have a similar, but not
identical, odour and do not have the same cooling action as
(-)-menthol (eccles 1990). the (-)- and (+)-isomers of
menthol each have identical physical properties apart from
their specific optical effect on rotation of light. neomenthol,
neoisomenthol, menthol and isomenthol differ slightly in
their boiling points with a range of 211.7-218.6"c. the
isomers also differ in their physical characteristics, as at
room temperature (+)-neomenthol is a colourless liquid and
isomenthol and menthol are white crystals.
metabolism
menthol is a highly lipid-soluble substance and like many
similar organic substances metabolism of menthol involves
the formation of glucuronide compounds, which are much
more water soluble and more readily excreted in the urine.
menthol administered orally or absorbed through the skin or
respiratory epithelium is transported to the liver by the
circulation. there may be some phase 1 metabolism of
menthol in the skin and gut on absorption but most occurs

fig.2. metabolism of menthol. the major metabolites are
p-menthane-3,8 diol (11) and 3,8-dihydroxy-p-menthane-7-carboxylic acid (v). see text for further details. after madyastha &
srivatsan (1988).

the glucuronidation of menthol involves udp-glucuronyltransferase which is responsible for the glucuronidation
of monoterpenoid alcohols in general (nakaoka 1990).
menthol glucuronide compounds in urine can be readily
deconjugated by treating raw urine with p-glucuronidase
and the menthol content of urine can be specifically assayed
by gas chromatography (bell et a1 1981; kaffenberger &
doyle 1990).
structure-activity relationships
in discussing structure-activity relationships for menthol it
is the cooling action of menthol which has been most
studied. the cooling action can be investigated either by
using panels of volunteers with subjective scores for cooling
effects (watson et a1 1978), or by electrophysiological
investigations on nerve cell activity (swandulla et al 1987).
studies on the electrophysiological activity of cultured
vertebrate neurons and snail neurons have shown that (-)menthol has a very specific dose-dependent effect on calcium
flux across the cell membrane, whereas the closely related
compound,  xxxd1776xxx , was without activity and (+)-

620

r. eccles

menthol was only half as active as its stereoisomer (swandulla et a1 1986, 1987).
a systematic investigation of structure-activity relationships was undertaken by watson et al (1978), who investigated the cooling activity of over 1200 synthetic compounds
in order to develop a non-volatile coolant compound for use
in shaving foams. the subjective tests used by watson et a1
(1978) to determine the coolant activity of compounds were
based on the application of coolant compounds onto the
surface of the tongue to determine oral threshold for cooling, or directly onto the skin of the inside of thi forearm to
determine the degree of cooling on an eight point subjective
scale. the authors established that four important criteria
needed to be satisfied for a compound to possess effective
cooling activity: a hydrogen bonding group, a compact
hydrocarbon skeleton, a correct hydrophilic/hydrophobic
balance, and, a mol. wt in the range 150-350.
the hydrogen-bonding group of menthol is the hydroxyl
group, but this can be substituted with a variety of hydrogen-bonding groups and still retain coolant activity. watson
et a1 (1978) studied a series of n-alkyl-carboxamide groups
which had the advantage over menthol of low volatility.
two examples of these compounds are illustrated in fig. 3,
with the average oral cooling threshold recorded (pg) given
in brackets.
studies by amano (1986) on cooling and pungent agents
for use as flavouring compounds led to the discovery of a very
active cooling compound, 3-1 menthoxy propane- 1,2-diol,
which is often referred to as ‘coolant agent 10’ or mpd, and
whose structure is illustrated in fig. 3. the compound is
widely used in cosmetics, soaps, dentifrices, mouthwashes,
chewing-gums, tobaccos and medical plasters. coolant agent
10 has an oral cooling threshold in man as low as 1ppm in
aqueous solution, which is only one-fifth that of (-)-menthol,
and its duration of cooling action is 20-25min at ioppm,
which is twice as long as (-)-menthol (amano 1986). coolant
agent 10 resembles menthol in its ability to cause a subjective
sensation of coolness, but it differs in other respects being a
colourless liquid with only a faint minty odour.
cooling agent ag-3-5 (1-(2-hydroxyphenyi)-4-(3 nitrophenyl)-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyrimidine-2-one), as shown in
fig. 3, was discovered by a chance finding when wei
(1983) noted that accidental self-contamination of the
nostrils eyelids and lips with the compound caused a very
strong sensation of coolness. cooling agent ag-3-5 was
found to be a potent cooling agent and wei (1983) proposed
that the compound could be very useful as it lacked the
flavour and odour of menthol and was not readily absorbed
through the skin.
apart from the cooling effect, and a degree of flavour
potentiation and odour modification, there is no common
property of cooling compounds. for instance, there is no
association between minty smell and cooling. (-)-menthol
has the greatest cooling activity of the eight stereoisomers of
menthol, with (+)-menthol 45 times less active than (-)menthol, as determined by oral threshold for cooling
activity (watson et a1 1978). (+)-menthol is also relatively
inactive compared with (-)-menthol when nasal cooling
sensation is used as a measure of activity (eccles et a1 1988a).
menthol is an alcohol derivative and could act by inducing general cell membrane labilization or modifying mem-

cooling agent 10

cooling agent ag-3-5

7
no2

fig.3. synthetic coolant compounds. the structure of menthol is
shown for comparison. the figures in parentheses are the oral
thresholds (pg) for cooling sensation for man. compounds i1 and
ix were synthesized by watson et a1 (1978). coolant agent 10 was
synthesized by amano (1986), and cooling agent ag-3-5 was
discovered by wei (1983).

brane fluidity due to its lipophilic properties. however,
similar lipophilic compounds such as  xxxd1776xxx  are
without cooling activity. studies on the effects of menthol
on rat lingual nerve response and comparisons with a range
of related alcohols demonstrated that menthol behaved
quite differently from the other substances tested, and the
results were consistent with menthol interacting with a
specific receptor (simon & sostman 1991). this information, together with the observations that the effects of
menthol are fully reversible, stereochemically selective and
cannot be evoked by intracellular application, indicate that
menthol exerts its cooling effects by interaction with a
specific pharmacological receptor (watson et a1 1978;
swandulla et a1 1986; eccles et a1 1988a).
mechanism of action
one of the major effects of menthol when applied to the skin
or a mucosal surface is to cause a sensation of coolness or
warmth and this was attributed to stimulation of thermoreceptors by goldsheider as early as 1886. the perceived
temperature effect is not caused by evaporation of menthol
or due to vasodilation but is due to a specific action of
menthol on sensory nerve endings. the sensation of cold or
warmth is determined by the activity of thermoreceptors in
the skin and mucosal surfaces. these cold and warm
receptors are considered to be free nerve endings without
any specialized end organ (hensel 1982).
it has been known for some time that changes in the
calcium concentration around thermoreceptors cause
changes in the sensation of temperature. in man, intravenous injection of calcium solutions has been reported to cause
a diffuse sensation of warmth (hirschsohn & maendl 1922).
the effects of calcium solutions on human sensations of
warmth are supported by electrophysiological studies on
warm and cold receptors in the nasal area of the cat.
intravenous administration of calcium solution in the
anaesthetized cat caused a marked increase in the frequency
of warm-receptor discharge and a depression in the discharge of cold receptors (hensel & schafer 1974). subsequent studies on the cat have demonstrated that a decrease

62 1

menthol a n d related cooling compounds

in external calcium concentration caused by intravenous
administration of the calcium-chelating agent edta,
caused an increase in cold-receptor discharge from nasal
skin (schafer et al 1982). similarly, a decrease in the calcium
concentration in the perfusion fluid of the isolated tongue of
the cat was shown to enhance cold-fibre activity in the same
m ) (schafer & braun 1992).
way as menthol
the above studies indicate that calcium ions play a major
role in determining the activity of cold receptors and that
movement of calcium across the sensory nerve-cell membrane controls the membrane potential and the electrical
activity of the cold receptor. our understanding of the
transducer activity of cold receptors is still developing, but
it is generally accepted that the cold receptor exhibits
oscillations in the membrane potential and that whenever
the membrane potential depolarizes above threshold a
bursting discharge of action potentials is fired (braun et al
1980). the oscillations in membrane potential are caused by
a regenerative influx and efflux of calcium ions. the efflux of
calcium from the cold receptor causes hyperpolarization of
the receptor and inhibits the discharge of action potentials.
it is this efflux of calcium which is believed to be sensitive to
changes in external calcium concentration as the influx of
calcium stimulates the efflux mechanism (eckert & lux
1976). therefore, a decrease in external calcium concentrations as caused by edta slows the efflux of calcium from
the cold receptor and the resultant depolarization of the cell
membrane causes an increased electrical discharge from the
cold receptor.
menthol exerts its effects on cold receptors by interfering
with the movement of calcium across the cell membrane and
there is evidence that menthol acts in the same way as
edta. studies on the discharge activity of cat nasal and
lingual cold receptors have demonstrated that intravenous
infusion of an aqueous solution of menthol in micromolar
concentrations caused an increase in the electrical discharge
from cold receptors (schafer et al 1986). the effects of
menthol on cold-receptor discharge were abolished by
intravenous infusion of a calcium solution. the authors
concluded that these findings indicated that menthol
caused receptor depolarization and increased nervous discharge by inhibiting the efflux of calcium from the cold
receptor (schafer et a1 1986).
the inhibitory action of menthol on calcium efflux from
cold receptors is not due to blocking of open calcium
channels. studies on snail neurons and vertebrate neurons
in culture have shown that menthol acts on a cell membrane
mechanism which regulates calcium efflux (swandulla et al
1986,1987; dorshenko et a1 1989). this mechanism does not
require menthol to penetrate the nerve cell, as intracellular
injection of saturated menthol solutions did not affect
calcium efflux (swandulla et a1 1987).
the actions of peppermint oil and menthol on calcium
channel-dependent processes in intestinal, neuronal and
cardiac preparations were studied in detail by hawthorn
et al (1988). these investigators demonstrated that menthol
was almost twice as potent as peppermint oil as an inhibitor
of potassium depolarization-induced and electrically
induced contractions of guinea-pig ileum and cardiac
muscle. both menthol and peppermint oil inhibited radiolabelled  xxxd2737xxx  binding to smooth and cardiac muscle

and the authors concluded that menthol exhibited calciumchannel blocking properties.
the early observations that administration of calcium
solutions affected the sensations of warmth and cold
(hirchsohn & maendl 1922) clearly linked temperature
sensation with calcium. later studies on menthol have
now demonstrated that menthol exerts its actions on the
perception of cold and warmth by influencing the movement
of calcium in thennoreceptors (schafer et a1 1991). further
clarification of the mechanism of action of menthol is
dependent on a better understanding of the role of calcium
in modulating nerve-cell activity. pharmacological studies
comparing the effects of menthol with calcium antagonists
such as verapamil and dihydropyridine (side11 et al 1990) are
starting to untangle this complex interaction of menthol on
calcium flux in the nerve cell, and we can expect rapid
developments in this field of research.
the cool sensation caused by application of menthol to
the skin or mucosal surfaces is apparent when low or
threshold concentrations of menthol are used and is related
to stimulation of cold receptors, but menthol has both
irritant and local anaesthetic actions when used in higher
concentrations. menthol in 5-10% concentration in
 xxxd2648xxx  causes a burning sensation when applied to the
skin and this sensation has been attributed to stimulation of
nociceptors in the skin (green 1986). the local anaesthetic
action of menthol was studied by macht (1939) who used a
1 :500 solution of menthol in 9.5% alcohol. macht (1939)
demonstrated local anaesthetic activity on frog skin, rabbit
eye and guinea-pig skin and he also attributed the central
nervous system effects of menthol to its local anaesthetic
activity. a local anaesthetic action of menthol on sensory
receptors of the human tongue was reported by hensel &
zotterman (1951). similarly, hellekant (1969), reported that
high concentrations of menthol (0.2 g l-' in water) or
prolonged exposure to menthol caused anaesthesia of
sensory receptors in the cat tongue. menthol in aqueous
solution is used as an anaesthetic for experiments on snails
where it causes a fully reversible depression of activity in
central neurons (haydon et a1 1982).
the local anaesthetic activity and irritant activity of
menthol may be caused by effects on calcium conductance
in sensory nerves and have similarities with menthol's effects
on thermoreceptors. this is quite likely for the local
anaesthetic properties, but the irritant activity may be a
nonspecific action which is also found in other compounds
such as camphor, which have quite a different pharmacological profile from menthol.

pharmacology
respiratory system
menthol is widely used in medications for the relief of
common cold symptoms such as nasal congestion and
cough, but there is little hard scientific evidence to support
any  xxxd2565xxx  or antitussive activity.
menthol was introduced into europe and the united
states at the end of the nineteenth century and in 1890,
potter, in a review of 'the use of menthol in diseases of the
upper air passages' stated that "while menthol seems to be a
drug with a future of great usefulness, it needs to be carefully

622

r. eccles

studied and investigated, so that we may become familiar
with its action and know its limitations”. it is now over one
hundred years since potter wrote on menthol, yet our
understanding of the pharmacology of this compound is
still very limited and often confused.
 xxxd2565xxx  activity. menthol-containing inhalations, rubs, and lozenges are often described as nasal
decongestants yet there are several studies which have
clearly shown the opposite effect, i.e. a tendency to
increased nasal congestion. as early as 1927, fox, in a
series of experiments on dogs, demonstrated that topical
application of 1 and 5% solutions of menthol to the nasal
mucosa caused nasal congestion whereas topical adrenaline
solution (1 : 1000) had a marked  xxxd2565xxx  action.
administration of menthol via a nasal inhaler has also
been shown to cause nasal congestion (butler & ivy 1943).
in these experiments on volunteers, inhalation of menthol
produced a marked increase in nasal resistance within 1 min
after administration and this congestion was sustained over
210min. despite the nasal congestion, the subjects did not
feel congested but actually believed “that their nasal passages felt clear” (butler & ivy 1943). the nasal congestion
caused by menthol may be due to an irritant action as
menthol, when applied topically to both the skin and
nasal mucosa, has been shown to cause hyperaemia and a
burning or smarting sensation (glass & bliss 1939). the
irritant action of menthol is dependent on the concentration
of menthol, as a 0.5% solution of menthol in liquid
petrolatum was irritating to the nasal mucosa in all subjects
tested, whereas a 0.1% solution in physiological saline was
non-irritant in most subjects (glass & bliss 1939).
despite the results of the studies by fox (1927) and butler
& ivy (1943), menthol and similar aromatics were still
believed to have a  xxxd2565xxx  action and they
were recommended as nasal decongestants in professional
literature (british national formulary 1974). studies on
healthy volunteers by burrow et al (1983) clearly demonstrated that inhalation of camphor, eucalyptus and menthol
vapour had no effect on nasal resistance to airflow as
measured by rhinomanometry, but exercise caused a
marked decrease in nasal resistance in the same group of
subjects. this was the first investigation to use rhinomanometry as a means of investigating the effects of menthol on
the nose. in the study by burrow et a1 (1983), the volunteers
were asked if their sensation of nasal airflow was improved
after breathing the aromatics and after exercise. one hundred percent of subjects who breathed menthol reported an
increased sensation of nasal airflow whereas only 20% of
subjects reported improved airflow after exercise, despite a
70% decrease in nasal resistance to airflow associated with
exercise and no change in nasal resistance after menthol.
this study clearly demonstrated that menthol inhalation
caused a subjective  xxxd2565xxx  effect without any
objective decongestant action.
the method of measuring the subjective decongestant
action of menthol was refined in subsequent studies which
used scoring from -6 (completely obstructed nose) to f 6
(completely clear nose) and a 100-mm visual analogue scale
with the extremes labelled ‘nose feels extremely blocked’ and
‘nose feels extremely clear’ (eccles et al 1987a,b, 1988a,b).

these studies confirmed that menthol had no effect on nasal
airway resistance but caused a marked increase in nasal
sensation of airflow, which could now be quantified for the
first time as a subjective score.
menthol lozenges are widely marketed for the relief of
common cold symptoms and although they may have a
soothing effect on sore throat, their main action appears to
be a subjective sensation of improved nasal airflow. in a
study on subjects suffering from nasal congestion associated
with the common cold, eccles et a1 (1990), demonstrated
that oral administration of an 11-mg menthol lozenge
caused a subjective sensation of improved airflow without
any change in nasal airway resistance. the effects of ingestion of a menthol lozenge on the subjective sensation of
nasal airflow and an objective measure of nasal airway
resistance are illustrated in fig. 4.
the cool sensation of increased nasal airflow caused by
inhalation of menthol is believed to be due to stimulation of
cold receptors served by the trigeminal nerve supply to the
nose (jones et a1 1987; eccles 1990). jones et al (1989)
studied the distribution of thermoreceptors within the
nasal vestibule and compared the sensitivity of this area
with the nasal mucosa inside the nasal cavity and the malar
skin lining the outside of the nose. they found evidence for
thermoreceptors within the nasal vestibule and on the
surface of the nose, but thermoreceptors were not found
on the nasal mucosa.
the location of the cold receptors in the nose is believed to
be mainly in the nasal vestibule, which is lined by a
squamous epithelium similar to facial skin (jones et a1
1987; aldren & tolley 1991; clarke et al 1992), but there

e

15

v)
0

c

.-0

i-

p

10

0

-m
0

z“
5
m
c

m
*

.-

u)

-m2
2

0

v)

-5

i

basal

lb

40

80

time (min)

fig.4. the effects of ingestion of an 1 i-mg (-)-menthol lozenge on
subjective sensation of nasal congestion (0,m) and nasal resistance
0 )in volunteers with common cold. the subjective
to airflow (0,
sensation of nasal congestion was significantly reduced after 10 min
after ingestion of the lozenge but nasal airway resistance as measured
by rhinomanometry was unaffected. shaded symbols (m, 0 )represent the values for the menthol-treated group (n = 30) and the open
represent the mean values for the placebo-treated
symbols (0,0)
group (n = 32). results taken from eccles et a1 (1990).

menthol a n d related cooling compounds

is also evidence supporting the involvement of the nasal
mucosa in the sensation of nasal airflow based on a finding
that local anaesthesia of the nasal mucosa reduces the
sensation of nasal airflow (eccles et al 1988~).
when menthol is taken orally in lozenge form, the
increased sensation of nasal airflow is believed to be due
to menthol vapour reaching the nasal cavity via the nostrils
when the mouth is opened and via the nasopharynx during
swallowing. however, there is evidence that menthol may
influence the sensation of nasal airflow by a purely oral form
of stimulation as it has been proposed that the major
palatine nerve serving the hard palate has a role in nasal
sensation of airflow (naito et a1 1991).
respiratory rejexes. inspiratory airflow cools the nose and
larynx and stimulates cold receptors to cause a sensation of
airway cooling which is associated with airflow. as well as
providing a sensation of cool airflow, the stimulation of
upper airway cold receptors causes a reflex inhibition of
respiration and inhibition of upper airway accessory respiratory muscle activity in conscious man (mcbride & whitelaw
1981; eccles & tolley 1987) and in the anaesthetized dog
(mathew et al 1990). inhalation of menthol causes the same
reflex inhibition of respiration as a cold air stimulus but
without any change in airway temperature in the anaesthetized guinea-pig (orani et al 1991), the anaesthetized dog
(sant’ ambrogio et al 1992), and in conscious man (eccles et
al 1989; de cort et al 1993; sloan et al 1993). the effects of
nasal airflow and menthol are not always inhibitory to
respiratory activity as in the anaesthetized cat, nasal airflow
enhances the activity of nasal dilator muscles and menthol
potentiates this response (davies & eccles 1985, 1987).
the inhibition of respiration caused by cold-air stimulation of the nostrils in man may cause a brief period of
apnoea in newborn infants. similarly, administration of
menthol vapour directly to the nose of infants has been
shown to cause a brief period of apnoea (javorka et a1 1980).
those authors demonstrated that menthol vapour administered from an open container of menthol crystals placed
1 cm from the nostrilscaused a brief period of apnoea (mean
4.7s in 43% of cases) in a study on 44 premature infants
(gestation age 19-37 weeks). it is not clear from this study if
the reflex apnoea was induced solely by cold receptor
stimulation; menthol crystals placed so close to the nose
would deliver a high concentration of menthol vapour
which could be irritant. javorka et al (1980) proposed that
the apnoea was the result of a protective reflex to prevent
inhalation of irritant substances, and this is supported by
the increase in heart rate observed after menthol exposure,
which may represent a general arousal reaction.
since menthol-containing medications are widely used in
the treatment of common cold in infants, any tendency of
menthol to cause apnoea is viewed with great concern.
following several reports in the german medical literature
of adverse events in infants after treatment with mentholcontaining ointments (bettecken 1964; moll 1964), the
german medical authorities issued a statement warning
against the use of menthol medications in infants (arzneimittelkommission der deutschen arzteschaft 1964). the
public warning by the german medical authorities stimulated interest in this area and an international symposium

623

was held in paris in april 1966 to debate the safety of
menthol medications. the symposium proceedings bring
together a large amount of clinical data on the use of
menthol medication in thousands of cases in infants suffering from acute respiratory tract infection. the general
conclusions of the symposium were that commonly used
vaporub remedies were safe to use in infants but that they
should not be applied directly to the nostrils (dost & leiber
1967).
antitussive properties. the use of menthol as an antitussive
goes back over one hundred years, as it was in 1890 that
lunsford richardson developed a topical rub containing
menthol for the treatment of whooping cough (poetsch
1967). the ‘vaporub’ developed by richardson is still
marketed for the treatment of cough together with numerous other menthol-containing syrups, lozenges and topical
rubs. despite the very widespread use of menthol products
as antitussives, there is very little literature available in the
public domain to support antitussive efficacy.
inhalation of menthol has been shown to inhibit respiration via stimulation of upper airway cold receptors (eccles et
al 1989; orani et al 1991; sant’ ambrogio et a1 1992), and
menthol may act to inhibit cough via this mechanism.
respiratory reflexes such as cough are closely linked to the
brainstem centres regulating respiration and the general
inhibition of respiratory activity caused by menthol could
also influence the frequency and intensity of cough. menthol
may also act as an antitussive by influencing the activity of
sensory nerves in the upper airway which initiate cough. it is
not clear at present which sensory nerves are involved in
producing cough, but it is generally agreed that the larynx is
the most sensitive site for the initiation of cough (karlsson
et a1 1988; fuller & jackson 1990). menthol has been shown
to influence the activity of cold receptors in the larynx (sant’
ambrogio et al 1991) and may also influence the activity of
laryngeal sensory receptors involved in the cough reflex. the
mechanisms by which menthol may act as an antitussive are
at present speculative, but they are based on established
knowledge that menthol has already been shown to influence the activity of upper-airway sensory receptors and to
modulate respiratory reflexes.
mucus production and mucociliary clearance. the secretion
of mucus and the continuous mucociliary clearance from the
upper airway are important defence mechanisms against
infection. there are conflicting reports in the literature that
menthol and other aromatics may either enhance or depress
these defence mechanisms. menthol is a popular ingredient
for steam inhalations taken for the treatment of cough and
as an expectorant to promote clearance of mucus from the
respiratory tract. oswald (1959) concluded that the most
desirable property of menthol and other aromatics taken in
steam inhalation was their pleasant smell because the main
virtue of steam inhalation “is the expectorant effect of hot
moist air”. however, studies by boyd & sheppard (1969) on
anaesthetized rabbits demonstrated that administration of
menthol by steam inhalation caused an increase in mucus
production and a decrease in the specific gravity of respiratory tract fluid. this effect of menthol was produced by
amounts of menthol which added no detectable odour of

624

r. eccles

menthol to the inspired air and which corresponded to a
systemic absorption of less than 20 pg kg-’ body weight.
the authors concluded that the bronchomucotropic effects
of menthol were due to direct local stimulation of mucussecreting cells in the respiratory tract. the effect of menthol
on mucus production was dose dependent, as inhalation of
high concentrations of menthol depressed both the volume
and mucus content of respiratory-tract fluid.
the stimulant action of menthol on mucus production
may be beneficial, as bacteria adhere avidly to respiratorytract mucus (plotkowski et a1 1993). ciliary clearance of
mucus is essential in order to prevent infection and therefore
any effect of menthol on ciliary activity is of interest. using
an in-vitro model of the frog oesophagus, das et al (1970)
demonstrated that 0.1 yomenthol in ringer solution stimulated mucociliary clearance, whereas su et a1 (1993) using a
rat tracheal preparation demonstrated that menthol at
0.01 % concentration decreased ciliary beat frequency.
although su et al (1993) claim that menthol is ciliotoxic in
a dose-dependent manner, they also suggest that in-vivo
studies need to be made on human subjects to determine any
effects on mucociliary clearance and respiratory defence.
there does not appear to be any report of in-vivo studies
in man on the effects of menthol on respiratory defence.
however, huber et a1 (1973) reported in abstract form that
exposure to a vapour rub containing menthol and other
aromatics resulted in a depression of respiratory defence, as
measured by bacterial aerosol challenge in mice. this
publication aroused great clinical interest as the vaporub
preparation was widely used in children for the symptomatic
treatment of common cold. in a fuller paper, jakab & green
(1975) contradicted the earlier report by huber et a1 (1973)
and demonstrated that exposure to vaporub vapours did not
cause any depression of pulmonary antibacterial activity.
the findings of jakab & green (1975) were later confirmed
by goldstein et al (1976), who demonstrated that rates of
pulmonary bacterial transport and inactivation in the rat
and mouse were unaffected by exposure to vapours of
 xxxd2565xxx , eucalyptol and turpentine. jakab &
green (1975) took the trouble to measure the concentrations of the vapours and they carefully controlled the
conditions of exposure and assessments of respiratory
defence, and their work throws considerable doubt on the
early report by huber et al(l973) that inhalation of menthol
and other aromatics may compromise respiratory defence.
the studies on respiratory defence mechanisms investigated the effects of a mixture of aromatic vapours and,
therefore, it is difficult to separate out any specific effect of
menthol. however, the substantial studies by jakab &
green (1975) and goldstein et a1 (1976) showed that the
mixture of aromatics was without effect on respiratory
defence and one can conclude that menthol vapour alone
would also be innocuous unless there was some complex
interaction between the components of the vapour mixture.

pulmonary function. because of the commercial pressure to
show efficacy of action for a registered product with a
mixture of aromatics (including menthol) there are relatively few studies on the single ingredients. menthol may
have effects on the airways in subjects with common cold, as
cohen & dressler (1982) reported that a mixture of aro-

matics (including menthol) improved a number of pulmonary function indices. however, that report which indicates a
beneficial effect of aromatics inhalation has not been confirmed and it is difficult to attribute any effect of the mixture
of vapours to an action of menthol.
menthol vapour may exert some effect on lung function
by influencing lung surface tension, as in-vitro studies on
synthetic surfactant films have shown that menthol does
lower surface tension and in-vivo studies on anaesthetized
rabbits have shown that eucalyptol exhibits surfactant
properties and increases lung compliance (zanker et a1
1980).

skin
the main effect of menthol when applied to hairy skin is to
create a cooling sensation similar to the nasal cooling
sensation described above. the coolant action of menthol
on skin made it a popular ingredient in shaving creams
(watson et a1 1978) and in order to avoid the eye irritation
caused by menthol vapour, relatively non-volatile menthollike coolant compounds were developed. however, the
sensory effects of menthol on skin are more complex than
a straightforward stimulation of cold receptors, as menthol
also modulates the sensations of warmth and skin irritation.
menthol (0.2 and 2% in  xxxd2648xxx ) when applied to the
vermillion border of the human lip causes an attenuation of
the sensation of warmth, which appears to be due to effects
on warm receptors rather than a masking of the sensation of
warmth due to stimulation of cold receptors (green 1986).
higher concentrations of menthol (5 and 10% in mineral
oil) caused a strong burning sensation which may be due to
stimulation of nociceptors rather than warm receptors
(green 1986). green (1992) also made psychophysical
measurements on the sensory effects of menthol applied
topically to the human forearm under controlled thermal
conditions. menthol as a 5% solution in ethanol heightened
the perception of skin cooling and attenuated the perception
of moderate skin warming. menthol was also shown to have
pungent or irritant properties which were enhanced by
cooling of the skin, and green (1992) suggested that
menthol may stimulate cold-sensitive nociceptors as well
as cold receptors.
menthol’s property to stimulate skin nociceptors may be
responsible for the counter-irritant action of menthol, as the
nociceptors initiate an axon reflex with subsequent release of
vasodilator peptides. an increase in skin temperature and
underlying muscle temperature has been shown after topical
application of a mixture of eucalyptus oil and menthol, and
this may be beneficial for pain relief and useful to athletes as
a passive form of warm-up (hong & shellock 1991). the
effects of menthol on cold receptors and nociceptors may
also be beneficial in the treatment of pruritus, as itching is
mediated via unmyelinated ‘c’ fibres which also transmit the
sensation of pain. topical menthol (0.25%) has been widely
used for many years to treat pruritus but there are no
controlled studies to verify the efficacy of menthol as a
topical treatment for this condition (greco & ende 1992).
the irritant effect of menthol causes local vasodilation
and this together with the lipophilic nature of menthol may
aid topical drug penetration. studies on hairless mouse skin
have shown that menthol (1-5% w/v) can aid the penetra-

menthol and related cooling compounds

tion of compounds such as indomethacin and cortisone
(katayama et al 1992), morphine hydrochloride (morimot0 et al 1993) and methyl salicylate (yano et a1 1991).
irritancy at high concentrations is not a general property
of coolant compounds as coolant agent 10 has no irritant
activity on human skin and rabbit eye at concentrations up
to lo%, despite being a more potent coolant compound
than menthol (amano 1986; takasago co. 1993).
oral cavity
cornmint oil and peppermint oil are widely used for
flavouring toothpastes, chewing-gum and confectionery.
these oils contain around 70% (-)-menthol which is
responsible for the pleasant cooling and refreshing taste of
the oils.
menthol has a complex sensory effect in the oral cavity as
it influences the activity of both gustatory and temperature
receptors. in studies on the electrical activity of the chorda
tympani nerve of the anaesthetized cat, hellekant (1969)
demonstrated that rinsing the tongue with an aqueous
 xxxd2565xxx  (0.1 g l-i) caused a slowly increasing
activity in all gustatory fibres. menthol also altered the
response of the taste receptors to other sapid solutions,
and prolonged exposure to menthol or higher concentrations of menthol (0.2 g l-’ water) anaesthetized the taste
receptors. hensel & zotterman (1951) studied the effects of
an aqueous solution of menthol on temperature-induced
responses from the tongue of the cat and reported that
menthol caused ‘chemical sensitization of the thermoreceptors to thermal stimuli’. menthol in an aqueous solution
(1 : 10 000) was shown to enhance cold-receptor activity
without any action on warm receptors. hensel & zotterman (1951) also commented that the local anaesthetic action
of high concentrations on menthol in oil was easily demonstrated in man, as 1 or 2 min after application of menthol to
the tip of the tongue there was an obvious decrease in both
cold and tactile sensibility. dodt et al (1953), in a similar
study on the thermoreceptors of the tongue of the cat, found
that acetylcholine and menthol behaved in a similar way as
they both sensitized cold receptors. the authors also
reported that menthol influenced the activity of warm
receptors and caused a shift of the range of steady discharge
of the warm receptors towards the cold side, i.e. sensitized
warm receptors. dodt et al (1953) claimed that the earlier
study by hensel& zotterman (1951) did not find any effect
of menthol on warm-receptor discharge because the study
was limited to very few warm-fibre preparations and to
onset of heat paralysis in the warm-fibre response above
40°c.
the complex oral sensations induced by menthol were
commented on by green (1985), who found that menthol
enhanced cold sensations in the mouth but could enhance or
attenuate warm sensations depending on the time period of
pretreatment with menthol.
the complexity of oral sensations caused by menthol may
be explained by a sensitization of both warm and cold
receptors together with modulation of taste-receptor activity. in high concentrations menthol has both an irritant
action and a local anaesthetic effect and gradations of these
effects complicate the sensory actions of menthol. studies on
the chorda tympani nerve response to menthol in the

625

anaesthetized rat have shown that the nerve response
elicited by menthol (064mm in aqueous solution) only
lasts around 2.5s, but that the tongue receptors remain
insensitive to menthol for up to 10min after application of
the solution (lundy & contreras 1993). although stimulation with menthol prevented taste receptors from responding to subsequent presentations of menthol, the preparation
responded normally to sodium and potassium solutions and
solutions of quinine and  xxxd1710xxx , and prior stimulation
with one of these solutions resulted in the recovery of the
menthol response. lundy & contreras (1993) explained this
effect of menthol as being due to cell depolarization caused
by menthol binding with receptor proteins on the plasma
membrane of the taste receptor.
the oral sensations of warmth and cold are accompanied
by a sensation of nasal cooling and a peppermint smell, as
menthol vapour from the oral cavity reaches the nose. oral
administration of menthol may also directly influence nasal
sensation of airflow by effects on the major palative nerve
which innervates the palatal mucosa (naito et a1 1991).
gastrointestinal tract
peppermint oil has been used for many years in herbal
remedies for the treatment of digestive disorders and it has
been shown to be effective in the symptomatic treatment of
irritable bowel syndrome (rees et a1 1979), and to reduce
colonic spasm when injected directly into the large intestine
during colonoscopy (leicester & hunt 1982).when used for
the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome, peppermint oil is
recommended to be taken in enteric-coated capsules as
release of the oil in the stomach causes relaxation of the
lower oesophageal sphincter and heart burn (somerville et
a1 1984). peppermint oil is a carminative with potent
antispasmodic properties and it is likely that these actions
are mainly due to the high (-)-menthol content of peppermint oil, although evans et a1 (1975) suggest that the
carminative action of menthol and similar compounds
such as camphor, thymol, eugenol, and carvone, is nonspecific and related to the aqueous solubility.
menthol has been shown to inhibit the histamine- and
acetylcholine-induced contractions of the guinea-pig isolated taenia coli (reis & bertini 1984) and to have smooth
muscle relaxant activity on the isolated vas deferens, uterus
and intestine (macht 1939). the fact that menthol has been
shown to be a smooth-muscle relaxant supports the idea
that the activity of peppermint oil is mainly related to its
high menthol content. however, since peppermint oil is a
mixture of biologically-active substances, some caution
needs to be taken in attributing all the properties of
peppermint oil to menthol.
menthol has been shown to inhibit the contractions of the
guinea-pig ileum by an effect on calcium conductance in
smooth muscle (hawthorn et al 1988). this inhibitory
action of menthol on gut smooth-muscle calcium conductance may be the basis for the efficacy of peppermint oil in
treating irritable bowel syndrome, as peppermint oil contains
a high percentage of menthol. in-vitro studies on guinea-pig
and human gut smooth muscle by taylor et a1 (1984, 1985)
indicate that menthol exerts an inhibitory effect on gut
smooth muscle by decreasing the influx of extracellular
calcium through potential-dependent channels, whilst

626

r. eccles

having no effect on the intracellular mobilization of calcium.
thus, the actions of menthol on both nervous tissue and
smooth muscle are mediated by effects on calcium conductance across the cell membrane, and this basic action links
menthol’s cooling and carminative properties.
effects on olfaction
the cooling sensation caused by inhalation of menthol is
believed to be primarily due to stimulation of trigeminal
nerve fibres supplying the nasal vestibule and nasal mucosa,
but menthol also has a distinctive minty smell which is
presumably due to stimulation of olfactory nerves. the
integrity of the olfactory system is not essential for the
detection of menthol as anosmics can detect menthol via
pungency (commetto-muniz & cain 1990). chronic exposure to menthol has been shown to cause symptoms of
occupational hyposmia (naus 1983), whereas an acute
exposure to an aqueous solution of menthol applied to the
human olfactory area by means of a drop pipette has been
shown to decrease the smell threshold to coffee, which is
believed to be a pure olfactory stimulus (skouby & zilstorffpedersen 1954). the ability to detect menthol declines with
age (murphy 1983), and this may represent a general decline
in nasal trigeminal/olfactory sensitivity due to accumulated
damage of nasal infection and it indicates that caution must
be taken when applying results of research on healthy young
adults to the general population.
the trigeminal nerve fibres supplying the nasal mucosa
have been shown to respond to a wide variety of chemical
stimuli and are believed to provide a sense of irritation often
referred to as a ‘common chemical sense’, whose prime
function is to protect the animal from potentially harmful
chemicals (silver 1990). the nerve fibres involved in the
sense of nasal irritation appear to be free trigeminal nerve
fibres which penetrate between the epithelial cells of the
nasal mucosa (silver 1992).
sensory impact of menthol
the sensory impact of menthol when applied to skin or a
mucosal surface depends on the concentration of menthol.
low concentrations give a cool sensation whereas high
concentrations of 2-5% menthol cause irritation and local
anaesthesia. there is little information on the dose-response
characteristics of menthol and it is often difficult to compare
studies when different aqueous and organic vehicles are used
for application of menthol, as the solvent influences the
biological activity of the menthol. there is also evidence
that there is a marked difference in sensitivity between
different body surfaces for the cooling action of menthol.
watson et al(l978) stated that the eye was the most sensitive
region of the body, with thresholds measured in nanograms
and a simple test for cooling activity in volatile compounds
being to hold an open bottle near to the eye. the sensitivity of
body surfaces was ordered as eye > tongue > buccal
region > ano-genital area > axilla > inside forearm-breast >
other arm areas, thigh, back > hands, feet % palms, soles
(watson et a1 1978). this gradation of sensitivity is probably
related to the density of thermoreceptors in these surfaces.
the nasal-cooling response was not listed by watson et al
(1978) but from our own experience it probably comes a close
second to the eye as a very sensitive area.

the sensory impact of menthol in the nose when inspired
as a vapour or administered intranasally in solution is a
complex mix of sensations. the cool sensation dominates at
low concentrations of menthol with stimulation of trigeminal cold receptors and this is supplemented by the minty
smell caused by stimulation of olfactory nerves. in higher
concentrations menthol stimulates trigeminal nerves to give
a ‘chemical’ sense related to the detection of irritant
compounds, and this may be related to stimulation of
nociceptors. depending on the concentration of menthol,
this irritant sensation may be just a pungent sensation, or in
extreme, a sensation of burning and pain. the cool sensation
is generally perceived as a pleasant sensation, especially
when providing relief from nasal congestion, but high
concentrations of menthol are irritant and may elicit protective respiratory reflexes and cause nasal congestion.
the sensory impact in the mouth is complex, as menthol
vapour will also reach the nasal cavity and stimulate
olfactory and trigeminal sensory receptors. similarly in the
oral cavity, menthol will stimulate taste receptors and
thermoreceptors and, as discussed above, the effects of
menthol on these sensory receptors are dependent on both
the concentration of menthol and the duration of exposure.
the well-known pleasant minty taste of menthol and
peppermint oil is very familiar, but when it comes to
dissecting out the various sensations and ascribing them to
nasal and oral receptors the picture is extremely complex.
miscellaneous
menthol is commonly used in oral and nasal medications
and comes into contact with mucosal epithelia which are
frequently subject to bacterial infection and allergic reactions. therefore, it is not surprising that investigators have
studied the antibacterial and anti-allergic properties of
menthol and other essential oil components.
moleyar & narasimham (1992) studied the antibacterial
activity of fifteen essential oil components towards foodborne bacteria and demonstrated that cinnamic aldehyde
was the most active compound but that menthol also had
significant antibacterial activity.
studies on the anti-allergic effects of constituents of
chewing-gum by arakawa et al (1992) have shown that
intraperitoneal administration of menthol in the guineapig inhibits homologous passive cutaneous anaphylaxis
mediated by ige antibody. similarly, menthol was shown
to suppress antigen-induced histamine release from rat
peritoneal mast cells and the authors concluded that
menthol in chewing-gum would have an anti-allergic effect.
cooling of the urinary bladder in man and other animals
has been shown to cause a reflex contraction of the detrusor
muscle and micturition. this reflex is believed to be mediated
by cold receptors in the bladder wall. lindstrom & mazieres
(1991) studied the effect of menthol on the urinary bladder
cooling reflex in anaesthetized cats and demonstrated that the
bladder cooling reflex was greatly exaggerated by intraluminal exposure of the bladder or urethra to a 0.6 mm solution of
menthol. this action of menthol appeared to be a specific
sensitizing action on bladder cold receptors as the activity of
bladder mechanoreceptors was unaffected. thus, menthol
seems to have similar actions on respiratory cutaneous and
bladder cold receptors.

menthol and related cooling compounds

menthol causes a cool sensation when applied to the skin
and this may be the cause of a behavioural response known
as ‘the wet shakes’, which is observed following administration of menthol in rats. wei (1983) described the wet shakes
in rats treated with menthol and another coolant compound
ag-3-5 as rotational body movements similar to those
made by a dog when wet. the ed50 for menthol for wet
shakes was found to be 35 mg kg-l compared with an ed50
of only 0.18 mg kg-’ for compound ag-3-5 when administered by intraperitoneal injection. the wet-shakes behaviour
was attributed to a cutaneous action of the drugs which
probably caused a sensation of skin cooling.
an unusual use for menthol is as a pesticide in controlling
tracheal mite infestations in honey bee colonies. a 50-g
porous sachet of menthol is placed within the hive and the
menthol vapour kills mites within the bee tracheae (duff &
furgala 1991; delaplane 1992). menthol is the only pesticide approved by the us environmental protection agency
for bee mite control.
toxicology
menthol, peppermint oil and synthetic coolant compounds
are widely used in the food and pharmaceutical industries;
peppermint oil is the world’s third most important flavouring exceeded in popularity only by vanilla and citrus
flavours (thorup et a1 1983a). world production of
menthol was estimated as 3500tonnes in 1984 and is
probably considerably more today (anon 1984). peppermint oil contains 30-50% menthol and the world production of peppermint oil is about 8000 tonnes per year. for
such a commonly ingested substance it is surprising that
there are relatively few studies on the toxicology of menthol
and this supports the generally held opinion that menthol is
a relatively nontoxic and safe substance.
the acceptable daily intake for menthol is quoted as
0-0.2mgkg-i (fao/who 1976), but this figure is not
supported by any toxicological data. the authors have
quoted a very low value for chronic menthol intake to err
on the side of safety in the absence of any hard data and they
acknowledge that much larger doses have been taken by
man without any ill effect.
martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia (1989) states that
the fatal dose in man has been estimated to be about 2g.
this is probably a gross underestimate as it represents a dose
of only around 28 mg kg-’ and in metabolic studies on rats a
daily dose of 800 mg kg-’ was given for 20 days without any
report of serious adverse effects, apart from induction of
liver enzymes (madyastha & srivatsan 1988). macht (1939)
reported the lethal dose in rats to be 1.5g kg-i . in a study
which primarily investigated the cooling action of menthol,
the ld50 in rats was found to be 700mg kg-’, with death
attributed to the “well known anaesthetic properties of this
compound” with loss of the righting reflex and depression of
respiration (wei 1983). macht (1939) commented that the
most striking pharmacological property of menthol was its
effect on the central nervous system, as with high doses
animals soon became depressed and gradually lost consciousness, an action which he attributed to the local
anaesthetic activity of menthol. menthol has been shown
to reversibly depress the activity of snail neurons, where it is

627

often used as an anaesthetic agent and there is also some
evidence that menthol inhibits synaptic transmission in the
snail (haydon et a1 1982). in comparison with menthol,
camphor exhibited marked convulsant activity in the rat
(macht 1939).
the synthetic coolant compounds have been found to be
even less toxic than menthol when judged by the rat ldso.
coolant agent 10 has an acute oral ld50 of 5.7gkg-’
(amano 1986), and coolant agent ag-3-5 has an acute
ld50 of 1.5gkg-’ (wei 1983).
neuropathy has been induced in rats given peppermint oil
(40-100mg kg-’ per day), with histological changes in the
white matter of the cerebellum (thorup et a1 1983a). since
peppermint oil contains 1-3% pulegone, which is known to
be toxic, a comparison of the toxicology of menthol with
pulegone was undertaken in order to determine if menthol
could also be implicated as a cause of neuropathy. rats were
given menthol by gavage for 28 days at 0, 200, 400 and
800mgkg-’ and showed few toxic effects (thorup et al
1983b). for menthol, the only effects were an increase in
liver weight and increased vacuolization of hepatocytes
which was evident at all doses, and probably represents an
induction of liver enzymes. in contrast, pulegone, at doses of
80 and 60 mg kg-’ , caused atonia and histopathological
changes in both liver and brain tissues. no sign of encephalopathy was observed in rats given menthol. thus, the
neurotoxicity of peppermint oil is probably related to the
pulegone content rather than menthol.
chronic exposure to high concentrations of menthol
vapour has been shown to have no gross toxic effects in
rats (rakieten et al 1954). those investigators exposed
rats to (-)-menthol vapour at several concentrations
between 0.087 and 0.166ppm for over 6 h a day, for up to
79 days, and found only slight changes indicative of irritation of the eyes and lungs at the highest concentration.
the authors also report that after the rats had been killed,
tracheal ciliary activity was normal in all animals,
although no objective measurement of ciliary beat frequency or mucociliary clearance was used by the authors
to support this claim.
in-vitro studies on a variety of animal tissues including
hamster brown adipocytes have shown that the major effect
of menthol in-vitro at a concentration of 0.32-0.76 mm is to
cause deterioration of biological membranes (bernson &
pettersson 1983). the authors also demonstrated that
noradrenaline-induced respiratory activity in the adipocytes was inhibited by menthol.
menthol is used in many brands of cigarettes and the
smoking of mentholated cigarettes represents a chronic
form of menthol intake. the percentage of mentholatedcigarette users has been shown to be much higher in
american blacks and asians than in whites, especially in
the younger age groups (sidney et al 1989). since the
incidence of oesophageal cancer mortality among american blacks is over three times the rate for whites and the
increase in oesophageal cancer roughly parallels the increase
in menthol cigarette sales, it has been proposed that there is
a link between smoking mentholated cigarettes and oesophageal cancer (herbert & kabat 1989). however, studies
looking at the consumption of mentholated cigarettes and
oesophageal cancer have not shown any clear link, and the

628

r. eccles

issue of menthol-cigarette smoking a n d oesophageal cancer
is unresolved (herbert & k a b a t 1989). in-vitro studies on
genotoxicity on animal and h u m a n tissues have n o t found
a ny chromosomal-damaging effects of menthol a n d at
present there is no evidence to implicate menthol as a
carcinogen (murthy et al 1991).
in general, menthol appears t o be a substance o f very low
toxicity in acute studies, but more information is required t o
define a safe daily intake for chronic intake.

references
aldren, c., tolley, n. s. (1991) further studies on nasal sensation
of airflow. rhinology 29: 49-55
amano, a. (1986) cooling and pungent agents. j. jap. soc.cut.
health 17: 77-86
anon (1984) the situation of the world menthol market. tabak. j.
int. 5: 404-405
arakawa, t., shibata, m., hosomi, k., watanabe, t., honma, y.,
kawasumi, k., takeuchi, y. (1992) anti-allergic effects of peppermint oil, chicle and jelutong. j. food hyg. soc.jap. 33: 569-575
arzneimittekommission der deutschen arzteschaft (1964) warnung vor. der anwendung mentholhaltiger praparate bei sauglingen und kleinkindern. deutsches arzteblatt 1763
bauer, k., garbe, d., surburg, h. (1990) common fragrance and
flavor materials: preparation, properties and uses. vch,
weinheim, germany
bell, g. d., henry, d. a., richmond, c. r. (1981) a specific g.1.c.
assay for menthol in urine. br. j. clin. pharmacol. 12: 281p
bernson, v. s. m., pettersson, b. (1983) the toxicity of menthol in
short term assays. chem. biol. interactions 46: 233-246
bettecken, f. (1964) nil nocere! vergiftungsssymptome bei sauglingen nach gebrauch mentholhaltiger salben. munch. med.
wschr. 106: 1218-1219
boyd, e. m., sheppard, e. p. (1969) a bronchomucotropic action in
rabbits from inhaled menthol and thymol. arch. int. pharmacodyn. ther. 182: 206-214
braun, h. a., bade, h., hensel, h. (1980) static and dynamic
discharge patterns of bursting cold fibres related to hypothetical
receptor mechanisms. mugers arch. 386: 1-9
british national formulary (1974-1976) british medical association, london, p. 159
burrow, a., eccles, r., jones, a. s. (1983) the effects of camphor,
eucalyptus and menthol vapour on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation. acta otolaryngol. 96: 157- 161
butler, d. b., ivy, a. c. (1943) effects ofnasal inhalers on erectiletissues
of the nose. archiv. otolaryngol. head neck surg. 38: 309-317
clarke, r. w., jones, a. s., charters, p., sherman, i. (1992) the
role of mucosal receptors in the nasal sensation of airflow. clin.
otolaryngol. 17: 383-387
cohen, b. c., dressler, w. (1982) acute aromatics inhalation
modifies the airways. effects of the common cold. respiration
43: 285-293
commetto-muniz, j. e., cain, w. s. (1990) thresholds for odor
and nasal pungency. physiol. behav. 48: 719-726
das, p. k., rathor, r. s., sinha, p. s., san yal, a. k. (1970) effect
on ciliary movements of some agents which come in contact with
the respiratory tract. ind. j. physiol. pharmacol. 1 4 297-303
davies, a. m., eccles, r. (1985) the effects of nasal airflow and
menthol on the electromyographic activity of the anaesthetised
cat. br. j. pharmacol. 85: 254p
davies, a. m., eccles, r. (1987) electromyographic responses of a
nasal muscle to stimulation of the nasal vestibule in the cat. j.
physiol. 391: 25-38
de cort, s. c., rowe, j. s., eccles, r. (1993) cardiorespiratory effects
of inhalation of  xxxd2565xxx  in healthy humans. j. physiol. 473: 47p
delaplane, k. s. (1992) controlling tracheal mites (acari: tarsonemidae) in colonies of honey bees (hymenoptera: apidae) with
vegetable oil and menthol. j. econ. entom. 85: 2118-2124
dodt, e., skouby, a. p., zotterman, y. (1953) the effect of
cholinergic substances on the discharge from thermal receptors.
acta physiol. scand. 28: 101-1 14

dorshenko, p. a., kostyuk, p. g., luk’yanets, e. a. (1989)
blockade of calcium channels by menthol. biol.  xxxg1967xxx . 61: 4250
dost, f. h., leiber, b. (eds) (1967) menthol and menthol-containing external remedies. use, mode of effect and tolerance in
children. george thieme verlag, stuttgart
duff, s. r., furgala, b. (1991) some effects of menthol on honeybee tracheal mite infestations in non migratory honey-bee colonies in minnesota. am. bee j. 131: 315-317
eccles, r. (1990) effects of menthol on nasal sensation of airflow.
in: green, b. g., mason, j. r., kare, m. r. (eds) chemical
senses, volume 2, irritation. marcell dekker inc., new york, pp
275-291
eccles, r., tolley, n. s. (1987) the effect of a nasal airflow stimulus
upon human alae nasi e.m.g. activity. j. physiol. 394:  xxxd3500xxx 
eccles, r., lancashire, b., tolley, n. s. (1987a) experimental
studies on nasal sensation of airflow. acta otolaryngol. 103:
303-306
eccles, r., lancashire, b., tolley, n. s. (1987b) the effects of
aromatics on inspiratory and expiratory nasal resistance to
airflow. clin. otolaryngol. 12: 11-14
eccles, r., griffiths, d. h., newton, c. g., tolley, n. s. (1988a)
the effects of d and l isomers of menthol upon nasal sensation of
airflow. j. laryngol. otol. 102: 506-508
eccles, r., griffiths, d. h., newton, c. g., tolley, n. s. (1988b)
the effects of menthol isomers on nasal sensation of airflow. clin.
otolaryngol. 13: 25-29
eccles, r., morris, s., tolley, n. s. (19%) the effects of nasal
anaesthesia upon nasal sensation of airflow. acta otolaryngol.
106: 152-155
eccles, r., lancashire, b., tolley, n. s. (1989) the effect of lmenthol on electromyographic activity of the alae nasi muscle in
man. j. physiol. 412: 34p
eccles, r., jawad, m. s., morris, s. (1990) the effects of oral
administration of (-)-menthol on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation of airflow in subjects suffering from nasal
congestion associated with the common cold. j. pharm. pharmacol. 42: 652-654
eckert, r., lux, h. d. (1976) a voltage sensitive persistent calcium
conductance in neuronal somata of helix. j. physiol. 254: 129152
evans, b. k., heatley, r. v., james, k. c., luscombe, d. k. (1975)
further studies on the correlation between biological activity and
solubility of some carminatives. j. pharm. pharmacol. 27
(suppl.): 66p
faojwho (1976) evaluation of certain food additives. twentieth
report of the joint faojwho expert committee on food
additives, tech. rep. ser. wld. hlth. org. no. 599
fox, n. (1927) effect of camphor, eucalypt01 and menthol on the
vascular state of the mucous membrane. archiv. otolaryngol.
head neck surg. 6: 112-122
fuller, r. w., jackson, d. m. (1990) physiology and treatment of
cough. thorax 45: 425-430
glass, h. b., bliss, r. (1939) the menthols. drug cosmet. ind. 44:
289-291
goldsheider, a. (1886) ueber specische wirking des menthols.
arch. anat. physiol abt. leipzig 555-558
goldstein, e., cooper, a. d., takington, b. (1976) effect of
inhaling medication vapors from a colds preparation on murine
pulmonary bacterial defense systems. j. toxicol. environ. health
2: 371-388
greco, p. j., ende, j. (1992) pruritus: a practical approach. j. gen.
intern. med. 7: 340-349
green, b. g. (1985) menthol modulates oral sensations of warmth
and cold. physiol. behav. 35: 427-434
green, b. g. (1986) menthol inhibits the perception of warmth.
physiol. behav. 38: 833-838
green, b. g. (1992) the sensory effects of  xxxd2565xxx  on human skin.
somatosens. mot. res. 9: 235-244
hawthorn, m., ferrante, j., luchowski, e., rutledge, a,, wei, x.
y., triggle, d. j. (1988) the actions of peppermint oil and
menthol on calcium channel dependent processes in intestinal,
neuronal and cardiac preparations. aliment. pharmacol. ther. 2:
101-118

menthol and related cooling compounds

haydon, p. g., winlow, w., holden, a. v. (1982) the effects of
menthol on central neurons of the pond snail, lymnaea stagnalis
(l.) comp. biochem. physiol. 73c: 95-100
hellekant, g. (1969) the effect of menthol on taste receptors. acta
physiol. scand. 76: 361-368
hensel, h. (1982) thermal sensations and thermoreceptors in
man. charles c. thomas, springfield, illinois
hensel, h., schafer, k. (1974) effects of calcium on warm and cold
receptors. pflugers arch. 352: 87-90
hensel, h., zotterman, y. (1951) the effect of menthol on the
thermoreceptors. acta physiol. scand. 24: 27-34
herbert, j. r., kabat, g. c. (1989) menthol cigarette smoking and
oesophageal cancer. int. j. epidemiol. 18: 37-44
hirschsohn, j., maendl, h. (1922) studien zur dynamik der
endovenosen injektion bei anwendung von calcium. wien.
arch. inn. med. 4: 379-414
hong, c.-z., shellock, f. g. (1991) effects of a topically applied
counterirritant (eucalypromint) on cutaneous blood flow and on
skin and muscle temperatures. am. j. phys. med. rehabil. 70:
29-33
huber, g., broderick, a., finder, e., simmons, g., o’connell, d.
(1 973) impairment of intrapulmonary bacterial inactivation
following administration of a commonly used cold remedy.
chest 64: 397
jakab, g. j., green, g. m. (1975) the effect of the vapors of a
commonly used remedy for colds on pulmonary antibacterial
defenses. chest 68: 389-390
javorka, k., tomori, z., zavarska, l. (1980) protective and
defensive airway reflexes in premature infants. physiol. boemos~ov.
29: 29-35
jones, a. s., crosher, r., wight, r. g., lancer, j. m., beckingham,
e. (1987) the effect of local anaesthesia of the nasal vestibule on
nasal sensation of airflow and nasal resistance. clin. otolaryngol.
12: 46 1-464
jones, a. s., wight, r. g., durham, l. h. (1989) the distribution
of thermoreceptors within the nasal cavity. clin. otolaryngol. 14:
235-239
kaffenberger, r. m., doyle, m. j. (1990) determination of menthol
glucuronide in human urine by gas chromatography using an
enzyme sensitive internal standard and flame ionization detection. j. chromatogr. 527: 59-66
karlsson, j.-a., sant’ambrogio, g., widdicombe, j. (1988) afferent neural pathways in cough and reflex bronchoconstriction. j.
appl. physiol. 65: 1007-1023
katayama, k., takahashi, o., matsui, r., morigaki, s., aiba, t.,
kakemi, m., koizumi, t. (1992) effect of  xxxd2565xxx  on the
permeation of indomethacin, mannitol and cortisone through
excised hairless mouse skin. chem. pharm. bull. 40: 3097-3099
leicester, r. j., hunt, r. h. (1982) peppermint oil reduces colonic
spasm during endoscopy. lancet ii: 989
lindstrom, s., mazieres, l. (1991) effect of menthol on the bladder
cooling reflex in the cat. acta physiol. scand. 141: 1-10
lundy, f., contreras, r. j. (1993) taste prestimulation increases
the chorda tympani nerve response to menthol. physiol. behav.
5 4 65-70
macht, d. i. (1939) comparative pharmacology of menthol and its
isomers. arch. int. pharmacodyn. 63: 43-58
madyastha, k. m., srivatsan, v. (1988) studies on the metabolism
of  xxxd2565xxx  in rats. drug metab. dispos. 16: 765-772
martindale. the extra pharmacopoeia (1989) 29th edn, reynolds,
j. e. f. (ed.), pharmaceutical press, london, p. 1586
mathew, 0. p., anderson, j. w., sant’ambrogio, f. b., sant’ambrogio, g. (1990) cooling mediates the ventilatory depression
associated with airflow through the larynx. respir. physiol. 82:
359-368
mcbride, b., whitelaw, w: a. (1981) a physiological stimulus to
upper airway receptors in humans. j. appl. physiol. 51: 11891197
moleyar, v., narasimham, p. (1992) antibacterial activity of
essential oil components. int. j. food microbiol. 16: 337-342
moll, h. (1964) gefharen mentolhaltiger praparate im kindesalter.
fortschr. med. 82: 861
morimoto, y., sugibayashi, k., koboyashi, d., shoji, h., yamazaki, j. i., kimura, m. (1993) a new enhancer-coenhancer system

629

to increase skin permeation of morphine hydrochloride in vitro.
int. j. pharm. 91: 9-14
murphy, c. (1983) age-related effects on the threshold, psychophysical function and pleasantness of menthol. j. gerontol. 38:
2 17-222
murthy, p. b. k., ahmed, m. m., regu, k. (1991) lack of
genotoxicity of menthol in chromosome aberration and sister
chromatid exchange assays using human lymphocytes in vitro.
toxicol. in vitro 5: 337-340
naito, k., ohaka, e., kato, r., kondo, y., iwata, s. (1991) the
effect of  xxxd2565xxx  stimulation of the major palatine nerve on
nasal patency. auris nasus larynx 18: 221-226
nakaoka, m. (1 990) kinetic characteristics of udp-glucuronyl
transferases toward a dithiol metabolite of malotilate in hepatic
microsomes of rats and rabbits. xenobiotica 20: 619-628
naus, a. (1983) alterations of the smell acuity caused by menthol.
j. laryngol. otol. 97: 705-709
orani, g. p., anderson, j. w., sant’ambrogio, g., sant’ambrogio,
f. b. (1991) upper airway cooling and  xxxd2565xxx  reduce
ventilation in the guinea pig. j. appl. physiol. 70: 2080-2086
oswald, n. c. (1959) cough mixtures. br. med. j. 1: 292
plotkowski, m. c., bajolet-laudinat, o., puchelle, e. (1993)
cellular and molecular mechanisms of bacterial adhesion to
respiratory mucosa. eur. respir. j. 6: 903-916
poetsch, c. e. (1967) brief history of topical rub therapy. in: dost,
f. h., leiber, b. (eds) menthol and menthol-containing external
remedies. thieme, stutgart
potter, f. h. (1890) the use of menthol in diseases of the upper air
passages. j. am. med. ass. 14: 147-149
rakieten, n., rakieten, m. l., boykin, m. (1954) effects of
menthol vapour on the intact animal with special reference to
the upper respiratory tract. j. am. pharm. assoc. 43: 390-392
rees, w. d. w., evans, b. k., rhodes, j. (1979) treating irritable bowel syndrome with peppermint oil. br. med. j. 2: 835836
reis, c. c. a., bertini, e. (1984) menthol effects on contractions in
guinea pig isolated taenia coli elicited by histamine and acetylcholine. rev. cienc. farm. 5: 155-166
sant’ambrogio, f. b., anderson, j. w., sant’ambrogio, g. (1991)
effect of  xxxd2565xxx  on laryngeal receptors. j. appl. physiol. 70:
788-793
sant’ambrogio, f. b., anderson, j. w., sant’ambrogio, g. (1992)
menthol in the upper airway depresses ventilation in newborn
dogs. resp. physiol. 89: 299-307
schafer, k., braun, h. a. (1992) modulation of cutaneous cold
receptor function by electrolytes, hormones and thermal adaptation. physiol. res. 41: 71-75
schafer, k., braun, h. a., hensel, h. (1982) static and dynamic
activity of cold receptors at various calcium levels. j. neurophysiol. 47: 1017-1028
schafer, k., braun, h. a., isenberg, c. (1986) effect of menthol on
cold receptor activity. j. gen. physiol. 88: 757-776
schafer, k., braun, h. a,, rempe, l. (1991) discharge pattern
analysis suggests existence of a low-threshold calcium channel in
cold receptors. experientia 47: 47-50
sidell, n., verity, m. a., nard, e. p. (1990) menthol blocks
dihydropyridine-insensitivecalcium channels and induces neurite outgrowth in human neuroblastomacells. j. cell. physiol. 142:
410-419
sidney, s., tekawa, i., friedman, g. d. (1989) mentholated
cigarette use among multiphasic examinees. am. j. public.
health 79: 1415-1416
silver, w. l. (1990) physiological factors in nasal trigeminal
chemoreception. in: green, b. g., mason, j. r., kare, m. r.
(eds) chemical senses, volume 2, irritation. marcell dekker inc.,
new york, pp 21-41
silver, w. l. (1992) neural and pharmacological basis for nasal
irritation. ann. ny acad. sci. 641: 152-163
simon, s. a., sostman, a. l. (1991) electrophysiological responses
to non-electrolytes in lingual nerve of rat and in lingual epithelia
of dog. arch. oral biol. 36: 805-814
skouby, a. p., zilstofl-pedersen, k. (1954) the influence of
acetylcholine-like substances, menthol and strychnine on olfactory receptors in man. acta physiol. scand. 32: 252-258

630

r. eccles

sloan, a., de cort, s. c., eccles, r. (1993) prolongation of
breathold time following treatment with an  xxxd2565xxx  lozenge.
j. physiol. 473: 53p
somerville, k. w., richmond, c. r., bell, g. d. (1984) delayed
release peppermint oil capsules (colpermin) for the spastic colon
syndrome: a pharmacokinetic study. br. j. pharmacol. 18: 638-640
su, x.y., li wan po, a,, millership, j. s. (1993) ciliotoxicity of
intranasal formulations: menthol enantiomers. chirality 5: 58-60
swandulla, d., schafer, k., lux, h. d. (1986) calcium channel
current inactivation is selectively modulated by menthol. neurosci. lett. 68: 23-28
swandulla, d., carbone, e., schafer, k., lux, h. d. (1987) effect of
menthol on two types of calcium currents in cultured sensory
neurons of vertebrates. hugers arch. 409: 52-59
takasago co. (1993) material safety data sheet for coolant agent
10. takasago international corporation, new jersey, usa
taylor, b. a., collins, p., luscombe, d. k., duthie, h. l. (1984)
the mechanism of the inhibitory action of menthol on gut
smooth muscle. br. j. surg. 71: 902
taylor, b. a,, duthie, h. l., luscombe, d. k. (1985) calcium
antagonist activity of menthol on gastrointestinal muscle. br. j.
clin. pharmacol. 20: 293-294

thorup, i., wurtzen, g., carstensen, j., olsen, p. (1983a) short
term toxicity study in rats dosed with peppermint oil. toxicol.
lett. 19: 211-215
thorup, i., wurtzen, g., carstensen, j., olsen, p. (1983b) short
term toxicity study in rats dosed with pulegone and menthol.
toxicol. lett. 19: 207-210
watson, h. r., hems, r., rowsell, d. g., spring, d. j. (1978) new
compounds with the menthol cooling effect. j. soc.cosmet.
chem. 29: 185-200
wei, e. t. (1983) ag-3-4: a chemical which produces sensations of
cold. environment, drugs and thermoregulation. 5th int. symp.
pharmacol. thermoregulation, saint-paulde-vence 1982,
karger, basel, pp 183-186
yano, t., kanetake, t., saita, m., noda, k. (1991) effects of
 xxxd2565xxx  and dl-camphor on the penetration and hydrolysis of
methyl salicylate in hairless mouse skin. j. pharmacobiodyn. 14:
663-669
zanker, k. s., tolle, w., blumel, g., probst, j. (1980) evaluation of
surfactant-like effects of commonly used remedies for colds.
respiration 39: 150- 157

