dose-effect and pharmacokmeticpharmacodynamic relationships of
the p -adrenergic receptor bloclung
properties of various doses of carvedilol
in healthv humans

,

objective: to evaluate the pharmacodynarnic properties of carvedilol across a broad range of doses in
relation to its enantiospecific kinetics and adrenergic receptor occupancies, relative to placebo and propranolol.
methodr: twelve healthy male subjects were investigated on six separate occasions at least 1 week apart
when they received either a single peroral dose of 40 mg propranolol, 12.5, 25, 50, or 100 mg carvedilol, or placebo. the subjects were extensively profiled at supine rest, and they underwent supine bicycle
ergometry before and at 2,4, 6,9, 12, and 22 hours after dosing. at these time points blood was drawn
for the high performance liquid chromatographic determination of the enantiomers of carvedilol and for
the radioreceptor assay determination of a,- and p,-adrenergic receptor binding and related concentrations.
results: carvedilol was confirmed to bind to p,-adrenergic receptors and (albeit to a lesser extent) to
a,-adrenergic receptors. carvedilol furthermore attenuated the ergometric increase in heart rate in a
closely dose-related fashion, which exemplified its p,-adrenergic receptor blocking effects. however, the
basal efferent adrenergic drive might have been too low to show consistent a,-blocking properties. the
radioreceptor and enantiomer kinetics were proportional with dose. there was no indication that the
overall kinetic behavior of contributing active metabolites would differ from that of the s(-)-enantiomer. on average, there was a smooth linear relationship between the ergometric treatment responses
and log-transformed dose, log-transformed concentrations of the s( -)-enantiomer, and the radioreceptor assay derived p,-adrenergic receptor occupancies.
conclztsion: the relative complexity of the kinetics of carvedilol (enantiospecific kinetics and dynamics,
protein binding, and involvement of active metabolites) does not preclude relatively simple and straightforward dose-effect and kinetic-dynamic relationships. (clinpharmacol
ther1994;55:329-37.)

christian de mey, md, kerstin breithaupt, md, jurgen schloos, phd,
gunter neugebauer, md, dieter palm, md, phd, and gustav g. belz, md, phd
mainz-wiesbaden, frankfirtlmain, and mannheim, gemzany

received for publication july 19, 1993; accepted sept. 28, 1993.

carvedilol ( xxxd447xxx , (r(+)is(-))-1-[carbazolyl(4) -oxy] - 3 - [(2-methyoxyphenoxyethyl) - amino] -propan-2-01) is a novel p-adrenergic receptor blocking
drug with ancillary vasodilatory properties.' the vasodilatory actions of carvedilol relate predominantly to
its a,-adrenergic receptor blocking proper tie^,^-^ although additional nonadrenergic mechanisms may also
be i n v o ~ v e d . ~carvedilol
~'
is a racemate of two enan-

reprint requests: christian de mey, md, centre for cardiovascular
pharmacology, alwinenstrasse 16, d-65 189 wiesbaden, germany.

copyright 0 1994 by mosby-year book, inc.
0009-9236194/$3.00 + 0 13/1/51827

from the centre for cardiovascular pharmacology, mainz-wiesbaden; the centre for pharmacology, university hospital, j.w.
goethe university, frankfurtimain; and the department of clinical pharmacology, boehringer mannheim, mannheim.
supported by a research grant from boehringer mannheim,
mannheim, germany.
these findings were excerpted in part from a medical thesis done by
y. schulz at the university of mainz (mainz, germany).

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
march 1994

tiomers8 with distinctly different pharmacokinetic9and
pharmacodynamic'o characteristics. the s(-)-enantiomer is affected by substantial presystemic metabolism and is the predominant determinant of the p-adrenergic receptor blocking properties of carvedilol.
the r(+)-enantiomer, in contrast, is far less affected
by presystemic metabolism, does not contribute to the
p-adrenergic receptor blocking properties, but is about
equipotent with regard to the a-blocking effects.
carvedilol is predominantly cleared by way of the
nonrenal route, and certain metabolites are thought to
be pharmacodynamically active. various studies have
been devoted to the elucidation of the effects, mechanism(~)of action, and pharmacokinetic properties of
carvedilol. however, there is little information about
the dose relationships of the pharmacologic properties
and about the relationships between the pharmacodynamic actions and the pharmacokinetic characteristics
of the drug. this study was performed to evaluate and
compare the time course and interrelation of carvedilol's @-adrenergicreceptor blocking properties, resting cardiovascular effects, p- and a-adrenergic receptor occupancies estimated from radioreceptor assay
(rra) data and the plasma concentrations of the
s(-)- and r(+)-carvedilol enantiomers after single
peroral doses of 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 mg carvedilol,
relative to a single peroral dose of 40 mg propranolol
and placebo.

methods
subjects
twelve male subjects (age range, 24 to 29 years;
weight range, 67 to 97 kg) who were judged to be
healthy on the basis of extensive medical and laboratory investigations participated in the study. the study
was conducted in accordance with the declaration of
helsinki. the protocol was reviewed by an independent ethics committee (wiesbaden, germany). the
subjects confirmed their consent to enrollment after
detailed information was provided both verbally and
in writing.
study design
the subjects were investigated on 6 study days, at
least 1 week apart, when they received one of the following peroral treatment: placebo, 40 mg propranolol
or 12.5, 25, 50, or 100 mg carvedilol. the treatments
were administered in a period-balanced within-subject
six-way crossover fashion with randomly allocated sequences. subjects, observers, and data analysts were
blinded to the nature of the treatments.

material
the treatments were administered each time as two
capsules containing the corresponding amounts of
carvedilol (tablets of 12.5 mg, batch 820-139-40 kc;
tablets of 25 mg, batch 820-156-40 kc; tablets of 50
mg, batch 820-175-40 oc), propranolol (commercially
available 20 mg tablets, batch 780-078-43 aa), or placebo (matched capsules 819-827-40 cb). all capsules
were suitably matched to permit a double-blinded
double-dummy approach.
general directives and restrictions
the subjects fasted for at least 12 hours before the
drugs were administered up to 6 hours after dosing
when a light standard meal was served. a further meal
was served at 9 hours. one hundred milliliters of caffeine-free tea and two dry biscuits were served 30
minutes before each ergometry. the subjects abstained from alcohol and smoking from 12 hours before until at least 22 hours after dosing. they were instructed to abstain from any medication for 1 week
before the study and during the study.
study procedures
the subjects reported to the study room at approximately 7: 30 am. after each subject emptied his bladder, he was positioned in bed. the subjects remained
in bed in a relaxed lying position until about 6 hours
after dosing. an intravenous catheter was placed in a
forearm vein for blood sampling until 12 hours after
dosing; subsequent samples were taken by venipuncture. after approximately 30 minutes of supine rest
for baseline measurements, a first ergometry was performed. approximately 10 minutes later the medications were administered with 100 ml water and under
medical surveillance. from 6 hours after dosing the
subjects were ambulant in the facilities of the study
center but were under further surveillance until 22
hours after dosing when they performed their last ergometry of the postdosing profiling.
cardiovascular investigations. while subjects were
in the supine resting position, the following cardiovascular in~esti~ations".'~
were performed twice before
dosing (as predosing baseline) and at 2, 4, 6, 9, 12,
and 22 hours after dosing:
hr (in beats per minute): heart rate from the
ecg recordings
sbpidbp (in millimeters of mercury): systolic
and diastolic blood pressure by stethoscope auscultation (korotkoff i, iv-v)

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
volume 55, number 3

st1 (in milliseconds): systolic time intervals derived from ecg, phonocardiogram, and carotid
pulse curve: pep (preejection period), vet,
(heart rate-corrected ventricular ejection time13),
and qs,, (heart rate-corrected total electromechanical systole")
sv (in milliliters): estimated stroke volume derived by standard impedance cardiography
(zcg)'~ by use of kubicek's equation1'
co (in liters per minute): estimated cardiac output (co = hr x sv11000)
tpr (in dyne - sec . ~ m - ~ total
) : peripheral resistance calculated from co and mean blood pressure (mbp = dbp + 0.43 (sbp - dbp)'~;
tpr = 80 x (mbp - 3)lco)
hi
. secp2): impedance cardiographic heather
index1'." of systolic contractile performance
cw (in meters per sec): pulse wave velocity along
the aorta as determined from the simultaneous
registrations of arterial carotis and arterial femoralis pressure pulses; pulse wave velocity was calculated from the relative time displacement of the
pulsations and the distance between pulse sites19
s

[a

subsequent to the supine resting measurements
specified above, a supine bicycle ergometry (set) was
performed as follows: 10 minutes before each set,
the subjects were carried from their beds to the ergometry bench. all ergometries were performed while
subjects were in the supine position with the hips and
knees flexed at an angle of approximately 90 degrees
with one piece of equipment used for all tests in all
subjects (siemens elema 380b ergometry system, erlangen, germany). within 3 weeks before the start of
the study, subjects performed a standard bicycle ergometry (starting at 100 watts and increasing with 25
watts per minute up to a heart rate of 160 beatslmin)
as part of the prestudy screening. from this ergometry, the watt-load equivalent with a target heart rate of
150 beatslmin was derived by interpolation (on average 203; sd: 27 watts). for all subsequent ergometries during the study, this same load was maintained
throughout for 4 minutes, preceded and followed by 1
minute of free (i.e., 0 watt) peddling. immediately before, and every minute during set, systolic and diastolic blood pressure and heart rate were measured by
the methods described above (the chosen procedure
was shown to yield highly reproducible and sensitive
end points20).
assay of the plasma concentrations of the enantiomers. before dosing and at 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, and 22

hours after dosing, blood was sampled for the analysis
of the plasma concentrations of both enantiomers.
the venous plasma concentrations of the s(-)- and
r(+)-enantiomers were measured by hplc with fluorometric d e t e ~ t i o nthe
. ~ limits of quantitation were 1
and 2 nglml for s(-) and r ( + ) , respectively.
p,- and a,-adrenergic receptor rras. the plasma
was subjected to ex vivo and in vitro adrenergic
rras to assay the amount of drug-related substrate
capable to bind to p,- and a,-adrenergic receptors.
for the p1-adrenergic receptors, 'h-cgp 12177 (as
the labeled ligand) and membranes prepared from
rat salivary gland (as receptor source) were used";
3~-prazosinand membranes prepared from rat liver
were used for the a,-adrenergic receptors. in each
assay a saturation isotherm of the respective radioligand was measured to determine the affinity for and
the capacity of the respective receptors. the binding
parameters were calculated by a nonlinear leastsquares fitting procedure with use of the following
equations:
b = b,,

- l/(l + k,) + nsb . l

(1)

in which b is the amount of radioligand bound at the
is the maximal binding caconcentration of l, b,,
pacity, kd is the equilibrium dissociation constant of
the radioligand, and nsb refers to the nonspecific binding of the radioligand.
in the presence of an unlabeled competitive inhibitor (plasma samples) the binding of the radioligand
can be expressed as follows:
b = b,,

. l/(l

+ k,

(1

+ iik,) + nsb . l

(2)

in which i is the concentration of the inhibitor and ki
is the equilibrium dissociation constant of the inhibitor.
when the binding parameters for the radioligand
are known, the concentration of the unlabeled compound can be derived by rearrangement of equation 2
and expressed as multifolds n of the ki value as
follows:
n

=

i/k, = (b,,

. l/(b - nsb . l) - l)/k, - 1 (3)

the plasma concentrations thus derived represent the
concentration of antagonist related compound (inclusive active metabolites and taking protein binding into
account) capable of displacing the radioligand or of
binding on the specific adrenergic receptor when directly in contact with it.

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
march 1994

332 a!e mey et al.
from this the fractional receptor occupancy was
calculated as follows:
%occupancy = 100 . i/k,/(i/k, + 1)

(4)

for each assay, the limit of quantitation lies at about
i/ki = 0.25, which corresponds with occupancies of
about 20%.

data analysis
the individual time courses of the supine resting
hr, tpr, and cw (arithmetic a, changes from the
baseline values before dosing) were fitted to a general
linear model with effects for subjects, periods, and
treatments. the residual variance of this anova was
used to contrast the treatments (differences of the active treatments versus placebo, according to dunnett22; a = 0.05). the end points of hr after 4 minutes of supine ergometry (set,) after dosing were
transformed as changes from the ergonomic hr end
points before dosing and analyzed according to a similar anova.
for the evaluation of the kinetic-dynamic interrelations, the dynamic data were expressed as "treatment
responses" (i.e. as 6 differences from the respective
placebo data) to account for the within-study day
time effects, such as those that occur after
reflected by the variations on the placebo study days
(and assuming additivity of these treatment unrelated
time effects).
results
supine resting cardiovascular function
in spite of the high sensitivity of the measureby the profound prandial effects
m e n t ~exemplified
~~
seen for all treatments beyond 6 hours after dosing
(shortening of pep, qs,,, and vet,; increase of sv,
co, and hi; and drop of tpr), only slight carvedilol
and/or propranolol effects were seen at rest: statistically significant reductions of resting heart rate were
observed between 4 and 12 hours after dosing (the
maximum effect [versus placebo] was about -6 beats/
min). although different in the duration of the effects
(longer with increasing doses), the carvedilol treatments could hardly be distinguished in the extent of
the effect. the propranolol effects tended to be similar
to those of carvedilol but did not last as long. at 4
hours after dosing, mean tpr was statistically significantly higher for treatment propranolol as for any of
the other treatment. the carvedilol treatments could
not be distinguished from placebo except for the highest dose (100 mg carvedilol), which yielded a significantly lower tpr (712 versus 786 dyne sec . cm-5

for placebo). the resting cw was statistically significantly lower for treatment with 100 mg carvedilol (at
2, 4, 6, 9, and 12 hours) and 50 mg carvedilol (at 4,
6 , 9, and 12 hours) relative to placebo. no further statistically significant treatment effects could be detected for any of the further variables of this extensive
profiling, even with a more extensive analysis that included the baseline values as covariate.

ergometric heart rate
the increase of the mean hr during the 4-minute
set at 2 hours after dosing for each treatment is presented in fig. 1 (left panel), which also presents the
treatment contrasts with regard to the ergometric end
points (right panel). carvedilol blunted the ergometric
rise of hr in a dose-related fashion (both in the extent
of effect and in duration). the ergometric attenuation
at 2 hours after dosing of 40 mg propranolol was similar to that of 50 mg carvedilol, but the effects of propranolol regressed more rapidly.
plasma pharmacokinetics of the enantiomers of
carvedilol
the time courses of the median plasma concentrations are presented in fig. 2. the r(+) concentrations
were substantially higher than the s(-) concentrations: the maximum concentration values for the
r-enantiomer were 2.8- to 3.0-fold higher. the (ris)
ratio between the two enantiomers was quite constant
across the various doses of carvedilol, but it was not
constant over time: the ratios reached their (observed)
maximum at 2 to 4 hours after dosing and then tended
to decline with time in a treatment independent fashion. this suggests a faster dose-independent decline of
the r(+)- relative to the s(-)-enantiomer. the individual and average dose-normalized area under the
curve (auc) values for both s(-); and r(+)-enantiomers were independent of dose.
adrenergic receptor- related kinetics
the median time courses of the rra-derived
(n . ki) concentrations are plotted in fig. 3. the individual and average dose-normalized auc values were
independent of dose within the range of 25 to 100 mg
carvedilol. the larger data scatter at the 12.5 mg dose
level relates to the relatively less accurate derivation
of the auc at this low dose level (and low concentrations versus the limit of quantitation). the corresponding maximum average pi-adrenergic receptor occupancies were 66%, 40%, 53%, 72%, and 83% for 40
mg propranolol and 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 mg carvedilol, respectively. the maximum average a,-adrener-

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
volume 55. number 3

set at time 2:00 h

ergometric hr-end points

(actual d a t a all time points)

150 7

fig. 1. left panel, time course of the average heart rate (hr; in beats per minute) before (time

0) and during each minute of supine bicycle ergometry (set)at 2 hours after administration of
placebo (pl), 40 mg propranolol (pr), and 12.5 (c12.5), 25 ( xxxd1102xxx ), 50 (c50), or 100 mg carvedilol (c100). right panel, time course of the ergometric hr after 4 minutes of set,expressed as
change from the set data before dosing. the data for placebo (dotted line) are flagged with the
least significant difference for the active treatments versus placebo (a = 0.05, dunnett test). the
difference between the active treatments and placebo reached statistical significance if their course
did not intersect the flags.
gic receptor occupancies were distinctly lower: 13%,
23%, 39%, and 58% for the increasing doses of carvedilol, respectively.

kinetic-dynamic interrelations
there was a smooth linear (sigmoidal) relationship
between the individual and average ergometric &responses of hr and the log-transformed dose of carvedilol (fig. 4, top panel). in spite of the many constraints that affect the enantiomer kinetics (the plasma
concentrations also comprise the free and proteinbound fractions, and the carvedilol s(-)-enantiomer is
not the sole determinant of the p-adrenergic receptor
occupancy), there nevertheless was a relatively
smooth linear relationship between the average ergometric 6-responses of hr and the log-transformed average plasma s(-) concentrations across all doses and
time points (fig. 4, middle panel). there also was a
relatively smooth and straightforward linear relationship between the average ergometric 6-responses and
the p,-adrenergic receptor occupancies across all
doses and profiling points (fig. 4, bottom panel).

clinical observations
the subjects often reported nasal congestion
("stuffed nose"). its first occurrence during the day
was often associated with the ergometries and its
intensity (and that of the related discomfort) increased
with the ergometries. the prominence (incidence and
severity) of this symptom was most likely enhanced
by the very intense ergometric strain (which prompted
nasal breathing and made the subject alert to even the
slightest impedance of nasal breathing). nasal congestion was not recorded with propranolol, was reported
twice for placebo, but quite regularly with carvedilol
(and in a dose-related fashion). this reaction is
possibly treatment related and may reflect the a-adrenergic blocking properties of carvedilol. a clear
reduction of the exercise capacity (under extreme
exercise stress) was seen with the 50 and 100 mg
carvedilol dose (and more so for the latter). it was
usually characterized by pallor, faintness, aching legs
and, less often, by general exhaustion that sometimes
required the exercise test to be interrupted prematurely.

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
march 1994

334 de mey et al.
enantiomer kinetics (hplc)

a 12.5 mg

v

25 mg

0

50 mg

0

100 mg

fig. 2. time course of the median plasma concentrations of the r(+)- and s(-)-enantiomers (in
nanograms per milliliter, as determined by specific hplc assay).

fig. 3. time course of the median plasma concentrations derived by rra bioassay versus the a,and p,-adrenergic receptors (as multifolds of the equilibrium dissociation constant [k,]).

discussion
the observed enantiospecific kinetics of carvedilol
with higher systemic bioavailability but more rapid
elimination of the r(+)-enantiomer agree with previous reports.%fter all doses of carvedilol, the concentration equivalents determined with the pi-rra were

1.7- to 3.7-fold higher than those derived from the a,rra. the concentration equivalents reached their
maximum usually at 2 hours after dosing (as did the
enantiomer concentrations) and were well proportional
with dose.
the smoothness of the relationship between the er-

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
volume 55, number 3

kinetic-dynamic interrelations

dose of carvedilol (and propranolol)

hplc-concentrations of s(-) [ng/m]

p1-rra-%

occupancy

fig. 4. top panel, individual (0)and average (0)relationships between the ergometric treatment effects (relative to placebo) and the log-transformed dose of carvedilol (relative to propran0101); middle panel, relationship between the average ( 2 sem) ergometric treatment effects and
the log-transformed plasma concentrations of the camedilol s(-)-enantiomer across all doses and
time points. bottom panel, relationship between the average (?sem) ergometric treatment effects and the carvedilol- and propranolol-related p,-adrenergic receptor occupancy as derived by
the radioreceptor assay (rra) bioassay with use of plasma samples.

336 de mey et al.
gometric treatment responses of hr (hallmarks of p i adrenergic receptor b l o ~ k a d e ~and
~ - ~the
~ )s(-)-enantiomer concentrations (without hysteresis) suggests
that the overall kinetic behavior of the metabolites that
are likely to contribute to carvedilol's effects does not
differ from that of the main enantiomer.
despite their pharmacokinetic difference (n . ki
rra concentrations regressed more rapidly for propranolol than for carvedilol), an oral dose of 40 mg
propranolol appeared to be roughly similar with an
oral dose of 40 to 50 mg carvedilol in terms of
p,-rra occupancies and the attenuation of the ergometric rise of hr.
only a relatively small portion of the ergometric
rise of hr relates to 6,-adrenergic receptor stimulation ( 100% p -adrenergic receptor occupancy would
reduce the average ergometric increase of hr by less
than half). the ergometric responses nevertheless permitted a highly sensitive differentiation of the treatments. the present findings also exemplify that the
relatively complex kinetics of carvedilol do not preclude quite simple, smooth, and straightforward doseeffect and kinetic-dynamic relationships.
there was no indication that a baroreflex related
cholinergic withdrawl (possibly resulting from a pronounced a,-adrenergic blockade) resulted in a different relationship between the ergometric hr modulation and the p-adrenergic occupancies for carvedilol
relative to propranolol. however, eventual vascular
effects might have played a role in the somewhat reduced clinical tolerability of maximum exercise seen
at high doses of carvedilol.
previous studies in healthy volunteers with use of
digital plethysmography showed clear (undifferentiated) vascular effects at oral doses of 25 to 100 mg
carvedilol. with venous occlusion plethysmography,
significant differences versus placebo were found only
at dose levels of at least 75 mg.2y a further study with
repeated doses of 50 mg carvedilol twice a day for 1
week showed a clear reduction in heart rate and systolic and diastolic blood pressure, with a 40% increase
of arterial calf blood flow (venous occlusion strain
gauge plethysmography30). however, studies using
doppler flow analysis of the forearm had not confirmed in healthy subjects the vasodilatory effects otherwise seen in subjects with hypertension." in addition, in spite of quite extensive investigations, in this
study there were only discrete signs of vascular effects
in the supine resting state. however, there was only a
slight reduction of resting heart rate as well. this indicates that the basal efferent adrenergic drive in these
resting normotensive young subjects might have been
too low to detect the consequences of its blockade.

,

clinicai. pharmacology & therapeutics
march 1994

in conclusion, this study confirms that carvedilol
binds to pi-adrenergic receptors and (albeit to a lesser
extent) to a,-adrenergic receptors. carvedilol furthermore attenuated the ergometric rise of hr in a closely
dose related fashion, which exemplifies its pi-adrenergic receptor blocking effects. however, the basal efferent adrenergic drive might have been too low to
show consistent a,-blocking properties. the rra and
hplc kinetics were proportional with dose. there
was no indication that the overall kinetic behavior of
contributing active metabolites would differ from that
of the s(-)-enantiomer. on average, there was a
smooth linear relationship between the ergometric
treatment responses and log-transformed dose, logtransformed concentrations of the s(-)-enantiomer,
and the rra-derived pi-adrenergic receptor occupancies. this indicates that the relative complexity of the
kinetics of carvedilol (enantiospecific kinetics and dynamics, protein binding, and involvement of active
metabolites) does not preclude relatively simple and
straightforward dose-effect and kinetic-dynamic relationships.

references
1 . abshagen u . a new molecule with vasodilating and
p-adrenoceptor blocking properties. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1987;10(suppl 1 i):s23-32.
2. cubeddu lx, fuenmayor n, varin f, villagra vg,
colindres re, powell jr. clinical pharmacology of
carvedilol in normal volunteers. clinpharmacol
ther
1987;41:31-44.
3. sponer g, strein k, bartsch w, miiller-beckmann b.
vasodilatory action of carvedilol. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1992;19(suppl 1):s5-11.
4. giannattasio c, cattaneo bm, seravalle g, et al. a,blocking properties of carvedilol during acute and
chronic administration. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1992;
19(suppl 1):s18-22.
5. tomlinson b, prichard bnc, graham br, walden rj.
clinical pharmacology of carvedilol. clin investigator
1992;7o:s27-36.
6. sponer g, strein k, miiller-beckmann b, bartsch w.
study on the mode of vasodilating action of carvedilol.
j cardiovasc pharmacol 1987;10(suppl 11):s42-8.
7. beermann c, schloos j, belz gg. constriction of human dorsal hand veins in vivo with several vasoconstrictors and the influence of oral administration of
carvedilol. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1992;19(suppl
l):s12-7.
8. nichols aj, sulpizio ac, ashton dj, hieble jp, ruffolo rr. the interaction of the enantiomers of carvedilol with a,- and pi-adrenoceptors. chirality 1989;
1:265-70.
9. neugebauer g, akpan w, kaufmann b, reiff k. stereoselective disposition of carvedilol in man after intra-

clinical pharmacology & therapeutics
volume 55, number 3

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

venous and oral administration of the racemic compound. eur j clin pharmacol 1990;38(suppl):s108-11.
bartsch w, sponer g, strein k, et al. pharmacological
characteristics of the stereoisomers of carvedilol. eur j
clin pharmacol 1990;38(suppl):s 104-7.
belz gg, stem hc, butzer r. dose-response following single administration of a new cardiac performance
enhancer ro 13-6438 in normal volunteers. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1985;7:86-90.
belz gg, aust pe, schneider b. time course of the effects of single intravenous doses of  xxxd1884xxx  in normal
volunteers. j cardiovasc pharmacol i98 1;3: 1116-25,
weissler a, harris ws, schoenfeld cd. systolic time
intervals in heart failure in man. circulation 1968;
37: 149-59.
de mey c, enterling d. disagreement between standard
transthoracic impedance cardiography and the automated transthoracic electrical bioimpedance method in
estimating cardiovascular performance in healthy man.
br j clin pharmacol 1993;35:349-55.
kubicek wg, kamegis jn, patterson rp, witsoe da,
mattson rh. development and evaluation of an impedance cardiac output system. aerospace med 1966;
37:1208-12.
wezler k, boger a. die dynamik des arteriellen systems. ergeb physiol 1939;41:291-606.
heather lw. a comparison of cardiac output values by
impedance cardiograph and dye dilution in cardiac patients. progress report contract no nas 9-4500. national aeronautics and space administration, houston,
texas: 247-58.
lababidi z, ehmke da, durnin re, leaverton pe,
lauer rm. the first derivate thoracic impedance cardiogram. circulation l97o;4 1 :65 1-8.
breithaupt k, erb ka, neumann b, wolf gk, belz
gg. comparison of four noninvasive techniques to
measure stroke volume: dual-beam doppler echoaortography, electrical impedance cardiography, mechanosphygmography, and m-mode echocardiography of the
left ventricle. am j noninvas cardiol 1990;4:203-9.
breithaupt k, de mey c, belz gg. an ergometric protocol with highly reproducible and sensitive heart rate
endpoints [abstract]. fifth world conference on clini-

de mey et a/. 337

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

cal pharmacology and therapeutics. yokohama, japan,
july 1992.
wellstein a, belz gg, palm d. beta adrenoceptor subtype binding activity in plasma and beta blockade by
propranolol and beta-l selective bisoprolol in humans:
evaluation with schild-plots. j pharmacol exp ther
1988;246:328-37.
dunnett cw. new tables for multiple comparisons with
a control. biometrics 1964;20:482-9 1.
de mey c, hansen-schmidt s, enterling d. postprandial haemodynamic changes: a source of bias in cardiovascular research affected by its own methodological
bias. cardiovasc res 1988;22:703-7.
de mey c, hansen-schmidt s, enterling d, meineke i .
time course and nature of postprandial hemodynamic
changes in normal man. clin physiol 1989;9:77-87.
de mey c, belz gg, nixdorf u, et al. relative sensitivity of four noninvasive methods in assessing systolic
cardiovascular effects of  xxxd2401xxx  in healthy volunteers. clinpharmacol
ther1992;52:609- 19.
dimsdale je, moss j. plasma catecholamines in stress
and exercise. jama 1980;243:340-2.
berkin ke, walker g, inblis gc, ball sg, thomson
nc. circulating adrenaline and noradrenaline concentrations during exercise in patients with exerciseinduced asthma and normal subjects. thorax 1988;
143:295-9.
arnold jmo, o'connor pc, riddell jg, harron dwg,
shanks rg, mcdevitt dg. effects of the p,-adrenoceptor antagonist ici 118,551 on exercise tachycardia
and  xxxd2398xxx -induced p-adrenoceptor responses in
man. br j clin pharmacol 1985;19:619-30.
von mollendorf e, abshagen u, akpan w, neugebauer
g, schroter e. clinical pharmacology investigations
with carvedilol, a new beta-blocker with direct vasodilator activity. clinpharmacol
ther1986;39:677-82.
sundberg s, tiihonen k, gordin a. vasodilatory effects of carvedilol and  xxxd2957xxx . j cardiovasc pharmacol 1987;io(supp1 11):s76-80.
cournot a, lim c, duchier j, safar m. hemodynamic
effects of carvedilol after acute oral administration in
hypertensive and normal subjects. j cardiovasc pharmacol 1992;19(suppl 1):s35-9.

