immunocytochemical localization and biological activity of 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the central nervous system of the frog.  the enzyme 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta 5-delta 4 isomerase (3 beta-hsd) catalyzes biosynthesis of progesterone (p) and all precursors of glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, androgens, and estrogens. despite the broad interest raised by neurosteroids, the cellular localization of 3 beta-hsd has never been investigated in the brain. we took advantage of the availability of an antiserum raised against human placental 3 beta-hsd to determine the distribution of 3 beta-hsd-immunoreactive structures in the brain of the frog rana ridibunda by the indirect immunofluorescence technique. three populations of 3 beta-hsd-immunoreactive cell bodies were observed in the hypothalamus, namely, in the rostral region of the preoptic nucleus, the dorsal infundibular nucleus, and the dorsal part of the ventral infundibular nucleus. a dense network of 3 beta-hsd-immunoreactive nerve fibers was visualized in the dorsal area of the diencephalon, that is, in the lateral neuropil, the corpus geniculatus lateralis, and the nucleus posterolateralis thalami. reversed-phase hplc analysis of frog hypothalamic extracts combined with ria detection showed the presence of substantial amounts of immunoreactive steroids coeluting with p and 17- xxxd2303xxx  (17oh-p). the synthesis of delta 4-3-keto-steroids in the frog hypothalamus was investigated using the pulse-chase technique with 3h-pregnenolone (3h-delta 5p) as a precursor. the formation of five tritiated metabolites of 3h-delta 5p was observed, one of which coeluted with 17oh-p. conversion of 3h-delta 5p into this radioactive metabolite was significantly reduced by  xxxd3436xxx , a specific inhibitor of 3 beta-hsd. immunodetection of newly synthesized steroids in hplc fractions of hypothalamic extracts, using 17oh-p antibodies, revealed the existence of an immunoreactive steroid that exhibited the same retention time as synthetic 17oh-p. the present study provides the first immunocytochemical mapping of 3 beta-hsd, a key enzyme of the steroid biosynthetic pathway, in the cns of a vertebrate. the data also demonstrate for the first time biosynthesis of neurosteroids in the brain of a nonmammalian vertebrate.