]( x y
principles & practice

catherine garner, rnc, msn, mpa, faan

uses of grtrh
agonists

gonadotropin-releasinghormone agonists are a relatively
new class of drugs, which, when chronically administered,
result in marked reductions in blood levels of testosterone
and estrogen, these drugs include  xxxd2463xxx 
(lupron); thejirst gnrh agonist to be approved in the
united states,  xxxd2691xxx  acetate ( xxxd2691xxx ); and  xxxd2229xxx 
acetate (zoladex). approved indicationsfor these drugs,
depending on the spec@ agent, include advanced prostate
cancer, endometriosis, and precocious puberty. these and
other investigational gnrh agonists are also being
evaluated in many other diseases, including uterine
jibroids, polycystic ovarian disease, breast cancer,
jibrocystic breast disease, benign prostatic hypertrophy,
and irritable bowel syndrome. because of their therapeutic
potential in many endocrinologic disorders, the gnrh
agonists represent one of the most important advances in
hormonal therapy in thepastfew decades. thus, it appears
likely that in the 1990s a greater number ofpatients will
be receiving these agents. this article summarizes the
application of gnrh agonist drugs in clinical practice,
their side effects, and important informationfor patient use.

o understand how gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (gnrh) agonists work, a review of
the interrelationships between the hypothalamus (the
true “master gland”) and the pituitary is in order.
these two parts of the brain indirectly regulate the
production of androgens and estrogens by the testes
and ovaries.

hormonal regulation of male and female
reproductive organs
in men, the major androgen is testosterone, produced
primarily by the testes. in women, the ovaries produce
estrogen and progesterone. the testes and ovaries are
stimulated by gonadotropic hormones luteinizing
hormone (lh) and follicle-stimulating hormone
(fsh), which are secreted by the anterior pituitary.
located at the base of the skull, the anterior pituitary is
stimulated to release these hormones by gnrh (sometimes referred to as  xxxg930xxx  or luteinizing hormone releasing hormone), which is produced by the hypothalamus and travels to the pituitary through a specialized
portal vascular system. the mechanism underlying
these interrelationships is often referred to as a negative feedback loop, because high levels of circulating
androgens and estrogens act on the hypothalamic-pituitary unit to reduce the output of gnrh and lhfsh, respectively.
in women, lh and fsh, referred to as gonadotropins, act sequentially on the ovary. luteinizing hormone triggers the production of progesterone and androgens. follicle-stimulating hormone stimulates the
production and secretion of estradiol, the principal
estrogen (see figure 1).

h o w do gnrh agonists work?
the physiologic effects of gnrh agonists depend on
whether they are administered intermittently or continuously. for example, when administered in a pulsatile fashion similar to human gnrh secretion, gnrh
agonists stimulate the pituitary, causing release of fsh
and lh (filicori & flamigni, 1988). however, when
administered continuously or in very large doses, agonists initially stimulate the release of fsh and lh
briefly and then inhibit the release of these gonadotropins (filicori & flamigni, 1988). this inhibition is

 xxxg930xxx 
agonists are potentially effective
in treating disorders aggravated by
either testosterone or estrogen.

accepted: april 1993

september 1994

jog”

563

p r i n c i p l e s

a n d

p r a c t i c e

gonadotropin-releasing

hormone
(gnrh)

recent clinical uses
commercially available and investigational gnrh agonists and approved indications for their use are listed
in table 1.

pituitary

androgens
estrogens

4
progesterones
androgens

*

estrogens

figure 1.

regulation of estrogen. progesterone. and androgen production b.v
gonadotropin-releasinghormone in women. lh = luteinizing hormone:
fsh = follicle-stimulatinghormone

fully reversible upon discontinuation of the drug (see
figure 2).
normally, both native gnrh and gnrh agonists
bind to cellular receptors located on the surface of the
anterior pituitary. these hormone-receptor complexes are subject to metabolic breakdown by the action of peptidase, thereby freeing the receptors so that
additional gnrh molecules can bind to them. however, because gnrh agonists are more resistant to
breakdown by peptidase than native gnrh, the number of receptors available for binding to gnrh is reduced (casper, 1991). continued administration of
gnrh agonists fails to stimulate the production of lh
and fsh, and levels of androgens and estrogens fall.
clinical studies have shown that within 4 weeks of
the initiation of continuous therapy, blood levels of
sex hormones (testosterone, estrogen) fall to levels
seen after oophorectomy or castration (dlugi, miller,
knittle, & the lupron study group, 1990). thus,
endometriosis bas been reported to
affect 1 in 15 women of childbearing
age.

564 j o c n n

gnrh agonists are potentially effective in treating disorders that are aggravated by either testosterone or
estrogen.

endometriosis
endometriosis is a disease characterized by progressive abnormal growth of tissue resembling the endometrium outside the uterus, most commonly on the
ovaries, uterus, and supporting ligaments. like the endometrium, the tissue of the implant is dependent
upon estrogen and progesterone for growth. although
estimates vary, endometriosis has been reported to affect 1 in 15 women of childbearing age and 25-35% of
women investigated for infertility (weingold, 1990).
nulliparity after age 30 and a family history of the disease are risk factors. endometriosis may produce n o
symptoms or may be associated with varying degrees
of dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, pelvic pain, and infertility. the disease is classified into stages of minimal,
mild, moderate, and severe, based on the finding at
laparoscopy.
treatpent of endometriosis is dictated by the patient’s symptoms, desire for childbearing, age, and
stage of disease. patients who have mild premenstrual
pain from endometriosis, n o signs of disease on pelvic
examination, and no immediate desire to become
pregnant are usually treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents. patients with mild forms of the disease who do not desire to become pregnant, or those
figure 2.

pulsatile administration of natural gnrh mimics the endogenous
hvpothalamic acretion o f gnrh. pharmacologic administration of gnrh
agonists leuds to an initial increase in the release of lh and fsh
jdlowed by a reversible inhibition o f l h and fsh.

i

l

o

profertility
(physiologic)

antifertility
(pharmamlogic)

gnrh (pulsed)

gnrh agonist (daily)

time(hr)

volume 23 number 7

8

0

tirne(wk)

4

gnrh agonists

resumption of pubertal patterns of
hormone secretion occurs when
therapy i s stopped, thus allowing
continuation of pubertal development
at an appropriate age.

who are unable to tolerate other therapies, often receive combination oral contraceptives or progestin.
these agents may be effective in relieving pelvic pain
but do not reduce the size of endometriotic lesions.
pregnancy rates after treatment range from 40-50%,
and side effects include depression and breakthrough
bleeding (weingold, 1990). if the patient is older than
35 years of age and has severe endometriosis and no
desire to retain her reproductive potential, hysterectomy and oophorectomy may be the appropriate procedures. in the younger patient, the ovaries may be
retained.
treatment of mild to severe endometriosis in patients who wish to become pregnant involves reduction of endogenous estrogen production, thereby inhibiting endometrial lesion growth. during the 1970s
and 1980s,  xxxd1806xxx  ( xxxd1806xxx ) was the mainstay of
therapy for these stages of endometriosis. however,
patiept acceptance was limited by its androgenic side
effects, such as hirsutism, acne, and weight gain (barbieri, 1988), as well as the need to take oral medication twice daily.
more recently, the gnrh agonists leuprolide
(which can be given as a once-a-month3.75 mg intramuscular depot injection) or  xxxd2691xxx  (administered
twice daily by nasal spray in a dose of 200 mg) have
been shown to be effective and well-tolerated therapeutic alternatives. both agents reduce the extent of
endometriotic lesions and the occurrence of pelvic
pain associated with endometriosis, and both produce
posttreatment pregnancy rates similar to that of  xxxd1806xxx  therapy (dlugi et al., 1990). the main side effects
are those of natural menopause-hot flushes and vaginal dryness. occasionally, headaches and myalgias
similar to those seen in hypoestrogenic women are
reported.
precocious puberty

precocious puberty is pubertal development before
the age of 8 years in girls and 9 years in boys. early
development of secondary sexual characteristics and
rapid bone advancement occurs. when the cause is
due to the early activation of gnrh-induced gonadotropin (fsh, lh) secretion, the syndrome is termed
central precocious puberty. central precocious pu-

september 1994

berty is usually idiopathic in girls or may be related to
tumors of the hypothalamus o r nerve tissue (filicori &
flamigni, 1988).
various medical treatments have been used for
the treatment of precocious puberty, including  xxxd1786xxx , medroxyprogesterone, and  xxxd1806xxx . although these agents are effective in blocking sexual
development, they fail to control bone age advancement (filicori & flamigni, 1988), thus leading to early
closure of the epiphyseal plates and to short stature.
because gnrh agonists inhibit the endogenous
production of gnrh, they have been used successfully to interrupt the progression of central precocious
puberty. in clinical trials, gnrh agonists have significantly reduced serum estradiol and testosterone levels; suppressed secondary sexual characteristics,
menses, and growth rate; and improved predicted
adult height (lee, page, & the leuprolide study
group, 1989). resumption of pubertal patterns of hormone secretion occurs when therapy is stopped, thus
allowing continuation of pubertal development at an
appropriate age.

clinical uses-investigational
uterine leiomyomata (fibroids)
uterine fibroids are benign tumors that occur in more
than 20% of women of reproductive age. they usually
produce no symptoms. however, when symptoms d o
develop, management is indicated. because the results of past attempts at medical therapy using progestogens and androgens were inconsistent, surgery became the treatment of choice.
fibroids appear to grow in the presence of estrogen. by producing reductions in circulating estrogen
concentrations, gnrh agonists have been shown to
reduce fibroid size and thus uterine size. clinical trials
have produced reductions in uterine size of approximately 40-50% during gnrh agonist therapy, often
with dramatic declines in symptoms (friedman et al.,
1991). however, when the agonist is discontinued,
symptoms and uterine size return to baseline within 6
to 9 months.
there is a lack of long-term treatment experience
and safety data with gnrh agonists in patients with
uterine fibroids. therefore, the maximum recommended duration of treatment is 6 months. currently,
gnrh therapy is directed toward reducing the size of
the fibroids and uterus before surgery, thereby facilitating myomectomy and often eliminating the need
for hysterectomy in women who wish to retain childbearing potential. in o n e clinical trial, the reduction in
uterine size produced by gnrh therapy was related to

jog"

565

p r i n c i p l e s

a n d

p r a c t i c e

failure to ozwiate accounts for 30% of
female infertility.

a reduction in the length of hospital stay (stovall, ling,
henry, &woodruff, 1991). manywomen become anemic as a result of menorrhagia, but gnrh agonist therapy allows the hematocrit level to increase so that the
woman can have an autologous transfusion if necessary (friedman, barbieri, doubilet, fine, & schiff,
1988).
polycystic ovary disease
polycystic ovary syndrome (also known as stein-leventhal syndrome) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by chronic anovulation (and resultant infertility) because of abnormalities in the feedback signals to the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. the result is
inappropriate gonadotropin secretion (lh and fsh).
excess circulating androgens may be present. the ovaries may be enlarged and have follicular cysts, or their
size may be normal. many patients have amenorrhea,
hirsutism, acne, and obesity, whereas others have irregular menses with profuse bleeding (presumably
due to endometrial hyperplasia that results from the
hyperestrogenism).
the clinical manifestations of polycystic ovarian
syndrome vary, but they are generally managed with
estrogen-progestogen combinations (such as oral
contraceptives) and with antiandrogen drugs such as
 xxxd1786xxx .  xxxg930xxx  agonists also have shown promise in the management of androgen-related side effects in patients
with polycystic ovary disease (steingold et al., 1987).
both  xxxd2691xxx  and histrelin suppress ovarian hormone production (estrogens, progesterones, and androgens) and serum lh levels in these patients. after
6 months of treatment, more than half the patients in
two studies showed some reduction in abnormal hair
growth, and all patients in one study had reduced skin
oiliness (steingold et al., 1987). discontinuation of
treatment without weight loss was associated with a
return of symptoms. in a randomized, controlled, prospective study, human menopausal gonadotropin
(hmg) administration, followed by leuprolide, led to
significant decreases from baseline in serum lh, es-

c ~ r agonists
h
are a potential
alternative for the palliatiue treatment
of advanced breast cancer in the
premenopausal woman.

566 j o c n n

tradiol, and testosterone levels in 13 women with
polycystic ovary disease. three of nine cycles of treatment resulted in pregnancy, compared with only one
of eight cycles with hmg alone (dodson, hughes,
whitesides, & haney, 1987).
ovulation induction for in vitro fertilization
failure to ovulate accounts for 30% of female infertility. other causes include  xxxg2347xxx   xxxg2350xxx  disease and male infertility. in these patients, ovulation can be induced artificially, and in vivo or in vitro fertilization and embryo
transfer can be attempted. the treatment of choice for
in vitro fertilization stimulation is the use of gonadotropins. human menopausal gonadotropins are administered daily during an 8- to 12-day period to
achieve adequate follicular stimulation and growth,
followed by a single injection of human  xxxd2228xxx . recent studies have reported that when
gnrh agonists are administered before or with gonadotropins, they enhance the pregnancy rates produced
by gonadotropins alone (dodson et al., 1987).
by suppressing ovarian estradiol production before ovarian stimulation, gnrh agonists reinforce follicle selection and prevent increases in lh levels. of
the gnrh agonists,  xxxd2463xxx  has been used
most frequently in this capacity. treatment with  xxxd2463xxx  0.5 to 1 mg per day for approximately
10 days has been associated with an increase in oocyte
rate, cleavage rate, and total number of embryos, as
well as the pregnancy rate and ongoing pregnancy rate
(dodson et al., 1987). one prospective, randomized
trial compared hmg and clomiphene with hmg and
leuprolide and found that both regimens were equally
efficacious as first-line ovulation induction regimens
(ferrier, prey, rasweiler, berdeley, & bedford, 1990).
breast cancer
estrogenic stimulation is thought to enhance the progression of metastatic breast cancer, at least in some
cases. hormonal manipulation is the oldest effective
systemic treatment for breast cancer and is still in use.
bilateral oophorectomy was originally used to treat
metastatic disease in premenopausal women, but in
recent years tamoxifen, an antiestrogen, has replaced
surgical oophorectomy in many centers. tamoxifen
treatment, however, may cause the development of
ovarian cysts in a small number of premenopausal patients with breast cancer (kaufman et al., 1989).
gnrh agonists are a potential palliative treatment
of advanced breast cancer in the premenopausal
woman. by inhibiting ovarian hormone production,
these agents produce an effective medical castration.

volume 23 number 7

gnrh agonists

table 1.
commercially available and investigational gnrh agonists
gnrh agonbt

(trade name,
manufacturer)

dosage form
ava ilable

fda-approved
indications

leuprolide
( xxxd2463xxx ,
lupron
injection tap)

im sustainedrelease
(depot) a n d
sc injection

palliative
treatment of
advanced
prostate
cancer;
endometriosis
endometriosis;
precocious
puberty
palliative
treatment of
advanced
prostate cancer
precocious
puberty

 xxxd2691xxx 
( xxxd2691xxx ,
syntex)
 xxxd2229xxx 
(zoladex, ici)

nasal spray

histrelin
(supprelin,
ort ho/roberts)
 xxxd387xxx ,
hoechst

sc injection
not yet marketed

tryp torel in,
lederle

investigational

sc

=

sc sustained-

release d e p o t
implant

investigational

subcutaneous; im

=

intramuscular.

in a study of 118 premenopausal and perimenopausal
women with metastatic breast cancer,  xxxd2229xxx  depot
produced remission rates and duration of remissions
comparable to those seen after oophorectomy.  xxxd2229xxx  was well tolerated both locally and systemically
(kaufman et al., 1989). additional studies comparing
gnrh agonist therapy with surgical oophorectomy in
premenopausal patients are needed to determine
their role in the palliative treatment of advanced
breast cancer.

agonists. in a study of 66 female patients, the gnrh
agonist ([ xxxd1794xxx  61 -  xxxg930xxx ) taken alone or in conjunction with tamoxifen or  xxxd1786xxx  (a progestin) for 3 to 6 months produced a complete response,
as noted on ultrasound or x-ray in more than 50% of
patients without troublesome side effects (monsonego et al., 1991). a significant partial response was
observed in 45% of patients. although the results of
this trial are promising, additional controlled studies
are needed.

safety
gnrh agonists are well tolerated. i t is uncommon for
patients to require discontinuation of therapy because
of adverse effects, which consist primarily of predictable extensions of their pharmacologic effects (reductions in gonadal concentration) (see table 2). hot
flushes have been the most commonly reported adverse event and occur in as many as 90% of patients
(henzl, corson, moghissi, buttram, & berquist,
1988). the incidence and severity of the hot flushes
can be greatly diminished by the concurrent use of
adjuvant therapy such as clonidine or an oral progestin
such as  xxxd2751xxx  in dosages of up to 3.5 mg/day
or 20 to 30 mg/day of  xxxd2554xxx .
other symptoms of hypoestrogenism, including vaginal dryness, dyspareunia, and decreased libido, have
been reported in patients receiving gnrh agonist analogs (henzl, et al., 1988).
the reported effects of gnrh agonists on bone
metabolism are inconsistent because of the variability
in measurement technology and the bone site evalu-

table 2.
side ejects reported with cnrh agonist therapy in women
hot flushes
decreased breast size in women
vaginal dryness

fibrocystic breast disease
fibrocystic breast disease is a benign disease characterized by macroscopic cysts. it may be associated
with symptoms such as congestion and sensitivity to
touch. most women with this disorder tolerate the
symptoms without difficulty. however, some require
repetitive cyst biopsy to rule out malignancy.
because fibrocystic disease has been interpreted
as the result of gonadal or hypothalamic hormonal disorder, some investigators think that symptomatic improvement of the disease can be produced with gnrh

september 1994

fatigue
insomnia
amenorrhea
headaches
arthralgias/myalgias
depression
decreased libido
weight gain
nausea/vomiting/constipation

j o c n n

567

p r i n c i p l e s

a n d

p r a c t i c e

aced in clinical trials. reductions in bone density during a 6-month course of therapy in women have
ranged from 2-13.8% (johansen et al., 1988), which,
on average, are comparable to the decreases (6.5%)
found in women who were breastfeeding for as long
as 6 months after delivery. the alterations in bone
mass were partially to completely reversible within 6
months after discontinuation of therapy. therefore,
bone mass alterations may be clinically significant
only in women being treated chronically or repeatedly
with gnrh analogs. nonetheless, this side effect must
be a part of informed consent.
some investigators have found that concurrent use
of progestins, such as  xxxd2751xxx  and  xxxd2554xxx , diminish the adverse effect of
gnrh agonists on bone loss (surrey, gambone, lu, &
judd, 1990; cedars, lu, meldrum, & judd, 1990).
there appears to be a sound rationale for concurrent
 xxxd2751xxx  therapy when patients are at high risk
for the bone-resorptive effects of gnrh agonists (e.g.,
those who may require chronic therapy). indeed,  xxxd2751xxx  was more successful than medroxyprogesterone in diminishing the pain and extent of disease in
patients with fibroids (surrey et al., 1990; moghissi,
1990). nonetheless, until the risks of reduction in
bone density with prolonged use are known, treatment with gnrh agonists is only recommended for 6
months at most.

patient education
patients must be educated about a number of facets of
gnrh agonists before initiating therapy (see table 3 ) .
for example, they should have a good understanding
of their disease state and the expected effect of drug
therapy (curative versus palliative) .,becausegnrh agonists result in an initial increase in hormone concentrations, patients should be told that they may notice
an increase in their symptoms at the start of therapy
but that these symptoms will subside with continuous
therapy. they should also be informed of the most
common side effects of gnrh agonist therapy, which
are similar to those that occur during menopause
(e.g., hot flushes, vaginal dryness). because women
will become amenorrheic o n therapy (although spotting and light vaginal bleeding can occur), it should
be emphasized that gnrh agonists are not contraceptives and that ovulation may still occur even in the
absence of menstruation. therefore, options for
barrier (nonhormonal) contraception should be discussed. pregnancy and breastfeeding are contraindications to gnrh agonist therapy. if  xxxd2691xxx  is used,

568 j o g n n

table 3.
important points to review with women wbo will
be taking gnrh agonists

1. at the start of therapy you may notice an increase in your

current symptoms. these symptoms will diminish as
hormone levels being to fall.
2 . hot flushes are common with this medication. these
occurrences are not dangerous, but may be
uncomfortable. if they are very bothersome, contact
your physician.
3. vaginal dryness may occur during therapy. if this
disrupts intercourse, you may try a water soluble vaginal
lubricant. if you still experience discomfort, contact
your physician. you may also experience spotting or
light vaginal bleeding during therapy.
4. this drug is not a contraceptive. even though your
menstrual periods may stop, ovulation could occur. you
should be using a barrier contraceptive. tell your
physician if you think you may be pregnant.
5 . your normal menstrual cycle should begin on average 6
to 8 weeks following the course of therapy prescribed
by your physician (usually 6 months).
6. women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not
be using these drugs. if you have ever had an allergic
reaction to factrel or to another gnrh agonist, do not
use these drugs.

the nurse should review the procedure of nasal insufflation with the patient, emphasizing the need for adherence (see table 4 ) . in addition, patients should be
told that if the use of a topical  xxxd2565xxx  is
required during treatment, it should be used at least
30 minutes after dosing to decrease the possibility of
reducing drug absorption. effective patient education
is essential to optimize the treatment course.
although gnrh-agonist therapy is expensive (the
average wholesale price of therapy ranges between
$300 and $400 a month), treatment may be covered by
some insurance plans, including medicare. nurses
should advise patients to ask their insurance companies if such therapy is covered. nurses must also emphasize the importance of completing a treatment
course to achieve the desired results of therapy.

conclusion
continuous administration of a gnrh agonist produces transient increases and subsequent reductions
in pituitary fsh and lh levels. the resultant revers-

volume 23 number 7

gnrh agonists

table 4.
lnstrrrctionsfor self-administrationof lntranasal  xxxd2691xxx 

1. gently blow your nose to clear both nostrils before you
use  xxxd2691xxx  nasal spray.

2. remove the aqua safety clip and clear plastic dust cover
3.

4.
5.
6.

from the spray bottle.
bend your head forward a little and put the spray tip into
one nostril. (the tip should not reach too far into your
nose.) aim the tip toward the back and outer side of
your nose.
close the other nostril with your finger.
pump the sprayer one time, slowly and firmly, at the
same time as you sniff in gently.
remove the sprayer from your nose and tilt your head
backwards for a few seconds. this lets the spray spread
over the back of your nose.

7. do not spray in the other nostril unless your doctor has
specifically instructed you to d o so.
8. replace the aqua safety clip and clear plastic dust cover
on the spray
.
. bottle.

ible suppression of gonadal steroid production is valuable' i n treating certain androgen- and estrogen-dep e n d e n t diseases, such as prostate cancer and endometriosis. n u m e r o u s other applications of t h e s e
compounds are under investigation, including treatm e n t of severe dysfunctional uterine bleeding. as research continues, it is e x p e c t e d that g n r h agonists
will c h a n g e t h e clinical approach to t h e treatment of
many reproductive and nonreproductive diseases.

references
barbieri, r. l. (1988). new therapy for endometriosis. new
englandjournal ofmedicine, 318, 512-514.
casper, r. f. (1991). clinical uses of  xxxg930xxx  analogues. canadian medical association
journal, 144, 153-158.
cedars, m. i., lu, j. k. h., meldrum, d. r., & judd, h. l.
(1990). treatment of endometriosis with a long-acting
 xxxg930xxx  agonist plus  xxxd2554xxx . obstetrics a n d gynecology, 75,
641-645.
dlugi, a. m., miller, j. d., knittle, j., & the lupron study
group. (1990).  xxxd2463xxx  ( xxxd2463xxx  for depot suspension) in the treatment of endometriosis: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study. fertility and sterility, 54, 419-427.
dodson, w. c., hughes, c. l., whitesides, d. b., & haney, a.
f. (1987). the effect of  xxxd2463xxx  on ovulation

september 1994

induction with human menopausal gonadotropins in
polycystic ovary syndrome. journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism, 65, 95-100.
ferrier, a,, prey, k., rasweiler, _j. j.,
_ iv, berdeley, a. s., &
bedford, j. m . (1990). evaluation of  xxxd2463xxx 
and gonadotropins versus  xxxd1726xxx  and gonadotropins for in vitro fertilization or gamete intrafallopian
transfer. fertility a n d sterility, 54, 90-95.
filicori, m., bz flamigni, c. (1988). gnrh agonistsandantagonists: current clinical status. drugs, 35, 63-82.
friedman, a. j., barbieri, f. l., doubilet, p. m., fine, c., &
schiff, i . (1988). a randomized, double-blind trial of a
gonadotropin releasing-hormone agonist (leuprolide)
with or without  xxxd2554xxx  in the
treatment of leimyomata uteri. fertility and sterility, 49,
404-409.
friedman, a . j., hoffman, d. i., comite, f., browneller, r.
w., miller, j . d., for the leuprolide study group.
(1991). treatment of leiomyomata uteri with leuprolide
acetate depot: a double-blind, placebo controlled, multicenter study. obstetrics and gynecology, 77, 720-725.
henzl, m. r., corson, s. l., moghissi, k., buttram, v. c., &
berquist, c. (1988). administration of nasal  xxxd2691xxx  as
compared with oral  xxxd1806xxx  for endometriosis: a multicenter double-blind comparative trial. new england
journal of medicine, 318, 485-489.
johansen, j. s., riis, b. j., hassager, c., moen, m., jacobson,
j., & christiansen, c. (1988). the effect of a  xxxg930xxx  agonist analog ( xxxd2691xxx ) on
bone metabolism. journal of clinical endocrinology
and metabolism, 67, 701-706.
kaufman, m.,jonat, w., kleeberg, u., eiermann, w., janicke,
f., & hilfrich, j . (1989).  xxxd2229xxx , a depot  xxxg930xxx  agonist in the treatment of premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer. journal of ciinical oncology, 7, 1113-1 119.
lee, p. a , , page, j. g., & the leuprolide study group.
(1989). effects of leuprolide in the treatment of central
precocious puberty. journal ofpediatrics, 114,321-324.
moghissi, k. s. (1990). gonadotropin releasing hormones:
clinical applications in gynecology. journal of reproductive medicine, 35, 1097-1 107.
monsonego, j., destable, m.-d., de saint floret, g., amouroux, j., kouyoundjian, j . c., haour, f., breau, j. l., israel,
l., & comaru-schally, a. m . (1991). fibrocystic disease
of the breast in premenopausal women: histohormonal
correlation and response to luteinizing hormone releasing hormone analog treatment. americanjournal of obstetrics and gynecology, 164, 1181-1189.
sharifi, r., soloway, m., bz the leuprolide study group.
(1990). clinical study of leuprolide depot formulation in
the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. journal of
urology, 143, 68-71.
steingold, k., d e ziegler, d., cedars, m., meldrum d. r., et
al. (1987). clinical and hormonal effects of chronic  xxxg930xxx  agonist treatment in
polycystic ovarian disease. journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism, 65, 773-778.

j o c n n

569

p r i n c i p l e s

a n d p r a c t i c e

practice of clinical gynecology, 2nd ed. ( p p . 479-501).
new york: churchill livingstone.

stovall, t. g., ling, f. w., henry, l. c., & woodruff, m . r.
(1991). a randomized trial evaluating  xxxd2463xxx 
before hysterectomy as treatment for leiomyomas. american journal of obstetrics a n d gynecology, 164, 14201425.
surrey, e. s.7 gambone, j. c., lu, j.k.h., 8i judd, h. l.
(1990). the effects of combining  xxxd2751xxx  with a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist in the treatment of symptomatic endometriosis. fertility and sterility, 53, 620-626.
weingold, a. b. (1990). pelvic pain. in n . g. kase, a. b.
weingold, & d. m. gershenson, (eds.), principles and

address for correspondence: catherine garner, rnc, msn,
mpa, faan, 5500 fortune’s ridge, #91b, durham, nc
27713,

570 j o c n n

volume 23 number 7

catherine garner is an assistant professor, university of north
carolina, chapel hill.

