 xxxd453xxx  ( xxxd453xxx ), a new oral amino-2-thiazolyl cephalosporin, inhibits human neutrophil myeloperoxidase in the extracellular medium but not the ph...   xxxd453xxx , a new oral 2-amino-5-thiazolyl cephalosporin, inhibited the luminol-amplified chemiluminescence (lacl) response of human neutrophils stimulated by pma but not opsonized zymosan, in a concentration-dependent but not time-dependent manner. the lacl response to opsonized zymosan in cytochalasin b-treated neutrophils was, however, inhibited by  xxxd453xxx . various cephalosporins, regardless of the presence of a 2-amino-5-thiazolyl moiety, did not significantly alter the neutrophil lacl response triggered by pma and zymosan. the lacl response induced by the calcium ionophore a23187 and fmlp was also impaired by  xxxd453xxx , and this impairment was increased in cytochalasin b-treated neutrophils. superoxide anion generation by neutrophils, measured in terms of lucigenin-amplified chemiluminescence and  xxxg569xxx  reduction, was not altered. spontaneous and fmlp-induced neutrophil degranulation, assessed by lysozyme and beta-glucuronidase release, were not modified by  xxxd453xxx . furthermore,  xxxd453xxx  inhibited lacl generation in cell-free systems consisting of h2o2, nai, and either horseradish peroxidase or a myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract. orthodianisidine oxidation in these two acellular systems was inhibited by  xxxd453xxx .  xxxd453xxx  did not alter neutrophil bacterial killing at concentrations that inhibited myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract-dependent reactions induced by soluble stimuli. taken together, these data strongly suggest that  xxxd453xxx  directly inhibits the activity of myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract released into the extracellular medium during neutrophil stimulation by soluble mediators, but has no effect on that released into the phagolysosome during phagocytosis. this unusual property of a member of the beta-lactam family could be of interest in modulating the exaggerated inflammatory process often associated with infectious diseases.