cellular and molecular mechanisms of gastric ulcer healing. is the
quality of mucosal scar affected by treatment?
a. tarnawski, k. tanoue, a. m. santos & i. j. sarfeh
dva medical center, long beach, and the university of california, irvine, california, usa

scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

tarnawski a, tanoue k, santos am, sarfeh ij. cellular and molecular mechanisms of gastric ulcer
healing. is the quality of mucosal scar affected by treatment? scand j gastroenterol 1995;30 suppl
210:9-14.

background: ulcer healing, i.e. the reconstruction of the mucosal architecture, is an active process of
filling the mucosal defect with proliferating and migrating epithelial cells and connective tissue. methods:
this article represents a summary of histologic and ultrastructural assessment of the cellular events
occurring during healing of experimental gastric ulcer. results: mucosa adjacent to the ulcer crater
forms a ‘healing’ zone. the gastric glands in this zone dilate and the epithelial cells lining these glands
de-differentiate, express  xxxg682xxx , and proliferate. the latter is the result of
local activation of genes encoding for egf and its receptors. at the ulcer margin, proliferating and
dividing epithelial cells migrate onto the granulation tissue to cover (re-epithelialize) the ulcer and bud
into granulation tissue to reconstruct glandular structures within the ulcer scar. re-epithelialization and
reconstruction of epithelial structures is under control of  xxxg681xxx  (egf) and related
peptides which are produced locally by regenerating cells. under control of fibroblast growth factors,
granulation connective tissue grows extensively supplying (a) microvessels for restoration of the microvascular network and (b) connective tissue cells for restoration of the lamina propria within the
mucosal scar. the final outcome of the healing process reflects a dynamic interaction between the
epithelial component for the ‘healing’ zone at the ulcer margin and the connective tissue component
(including microvessels) originating from the granulation tissue. depending on these interactions,
mucosal scar can be of good quality (restoration close to normal) or poor quality. while a number of
pharmacologic agents affect gastric ulcer healing, it is unknown whether these drugs affect the quality
of mucosal architecture reconstruction. in previous studies, we demonstrated that  xxxd3252xxx  exerts a
trophic effect on gastric mucosa and, compared with omeprazole, improves the quality of restored
mucosal structures within the scar of healed gastric ulcers. in the most recent studies, we demonstrated
that treatment with  xxxd3252xxx  activates genes for egf,  xxxg787xxx , and their receptors, significantlyincreasing
(vs placebo and omeprazole) expression of egf and its receptor in ulcerated gastric mucosa. conclusion:
thus, the superior quality of ulcer healing by  xxxd3252xxx  (versus omeprazole) is most likely based on its
capacity to induce and stimulate expression of egf,  xxxg787xxx , and their receptors.
key words: angiogenesis;  xxxg787xxx ;  xxxg681xxx ; epidermal growth
factor-receptor; healing; quality of ulcer healing;  xxxd3252xxx ; ulcer.
andrzej tarnawski, m. d., dsc., gastroenterology section, dva medical center, 5901 e. sevenrh
street, long beach, ca 90822, usa (fax: +i 7141846-4496)

numerous factors, such as genetic, neural, humoral, iatrogenic (e.g. nsaids) and infections (helicobacter pylori)
have been implicated in the etiology of gastroduodenal ulcerations (1-3). ulcerations develop as a result of an imbalance
between aggressive factors (e.g. hc1, pepsin, nsaids, h .
pylori infection, bile acids, etc.) present in the gastric (or
duodenal) lumen and mucosal defense (4,5). the latter
includes (6) unstirred layers of mucus and bicarbonate,
continuous layers of surface epithelial cells (secreting mucus,
bicarbonate, and prostaglandins), cell renewal, mucosal
microcirculation, ongoing generation of prostaglandins and
 xxxd2738xxx  and intact sensory innervation with nerves containing calcitonin gene-related peptide-a mucosal protective factor.
an ulcer is a deep defect in the gastric or duodenal

wall involving the entire mucosal thickness and penetrating
through the muscularis mucosae (4,5; fig. 1). vascular
factors leading to ischemia play a crucial role in the ulcer
development. this is indicated by a previous study analyzing
the development of experimental, acetic acid-induced gastric
ulcers in rats (7) and by studies which have demonstrated
that occlusion of gastric submucosal arteries in guinea pigs
leads to ulcer formation (8).
histologically, an ulcer consists of two major structures:
(a) the ulcer margin formed by mucosa immediately adjacent
to the ulcer crater, and (b) granulation tissue at the ulcer
base (4,5,7).
ulcer margin (table i )
mucosa adjacent to the ulcer crater forms a ‘healing’ zone.

10

a . tarnawski et al.

oblitercsted
vessel
scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

a

/

'

7

granulation tissueconnective tissue scar

fig. 1. (a) diagrammatic representation of ulceration in gastric or duodenal mucosa. m = mucosa;
mm = muscularis mucosae; sm = submucosa; mp = muscularis propria. healing of the ulcer is
accomplished by: (i) filling the mucosal defect with cells migrating from the healing zone and replicating
(regeneration) and/or (ii) replacement of the defect by connective tissue which forms a mucosal scar
(fibrosis). (from tarnawski et al. in: garner a, o'brian p, editors. mechanisms of injury, protection
and repair of the upper gastrointestinal tract. chichester: john wiley, 1991:521-31) (ref. 21). (b)
photomicrograph of 5-day-old gastric ulcer produced in rat by serosal application of acetic acid (7).
hz = healing zone at the ulcer margin. gt = granulation tissue at the ulcer base. reprinted from j
clin gastroenterol 1990;12 suppl 1:s151 (ref. 7).

table i. cellular events taking place in the mucosa of the ulcer margin during ulcer development and healing
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

cystic dilation of gastric glands.
de-differentiation of epithelial cells lining dilated glands.
de-differentiated cells express  xxxg682xxx  and proliferate.
epithelial cells from the base of the ulcer margin form tubules which invade granulation tissue and migrate toward the gastric lumen
to reconstruct the gastric glands within mucosal scar.
cells forming these tubules produce  xxxg681xxx  and express  xxxg681xxx  receptors.

mechanisms of ulcer healing

11

table 11. events taking place in granulation tissue at the ulcer base
1.
2.
3.

forty-eight to 72 h after mucosal and muscularis mucosae necrosis, granulation tissue develops. it is composed of macrophages,
fibroblasts, proliferating microvessels (angiogenesis), lymphoid cells, and extracellular matrix components.
growth and especially proliferation of connective tissue cells and angiogenesis are stimulated by fibroblast growth factors.
during ulcer healing granulation tissue grows rapidly and supplies: (a) connective tissue cells for the restoration of the lamina
propria and (b) endothelial cells for restoration of microvascular capillary network within the mucosal scar by angiogenesis (and
thus, facilitates supply of oxygen and nutrients to the ulcer base).

table 111. angiogenesis-sequential events

scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

1.
2.

3.
4.
5.

degradation of microvascular basement membrane.
endothelial cell migration into perivascular space
(sprouting) and proliferation.
formation of microvascular tube.
formation of anastomoses, lumina, and basement
membranes.
formation of capillary network.

develops at the ulcer crater base (4,7). it consists of proliferating connective tissue cells: macrophages, fibroblasts,
lymphoid cells, and endothelial cells. endothelial cells form
microvessels by the process of angiogenesis (4,13).

ulcer healing

this table is based on studies in vivo and in vitro and on our
preliminary data on angiogenesis in injured gastric mucosa
(13,16,17).
reprinted from our previous paper ‘role of angiogenesis in
healing of experimental gastric ulcer’, falk symposium 59. in:
halter f, garner a, tytgat gnj, editors. mechanisms of peptic
ulcer healing. dordrecht: kluwer, 1991:165-71 (ref. 13).

ulcer healing, i.e. reconstruction of the mucosal architecture, is an active process of filling the mucosal defect with
proliferating and migrating epithelial cells and connective
tissue components in fig. 2 (4,7,14). it is a very complex
process requiring the interaction of different tissues and
cellular systems.

the gastric glands in this zone dilate and the epithelial
cells lining these glands de-differentiate, express epidermal
growth factor receptor, and proliferate (9-12).

cellular events in the mucosa of the ulcer margin (epithelial
component)
at the ulcer margin, proliferating and dividing epithelial
cells migrate onto the granulation tissue to cover (re-epithelialize) the ulcer base (fig. 3a) (14). in addition, the
poorly differentiated cells from cystically dilated glands at

granulation tissue (tables ii and iii)
during the chronic stage of ulceration, granulation tissue

ulcer healing
1. lurnlnal factors:

i h +, i

pepsin, 4 mucuslbicarbonate

2. growth factors (egf, tgfa)

reconstructionof glandular

mucosae

-

submucosamuscularispropria

3. granulation tissue: supplies connective tissue and microvessel

(angiogenesis) for mucosal reconstruction
fig. 2. diagrammatic representation of the ulcer healing process and factors affecting ulcer healing.
ulcer healing is accomplished by filling the mucosal defect with: (i) cells migrating from the healing
zone and replicating under the influence of  xxxg681xxx  (egf)and transforming growth
factor alpha (tgfa), and (ii) connective tissue cells including microvessels originating from the
granulation tissue. reprinted from j clin gastroenterol 1991;13 suppl 1:s44 (ref. 14).

a. tarnawski et al.

12

scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

the base of the ulcer margin (healing zone) bud and migrate
into granulation tissue forming tubules (fig. 3b). these
tubules migrate toward the gastric mucosal lumen to reconstruct the gastric glandular structures within the mucosal scar
replacing the ulcer (14). the cells lining these reconstructed
glands within partly or entirely restored mucosa (scar)
express  xxxg682xxx  and its ligand
(11,12). the secretion of egf by these cells is probably
crucial for the ulcer healing process (15).

fig. 3. photomicrographsof the gastric ulcer margin. (a) cells from
the healing zone migrate (arrows) onto granulation tissue to cover
the ulcer base. (b) poorly differentiated cells bud into the lamina
propria (arrow) to form new glandular structures. reprinted from
j clin gastroenterol 1991;13 suppl 1:s45 (ref. 14).

cellular events in the granulation tissue at the ulcer base
(connective tissue component)
the second crucial component of ulcer healing is granulation tissue at the ulcer base, composed of connective tissue
cells (fig. 2) (4,13). granulation tissue grows extensively
due to: (a) proliferation of connective tissue cells secreting
extracellular matrix components, and (b) generation of new
microvessels by the process of angiogenesis (table 111) (13).
the latter is important for supplying oxygen and nutrients
to the mucosal epithelial structures that participate in ulcer
healing. granulation tissue supplies: (a) microvessels for
restoration of the microvascular network and (b) connective
tissue cells for restoration of the lamina propria within the
mucosal scar. the granulation tissue undergoes continuous
remodeling and changes in cellular composition. initially,
inflammatory cells and macrophages are abundant, while at
the later stages fibroblasts predominate (4,7).
the final outcome of the healing process reflects a dynamic
interaction between the epithelial component from the
mucosa of the ulcer margin ‘healing zone’ and the connective
tissue component (including microvessels) originating from
the granulation tissue.
angiogenesis in granulation tissue
formation of new microvessels (angiogenesis) plays a

table n.summary of histologic and ultrastructural findings in the ulcer scar following 14 days treatments
treatment

 xxxd3252xxx 

omeprazole

healing zone
mucosal scar thickness
gland dilation scale (0 normal to 5 worst)
connective tissue between glands
granulation tissue
quality score [scale: 0 (normal) to 5 (worst)

well developed
well restored
2
normal
predominant fibroblasts and collagen
1.6 f 0.2*

poorly developed
reduced by 42%
4.5
increased by 50%
less fibroblasts t lymphoid cells
3.6 0.3

~

*

~~

* p < 0.001 versus placebo or omeprazole.
table v. new ceuuiar and molecular mechanisms of ulcer healing action of  xxxd3252xxx 
1.
2.
3.

4.

activation of genes encoding for egf and its receptor leads to overexpressionof the egf receptors and its increased concentration
at the healing zone resulting in enhanced cell proliferation, migration, re-epithelializationand reconstruction of glandular structures.
activation of genes encoding for  xxxg787xxx  and its receptors at the ulcer base stimulates angiogenesis and growth of granulation tissue.
activation of the above genes and increased production of growth factors (egf,  xxxg787xxx ) provide enhanced and balanced regeneration
of ulcerated mucosa.
in addition,  xxxd3252xxx  adsorbs and binds egf and  xxxg787xxx  to the ulcerated area and protects  xxxg787xxx  from proteolytic degradation.

scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

mechanisms of ulcer healing

crucial role in morphogenesis, wound healing and tissue
regeneration (4,13). it is an important component of repair
of acute gastric mucosal injury (16,17) and healing of gastroduodenal ulcers (13,18-20). angiogenesis in granulation
tissue, through the formation of a capillary network, facilitates nutrient and oxygen delivery to the ulcer base and is
therefore crucial for the healing process.
szabo et al. (18-20) have demonstrated that stimulation
of angiogenesis in granulation tissue with basic fibroblast
growth factor dramatically accelerates healing of experimental ( xxxd1787xxx -induced) duodenal ulcers in rats. conversely, inhibition of angiogenesis in granulation tissue by
chronic indomethacin administration (1 mg/kg i.p., daily)
delays healing of experimental gastric ulcers in rats (21).
our in vivo studies demonstrated that angiogenesisin injured
gastric mucosa or in granulation tissue at the ulcer base
occurs via the sequential events listed in table i11
(13, 16, 17).
factors affecting ulcer healing
a number of factors appear to influence ulcer healing.
luminal aggressive factors (hcl secretion, pepsin) delay
ulcer healing. inhibition of these factors by acid inhibitory
drugs (h2 blockers,  xxxg215xxx  inhibitors) is one of the
major components of current peptic ulcer therapy.
mucus and bicarbonate secretion may also be important
in the ulcer healing process because the mucus/bicarbonate
layer protects newly formed cells from acid and pepsin
injury. topically active agents such as  xxxd3252xxx  or prostaglandins stimulate mucus and bicarbonate secretion.
 xxxg681xxx  (of salivary origin or produced
locally by a new cell lineage) is most likely the major factor
responsible for: (a) increased cell proliferation at the mucosa
of the ulcer margin (and consequently re-epitheliahation),
and (b) reconstruction of the glandular structures by epithelial tubules originating from the mucosa adjacent to the
ulcer crater base (11,12,14).
 xxxg787xxx  (and related angiogenic
peptides) regulate angiogenesis (22) and granulation tissue
development and growth. therefore, they are also crucial
for the successful outcome of ulcer healing (18-20). in
addition, it is most likely that a number of other growth
factors (e.g. platelet-derived growth factor, transforming
growth factor beta and others) as well as other cytokines
play a role in the ulcer healing process.

quality of ulcer healing
assessment of gastric ulcer healing is usually based on visual
endoscopic examination in patients, or on gross measurements of ulcer size in experimental studies. these
approaches have led to the assumption that the mumsa of
grossly ‘healed’ gastric and/or duodenal ulcers returns to
normal, either spontaneously or following treatment
(14,23). using quantitative histology and ultrastructural

13

assessment of subepithelial mucosal reconstruction we have
demonstrated that re-epithelialized mucosa of grossly
‘healed‘ experimental gastric ulcers has prominent abnormalities: reduced height, marked dilation of gastric glands,
poor differentiation, and/or degenerative changes in glandular cells (24). these morphologic abnormalities are
accompanied by functional changes such as reduced mucosal
oxygenation (a. tarnawski and i. j. sarfeh unpublished
data) and increased microvascular permeability.
it seems likely that the prominent abnormalities found in
the subepithelial mucosa of grossly ‘healed’ gastric ulcers
might interfere with mucosal defense and may predispose
these specific mucosal areas to subsequent damage and ulcer
recurrence when ulcerogenic factors are present (14).
indeed, clinical studies have demonstrated that gastric ulcers
tend to recur at the same location (25). therefore, the
quality of mucosal structure restoration may be the crucial
factor in determining future ulcer recurrence. although a
number of pharmacologic agents are known to affect the
rate of gastric ulcer healing, it is unknown whether these
agents affect the quality of ulcer healing, i.e. mucosal architecture reconstruction.
factors affecting quality of ulcer healing
we have demonstrated that chronic administration of
relatively low doses of indomethacin (1 mg/kg) delays healing of experimental gastric ulcers in rats, and impairs the
overall quality of ulcer healing. the mucosal architecture
restoration is impaired and differentiation and maturation
of glandular epithelial cells are blocked (21). moreover,
indomethacin treatment significantly reduces the number
of fibroblasts, collagen fibers, and microvessels. the latter
reflect inhibition of angiogenesis in granulation tissue (18).
in a more recent study (26), we compared the effect of
 xxxd3252xxx  and omeprazole on the quality of experimental
gastric ulcer healing in rats. we demonstrated that both
 xxxd3252xxx  and omeprazole treatment significantlyreduce the
size of experimental gastric ulcer, assessed macroscopically.
however, gastric mucosal architecture of the ulcer scar,
assessed histologically and ultrastructurally (table iv), was
much better restored by  xxxd3252xxx  than by omeprazole treatment (26).
 xxxd3252xxx  is a non-systemic, topically active, ulcer healing
drug. our previous studies demonstrated that chronic
administration of  xxxd3252xxx  exerts a trophic action on the
gastric mucosa (27) and induces a significant increase in
expression of  xxxg681xxx  (egf), transforming
growth factor alpha (tgfa), and their common receptor
(egfr) in gastric mucosal cells (28). since egf (and/or
tgfa), through its action on egfr, stimulates epithelial
cell proliferation, the effect of  xxxd3252xxx  on these factors
may be crucial for reconstructing epithelial structures. more
recent studies have demonstrated that  xxxd3252xxx  significantly
enhances (compared with placebo and omeprazole)
expression of egf and its receptor in the mucosa of the

scand j gastroenterol downloaded from informahealthcare.com by purdue university on 01/15/15
for personal use only.

14

a . tarnawski et al.

ulcer margin (29). this is due to activation of genes encoding
egf and its receptor (30). in addition,  xxxd3252xxx  also binds
to fibroblast growth factor, protects it from acid degradation
(17,19), activates genes encoding b f g f and its receptor
(30), and exerts a potent angiogenic action (20). the latter
actions would promote growth of granulation tissue and,
therefore, reconstruction of connective tissue and microvessels within the ulcer scar. by increasing expression of
growth factor (the egf family promoting growth of epithelial components and the fgfs family promoting granulation tissue growth and proliferation),  xxxd3252xxx  provides
balanced regeneration of ulcerated mucosa. these actions
of  xxxd3252xxx , mediated through growth factors, may b e the
basis for t h e improved quality of mucosal reconstruction
(quality of ulcer healing) following treatment by this agent.
these new cellular and molecular mechanisms of ulcer healing action of  xxxd3252xxx  are summarized in table v.

acknowledgments
dr. antonio m. santos was a visiting scientist from the
clinical universitaria d e medicina interna e gastrenterologia, lisbon, portugal. this work was supported in part
by the medical research service of the veterans administration.
references
1. richardson ct. pathogenetic factors in peptic ulcer disease.
am j med 1985;79:1-7.
2. isenberg ji. peptic ulcer. disease a month. dec 1981;l-58.
3. lam sk. pathogenesis and pathophysiology of duodenal ulcer.
j clin gastroenterol 1991;13:447-72.
4. robbins sl, cotran rs, kumar v, editors. healing and repair
in robbins pathologic basis of disease. philadelphia: w. b.
saunders, 1989.
5. tarnawski a, erickson ra.  xxxd3252xxx -24 years later: current
concepts of its protective and therapeutic actions. eur j gastroenterol hepatol 1991;3:795810.
6. tarnawski a, halter f, schmassmann a, vatier j , carner a.
experimental models for the assessment of antacid action on
gastrointestinal mucosa and ulcer healing. eur j gastroenterol
hepatol 1992;4:966-76.
7. tarnawski a, hollander d, stachura j, krause wj, eltorai m,
dabros w, et al. vascular and microvascular change-key
factors in the development of acetic acid-induced gastric ulcers
in rats. j clin gastroenterol 1990;12 suppl 1:s148-57.
8. piasecki c. evidence for an infarctive pathogenesis of acute
and chronic gastroduodenal ulceration. j physiol pharmacol
1992;43:99-112.
9. helpap b, hattori t, gedigk p. repair of gastric ulcer. a cell
kinetic study. virchows arch [a] 1981;392:159-70.
10. helander he. morphologic studies on the margin of gastric
corpus wounds in the rat. j submicrosc cytol 1983;15:627-43.
11. tamawski a, stachura j, durbin t, sarfeh ij, gergely h.
increased expression of  xxxg682xxx  during
gastric ulcer healing in rats. gastroenterology 1992;102:695-8.
12. lee h, hansson h-a, norstrom e , helander hf. immunoreactivities for  xxxg681xxx  (egf) and for egf
receptors in rats with gastric ulcer. cell tissue res 1991;
265:211-8.

13. tarnawski a, hollander d , stachura j, gergely h , krause wj,
sarfeh ij. role of angiogenesis in healing of experimental gastric
ulcer. in: halter f, gamer a, tytgat gnj, editors. mechanisms
of peptic ulcer healing. falk symposium 59. dordrecht: kluwer
1991.
14. tarnawski a, stachura j , krause wj, douglass tg, gergely
h. quality of gastric ulcer healing-a new, emerging concept.
j clin gastroenterol 1991;13:s42-7.
15. wright na, pike c, elia g . induction of a novel epidermal
growth factor-secreting cell lineage by mucosal ulceration in
human gastrointestinal stem cells. nature 1990;343:82-5.
16. tarnawski a, hollander d , stachura j, sarfeh ij, gergely h ,
krause wj. angiogenic response of gastric mucosa to ethanol
injury is abolished by indomethacin. gastroenterology 1989;
96:a505.
17. tarnawski a, hollander d, stachura j, sheffield m, gergely h,
krause wj. angiogenic response of damaged gastric mucosa-a
prostaglandin mediated process? gastroenterology 1990;
98:a136.
18,szabo s, folkman j, vattay p, morales re, kato k. duodenal
ulcerogens: effect of fgf on  xxxd1787xxx  induced duodenal
ulcers. in: halter f, garner a, tytgat gnj, editors. mechanisms of peptic ulcer healing: dordrecht: kluwer, 1991.
19. folkman j, szabo s, stovroff m, mcneil p, li w, shing y.
duodenal ulcer. discovery of a new mechanism and development of angiogenic therapy that accelerates healing. ann surg
1991;214:414-27.
20. szabo s, folkman j, vattay p, morales re, pinkus gs, kato
k. accelerated healing of duodenal ulcers by oral administration
of a mutein of basic fibroblast growth factors in rats. gastroenterology 1994;106:1106-11.
21. tarnawski a, stachura j, douglass tg, krause wj, gergely
h, sarfeh ij. indomethacin impairs quality of experimental
gastric ulcer healing: a quality histologic and ultrastructural
analysis. in: gamer a, o’brian p, editors. mechanisms of
injury, protection and repair of the upper gastrointestinal tract.
chichester: john wiley, 1991.
22. klagsburn m. angiogenesisfactors. in: ryan us, editor. endothelial cells. boca raton: crp press, 1988.
23. tarnawski a, douglass tg, stachura j, krause wj. quality of
gastric ulcer healing: histological and ultrastructural assessment.
aliment pharmacol ther 1991;5 suppl 1:80-90.
24. tarnawski a, hollander d , krause wj, dabros w, stachura
j, gergely h. ‘healed‘ experimental gastric ulcers remain histologically and ultrastructurally abnormal. j clin gastroenterol
1990;12 suppl 1:s139-47.
25. litman a, hanscom dh. the course of recurrent ulcer. gastroenterology 1971;61:585-91.
26. tarnawski a, santos am, hanke s , stachura j, douglass tg,
sarfeh ij. quality of ulcer healing. is it iduenced by antiulcer
drugs? scand j gastroenterol 1995;30 suppl208:9-13.
27. tarnawski a, hollander d, stachura j, gergely h, krause wj,
zipser rd. trophic effect of long term  xxxd3252xxx  treatment on
the gastric mucosa. a key to prophylactic efficacy? gastroenterology 1985;88:1610 (abstr).
28. tarnawski a, stachura j, durbin t, gergely h, douglass
tg.  xxxd3252xxx  treatment induces increased expression of egf,
tgfcv and their common receptor in the gastric mucosa. a
key to the ulcer healing and trophic action? gastroenterology
1992;a175:102 (abstr).
29. tarnawski a, santos am, stachura j, sarfeh ij.  xxxd3252xxx 
increases expression of egf and its receptor in the margins of
experimental gastric ulcer; a key to improved quality of ulcer
healing? gastroenterology 1994;a194:106.
30. tarnawski a, santos am, tanoue k, stachura j, sarfeh ij.
 xxxd3252xxx  treatment enhances expression of egf, its receptor
and  xxxg787xxx  in ulcerated gastric mucosa. a major mechanism
for its superior quality of ulcer healing? world congress of
gastroenterology, 2-7 october 1994, los angeles, ca.

