[inactivated  xxxg750xxx  exercises a powerful antithrombotic activity in an experimental model of recurrent arterial thrombosis].  the extrinsic coagulation pathway is activated when  xxxg748xxx  (tf) is exposed as a consequence of arterial damage. tf binds to  xxxg750xxx  (fvii) or activated fvii (fviia), generating a complex that activates both fx and fix, ultimately leading to thrombin formation. to determine whether inhibition of fvii binding to tf would result in antithrombotic effects, active site-blocked fviia (fviiai) was used in a rabbit model of intravascular thrombus formation. in addition, to study the interaction between extrinsic coagulation pathway activation and platelet aggregation, in the same model of intravascular thrombus formation, recombinant human fviia was administered in antiplatelet-treated rabbits. cyclic flow variations (cfvs), due to recurrent thrombus formation, were initiated by placing an external constrictor around the endothelially-injured rabbit carotid arteries (folt's model). carotid blood flow was measured continuously by a doppler flow probe placed proximally to the constrictor. cfvs were induced in 29 new zealand white rabbits. after cfvs were observed for 30 min, the animals were randomly divided in four groups: 5 animals received via a small catheter (26g) placed proximally to the stenosis, an intra-arterial infusion of human recombinant fviiai (0.1 mg/kg/min for 10 min); 9 animals received ap-1, a monoclonal antibody against rabbit tf (0.1 mg/kg i.v. bolus); 7 animals received  xxxd3115xxx , a dual thromboxane a2 synthetase inhibitor and  xxxg2253xxx  antagonist (10 mg/kg i.v. bolus); finally, 8 rabbits received aurintrycarboxilic acid (ata), an inhibitor of platelet glycoprotein ib/ xxxg2423xxx  interaction (10 mg/kg i.v. bolus). fviiai abolished cfvs in 5 of 5 animals (cfv frequency minutes 0 cycles/hour; p < 0.05; carotid blood flow velocity minutes 106 +/- 9% of the baseline values; ns vs baseline). ap-1 abolished cfvs in 7 of 9 animals (cfv frequency minutes 0 cycles/hour; p < 0.05; carotid blood flow velocity minutes 58 +/- 35% of the baseline values; ns vs baseline). finally, in all the animals receiving  xxxd3115xxx  or ata cfvs were abolished (cfv frequency 0 cycles/hour; p < 0.05 in both groups; carotid blood flow velocity, respectively 62 +/- 32 and 66 +/- 40% of the baseline values; ns vs baseline in both groups). thirty minutes following inhibition of cfvs, in the fviiai treated rabbits, human recombinant fviia was infused, via the small catheter placed proximally to the stenosis, at the dose of 0.1 mg/kg/min for 10 min. in the other three groups, fviia, at the same dose, was infused i.v. infusion of fviia restored cfvs in all fviiai treated animals and in 6 of 7 ap-1 treated animals, thus indicating that ap-1 and fviiai bindings to tf was competitive and was replaced by fviia. infusion of fviia failed to restore cfvs in  xxxd3115xxx  e ata treated rabbits (1 of 7 and 0 of 8 rabbits, respectively), showing that activation of extrinsic coagulation by fviia was overcome by inhibition of platelet function. activated partial thromboplastin time, and ex vivo platelet aggregation in response to adp and thrombin, were not different after fviiai infusion, while prothrombin time was slightly but significantly prolonged as compared to baseline values. thus, fvii-viia plays an important role in initiating thrombus formation in vivo. administration of fviiai exerts a potent antithrombotic effects in this model without affecting systemic coagulation. in addition, in this model platelets exert an important role in arterial thrombosis, since in the presence of inhibition of platelet function, activation of the extrinsic coagulation pathway failed to restore thrombus formation.