the journal of biological chemistry
© 1996 by the american society for biochemistry and molecular biology, inc.

vol. 271, no. 40, issue of october 4, pp. 24590 –24597, 1996
printed in u.s.a.

structural effects of neutral and anionic lipids on the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor
an infrared difference spectroscopy study*
(received for publication, april 25, 1996, and in revised form, july 24, 1996)

stephen e. ryan, caroline n. demers, jennifer p. chew, and john e. baenziger‡
from the department of biochemistry, university of ottawa, ottawa, ontario k1h 8m5, canada

the  xxxg456xxx  (nachr)1 from torpedo

* this work was supported by a grant from the medical research
council of canada (to j. e. b.). the costs of publication of this article
were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. this article must
therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18
u.s.c. section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
‡ to whom correspondence should be addressed: dept. of biochemistry, university of ottawa, 451 smyth rd., ottawa, ontario k1h 8m5,
canada.
1
the abbreviations used are: nachr,  xxxg456xxx ; atr, attenuated total reflectance; carb, carbamylcholine; chol,
cholesterol; dib,  xxxd1869xxx ; dopa, dioleoylphosphatidic acid;  xxxd1949xxx ,

is a large integral membrane protein that has been studied
extensively as a model of both neurotransmitter-gated ion
channel structure/function and protein-lipid interactions (1, 2).
the nachr is composed of four distinct subunits arranged as a
pentamer pseudosymmetrically around a central pore that
functions as a cation selective ion channel. in native membranes, roughly 80% of the nachr exist in a resting conformation that transiently conduct cations across the membrane in
response to the binding of cholinergic agonists, such as acetylcholine and carbamylcholine (carb) (29). the remaining ;20%
exist in a high affinity channel-inactive desensitized state that
is stabilized by prolonged exposure to agonist and some noncompetitive antagonists. the ability of the nachr to conduct
cations across the membrane and undergo the resting to desensitized affinity state transition is exquisitely sensitive to the
composition of the lipid membrane that surrounds the nachr.
previous studies have suggested that the nachr requires an
optimal membrane fluidity as well as the presence of both a
neutral lipid, such as cholesterol (chol), and an anionic lipid,
such as dioleoylphosphatidic acid (dopa), to retain optimal
flux and desensitization capabilities (3–5). in the absence of
chol and dopa, the nachr adopts a channel-inactive conformation that may be analogous to the ligand-induced desensitized state (4).
in contrast to the well characterized effects of lipids on
nachr function, the lipid-induced changes in the structure of
the nachr that lead to modulations in function are poorly
understood. the functional requirement of the nachr for neutral and anionic lipids has been attributed to the binding of
each lipid to distinct sites at or near the protein-lipid interface
with distinct effects on the gross secondary structure of the
nachr (3, 8 –11). others have reported more dramatic alterations in the content of both a-helix and b-sheet, with increasing levels of chol in reconstituted neutral lipid depleted soybean asolectin membranes (12). in contrast, a recent fourier
transform infrared (ftir) and hydrogen/deuterium exchange
study was unable to detect any definitive lipid-dependent alterations in nachr secondary structure, suggesting that both
neutral and anionic lipids modulate nachr function through
subtle, but as yet unidentified changes in nachr structure
(13).
the lack of detailed insight into the structural changes induced in the nachr by different lipids is a consequence of the
difficulties associated with the application of high resolution
structure elucidating techniques to large integral membrane
proteins, such as the nachr. ftir difference spectroscopy is
one of the few techniques that can probe the structure of large
integral membrane proteins at the single amino acid residue
level (14). the difference technique has revealed changes in the
dioleoylphosphatidylserine; epc, egg phosphatidylcholine; ftir, fourier transform infrared.

24590

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

the effects of both neutral and anionic lipids on the
structure of the  xxxg456xxx 
(nachr) have been probed using infrared difference
spectroscopy. the difference between infrared spectra
of the nachr recorded using the attenuated total reflectance technique in the presence and absence of the neurotransmitter analog, carbamylcholine, exhibits a complex pattern of positive and negative bands that
provides a spectral map of the structural changes that
occur in the nachr upon ligand binding and subsequent desensitization. this spectral map is essentially
identical in difference spectra recorded from native, native alkaline-extracted, and affinity-purified nachr reconstituted into either soybean asolectin or egg phosphatidylcholine membranes containing both neutral
and anionic lipids. this result suggests both a similar
structure of the nachr and a similar resting to desensitized conformational change in each membrane environment. in contrast, difference spectra recorded from
the nachr reconstituted into egg phosphatidylcholine
membranes lacking neutral and/or anionic lipids all exhibit an essentially identical pattern of band intensity
variations, which is similar to the pattern of variations
observed in difference spectra recorded in the continuous presence of the desensitizing local anesthetic,  xxxd1869xxx . the difference spectra suggest that the main effect of both neutral and anionic lipids in a reconstituted
egg phosphatidylcholine membrane is to help stabilize
the nachr in a resting conformation. in the absence of
neutral and/or anionic lipids, the nachr is converted
into an alternate conformation that appears to be analogous to the local anesthetic-induced desensitized state.
significantly, the proportion of receptors found in the
resting versus the putative desensitized state appears to
be dependent upon the final lipid composition of the
reconstituted membrane. a lipid-dependent modulation
of the equilibrium between a channel-active resting and
channel-inactive desensitized state may account for the
modulations of nachr activity that are observed in different lipid membranes.

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr

experimental procedures

materials—chol, squalene, soybean asolectin (type ii-s), carb, and
dib were purchased from sigma. egg lecithin (referred to as epc),
dopa, and dioleoylphosphatidylserine ( xxxd1949xxx ) were from avanti polar
lipids, inc. (alabaster, al). frozen torpedo californica electric tissue
was from marinus (long beach, ca).
sample preparation—native and native alkaline-extracted nachr
membranes were prepared as described previously (18), except that
the relatively crude native nachr membranes were removed from
the sucrose gradients using a pasteur pipette. the nachr was affinity-purified on a bromoacetylcholine bromide-derivatized bio-rad
affi-gel 201 column and then reconstituted into lipid vesicles composed of epc/dopa/chol (molar ratio of 3:1:1), epc/dopa (molar
ratio of 3:1), epc/ xxxd1949xxx  (molar ratio 3:1), epc/squalene (molar ratio
3:1), epc/chol (molar ratio 3:1), or epc as described by mccarthy
and moore (4).
ftir samples were prepared by spreading 250 mg of the nachr
protein on the surface of a 50 mm 3 20 mm 3 2 mm germanium
attenuated total reflectance (atr) crystal (harrick, ossining, ny).
after evaporating the bulk solvent with a gentle stream of n2 gas, the
atr crystal was installed in an atr liquid sample cell (also from
harrick) and the nachr film rehydrated with excess torpedo ringer
buffer (250 mm nacl, 5 mm kcl, 2 mm mgcl2, 3 mm cacl2, and 5 mm
na2hpo4, ph 7.0). note that each nachr film is spread over an
equivalent surface area on the atr crystal, and each expands beyond

fig. 1. the difference between ftir spectra recorded using
the atr technique in the presence and absence of 50 mm carb
from the nachr in native (trace a), native alkaline-extracted
(trace b), and reconstituted epc/dopa/chol membranes at a
molar ratio of 3:1:1 (trace c). panel a shows the absolute intensities
of the difference spectra. in panel b, the intensity of trace a has been
increased by a factor of 4, while the intensity of trace b has been
increased by a factor of 3. trace a is the average of 176 difference
spectra, trace b the average of 40 difference spectra, and trace c the
average of 57 differences. the protein is 10 –15% nachr in the native
membranes, roughly 25% nachr in alkaline-extracted membranes,
and essentially pure nachr in affinity-purified membranes. the purity
of each sample was judged by 125i-labeled a-bungarotoxin binding.
the effective penetration depth of the infrared beam upon hydration.
the absolute intensities of the protein bands in the ftir spectra are
similar from sample to sample.
ftir spectroscopy—ftir spectra were acquired using the atr
technique on an fts-40 spectrometer equipped with a dtgs detector.
spectra were recorded at 8 cm21 resolution using 512 scans, which took
roughly 7 min/spectrum. for the difference measurements, two consecutive spectra of the same nachr film in the absence of carb were
recorded with buffer flowing continuously through the sample compartment of the atr cell at a rate of ;1.5 ml/min. the flowing solution was
then switched to an identical one with 50 mm carb. after 1 min, a
spectrum was recorded of the desensitized state. the difference between both the two resting state spectra (absence of carb; control
spectra) and the consecutive resting and desensitized (presence of carb)
state spectra were calculated, stored, and the flowing buffer switched
back to buffer without carb. after a 23-min washing period to remove
carb from the film and convert the nachr back into a resting conformation, the process was repeated many times. each experiment was
repeated on several new films prepared from at least two separate
affinity purification/reconstitutions of the nachr. the 50 mm carb
solution is sufficient to desensitize the nachr (15), but low enough to
allow the rapid washing of carb from the nachr film. all difference
spectra were base-line corrected between 1800 and 1000 cm21 and were
interpolated to an effective resolution of 4 cm21.
results

ftir spectra of a thin film of the nachr deposited on the
surface of a germanium atr crystal were recorded while alternately flowing buffer either with or without carb past the
film surface. after extensive signal averaging, the difference
between spectra recorded under these stringent conditions in
the presence and absence of carb exhibits a highly reproducible
pattern of positive and negative bands (fig. 1, a and b, top
three traces) that is absent in control difference spectra recorded from nachr films preincubated with the essentially
irreversible competitive antagonist, a-bungarotoxin (17). parallel fluorescence experiments demonstrate that non a-bungarotoxin-treated nachr films retain the ability to bind agonists,

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

orientation, protonation state, strength of hydrogen bonding,
and/or environments surrounding specific tyr, asp, thr, pro,
arg, trp, and his side chains, as well as changes in the conformation and/or orientation of the polypeptide backbone upon
the absorption of light by light-activated proteins, such as
bacteriorhodopsin and the photosynthetic reaction center (see
refs. 34 –37 and 39, and references therein). the technique has
also been adapted for probing ligand-induced conformational
changes in the nachr. ftir spectra are repetitively recorded
while alternately flowing a buffer either with or without carb
past an nachr film deposited on the surface of a germanium
internal reflection element. after extensive signal averaging,
the difference between spectra of the resting and desensitized
states recorded under these stringent conditions exhibits a
complex, but highly reproducible, pattern of positive and negative bands that provides a “spectral map” of the structural
changes that occur in the nachr upon ligand binding and
subsequent desensitization (15–17).
in this report, we have used this ftir difference approach to
examine the effects of both neutral and anionic lipids on the
structure of the nachr. relative to the difference between
spectra recorded in the presence and absence of carb from the
nachr in native membranes, those recorded from the nachr
reconstituted into epc membranes either with or without a
variety of neutral and/or anionic lipids all exhibit subtle difference band intensity variations that reflect lipid-induced structural changes in those regions of the nachr that are involved
in ligand binding and desensitization. an essentially identical
pattern of difference band intensity variations is observed upon
reconstitution of the nachr into membranes lacking either
neutral, anionic, or both types of lipids. the same pattern of
variations is also observed in difference spectra recorded in the
continuous presence of the desensitizing local anesthetic,  xxxd1869xxx  (dib). the similarity of the spectral variations suggests
that neutral and anionic lipids both stabilize an equivalent
resting conformation of the nachr. in the absence of either
lipid, the nachr appears to be stabilized in a desensitized
conformation, although the proportion of receptors in the desensitized state appears to be dependent upon the final lipid
composition of the reconstituted membrane. a lipid-dependent
modulation of the equilibrium between the channel competent
resting and a putative channel-inactive desensitized state may
account for the effects of a variety of different lipids on the ion
flux activity of the nachr.

24591

24592

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr

fig. 2. the difference between ftir spectra recorded in the
presence and absence of 50 mm carb from affinity-purified
nachr reconstituted into membranes composed of epc/dopa/
chol at a molar ratio of 3:1:1 (top trace), epc/dopa at a molar
ratio of 3:1 (second from top trace), epc/chol at a molar ratio of
3:1 (second from bottom trace), and epc (bottom trace). the
presented difference spectra are the average of 57, 38, 37, and 26
spectral differences, respectively.
2

h2o (33). other lipid-sensitive bands near 1744, 1430, and
1059 cm21 could reflect either a lipid-induced change in the
structure and/or environment surrounding amino acid side
chains or possibly an alteration in the interactions between the
nachr and a “bound” phospholipid (see “discussion”).
although a detailed interpretation of the individual band
intensity variations is not yet possible, it is noteworthy that the
absence of chol, dopa, or both lipids leads to a decrease in
intensity near 1744, 1655, 1544, 1430, and 1059 cm21 accompanied by an increase in negative intensity near 1668 cm21.
the striking reproducibility of the pattern of band intensity
variations suggests that the absence (and conversely the presence) of either or both lipids lead to a similar change in the
structures of those residues of the nachr that are involved in
ligand binding and desensitization. the reproducibility of the
spectral variations suggests that both chol and dopa stabilize
an equivalent conformational state of the nachr.
in contrast, the relative magnitudes of the intensity variations and thus the degree of the conformational perturbation
appears to be dependent upon the final lipid composition of the
reconstituted membrane. relative to native and epc/dopa/
chol membranes, the variations in intensity of all six bands are
minimal for the nachr in epc/dopa, slightly more substantial for the nachr in epc/chol, and relatively dramatic for the
nachr in epc, where both the negative and positive bands
near 1744 and 1655 cm21 are completely absent, the two bands
near 1544 cm21 and 1430 cm21 are both reduced in intensity by
more than 50%, and the negative band near 1668 cm21 is
enhanced in intensity by ;100%. the relative magnitudes of
the lipid-induced changes in intensity of the four most intense
bands near 1668, 1655, 1544, and 1430 cm21 are summarized
in table i. the differing magnitudes of the variations in intensity of all six bands suggest that the structure of the nachr is
increasingly perturbed from a native like (predominantly resting) conformation in epc/dopa/chol to an alternate, possibly
desensitized conformation (see below) in epc/dopa, epc/
chol, and epc. chol and dopa may therefore differ in their
relative abilities to stabilize the nachr in a channel-competent resting conformation as opposed to their ability to stabilize
the nachr in distinct conformational states.
the possibility that diverse lipid structures stabilize an
equivalent conformation of the nachr was examined further
by recording difference spectra from the nachr reconstituted
into soybean asolectin, epc/ xxxd1949xxx , and epc/squalene (fig. 3).

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

non-competitive antagonists and undergo the resting to desensitized affinity state transition (15, 16). bands in the difference
spectra therefore reflect the molecular vibrations of those
amino acid residues whose structures change upon ligand binding and desensitization. in general, negative bands reflect the
vibrations of functional groups in the absence of carb (resting
state). positive bands reflect the vibrations of the same functional groups in the presence of carb (desensitized state), as
well as those of the nachr-bound carb itself (17).
the absolute intensities of bands in the difference spectra
recorded from native (fig. 1a, trace a), native alkaline-extracted (fig. 1a, trace b), and affinity-purified nachr reconstituted into epc/dopa/chol (fig. 1a, trace c) increase with
increasing purity of the nachr preparations providing additional support for the specificity of the bands to carb-induced
structural changes in the nachr. expansion of the y axis
shows that the frequencies and relative intensities of the
majority of the positive and negative bands are similar in all
three difference spectra, although subtle variations are
clearly evident in the bands near 1668 and 1544 cm21 (for
example compare the relative intensities of the two bands
near 1544 and 1516 cm21 in each spectrum) and may exist
near 1744, 1655, 1430, and 1059 cm21 (fig. 1b). the reproducibility of the majority of the bands in the difference spectra suggests that the structures and environments surrounding the majority of those residues involved in ligand binding
and/or the resting to desensitized conformational change are
essentially identical in native, native alkaline-extracted, and
reconstituted epc/dopa/chol membranes. the slight variations in the relative intensities of the noted difference bands,
which are difficult to assess due to the especially weak intensities of bands in the difference spectra recorded from
native membranes, may suggest a slight increase in the proportion of the receptors found in the desensitized state in
epc/dopa/chol relative to the proportion of desensitized
receptors found in native membranes (see below). note that
the 4- and 3-fold expansion of the difference spectra in traces
a and b (panel b), respectively, emphasizes the base-line
distortions that are particularly evident in the 1600 cm21 to
1700 cm21 region. these broad “rolling” base-line distortions
that affect the apparent relative intensities of some of the
relatively sharp difference bands are mainly due to slight
instabilities in temperature over the time course of the experiment that lead to changes in the shape of the intense,
broad, overlapping water absorbance near 1640 cm21.
the frequencies and relative intensities of the majority of the
bands in the difference spectra recorded from the nachr reconstituted into membranes composed of either epc/dopa,
epc/chol, or simply epc are also similar to those observed in
difference spectra recorded from the nachr in both native and
epc/dopa/chol membranes, suggesting that neither chol nor
dopa dramatically affect the structures and/or environments
surrounding a large number of residues involved in both ligand
binding and desensitization (fig. 2). however, there are substantial lipid-dependent variations in the intensities of bands
near 1744, 1668, 1655, 1544, 1430, and 1059 cm21 that reflect
lipid-induced changes in the structure of the nachr that are
likely responsible for modulations in nachr function. the
lipid-sensitive bands near 1668, 1655, and 1544 cm21 occur in
either the amide i (1600 –1700 cm21) or amide ii (1520 –1580
cm21) regions of the infrared spectrum and likely reflect a
subtle lipid-induced change in the conformation of the polypeptide backbone. the assignment of these three bands to either
amide i or amide ii vibrations is consistent with the downshifts
in the frequencies of the bands upon exposure of the nachr to

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr

24593

table i
relative magnitudes of the lipid-induced changes in the intensities of
four bands in the ftir difference spectra
the difference between spectra recorded in the presence and absence
of carb from the nachr in the various lipid membranes (figs. 1–3)
were all normalized with respect to the area of the carb vibration near
1474 cm21. the intensities of the four noted bands were then determined for each spectrum relative to the intensities of the same four
bands in the difference spectra recorded from the nachr reconstituted
into soybean asolectin. due to the weak signal (and thus the relatively
intense rolling base-line distortions), the intensities of the three bands
near 1668, 1655, and 1430 cm21 could not accurately be determined in
the difference spectra recorded from the nachr in native and native
alkaline-extracted membranes.
1668 cm21

1655 cm21

1544 cm21

1430 cm21

native
alkaline-extracted
asolectin
epc/dopa/chol
epc/dopa
epc/squalene
epc/ xxxd1949xxx 
epc/chol
epc

nda
nd
100
160
250
270
270
280
320

nd
nd
100
100
60
60
50
50
30

110
110
100
90
50
40
30
20
20

nd
nd
100
100
80
80
70
80
50

nd, not determined.

fig. 3. the difference between ftir spectra recorded in the
presence and absence of 50 mm carb from affinity-purified
nachr reconstituted into membranes composed of epc/dopa/
chol at a molar ratio of 3:1:1 (top trace), soybean asolectin
(second from top trace), epc/squalene at a molar ratio of 3:1
(second from bottom trace), and epc/ xxxd1949xxx  at a molar ratio of
3:1 (bottom trace). the difference spectra are the average of 57, 85, 52,
and 90 spectral differences, respectively.

soybean asolectin is a complex mixture of neutral, anionic, and
zwitterionic lipids. the difference spectra recorded from the
nachr reconstituted into asolectin membranes are similar to
those recorded from the nachr in both native and epc/dopa/
chol membranes, particularly in the intensities of the six lipidsensitive bands noted above, suggesting a similar structure of
the nachr and resting to desensitized conformational change
in complex membranes containing neutral, anionic, and zwitterionic lipids.
 xxxd1949xxx  is a negatively charged lipid with a much larger head
group than dopa, whereas squalene is an isoprenoid polyene
(neutral lipid) with little structural resemblance to dopa,
 xxxd1949xxx , or chol. in agreement with the previous data, the difference spectra recorded from the nachr in both epc/squalene and epc/ xxxd1949xxx  are similar to those recorded from the
nachr in native and epc/dopa/chol membranes but exhibit
variations in intensity of the same six bands noted above near
1744, 1668, 1655, 1544, 1430, and 1059 cm21 (fig. 3). in addition, the magnitudes of the variations in intensity of these six
bands are less in epc/squalene than in epc/ xxxd1949xxx , suggesting

fig. 4. the difference between ftir spectra recorded in the
presence and absence of 50 mm carb from affinity-purified
nachr reconstituted into membranes composed of epc/dopa/
chol at a molar ratio of 3:1:1, but in the continuous presence of
increasing concentrations of dib. spectra were recorded in the
presence and absence of carb as in figs. 1–3, except that the nachr
film was maintained in the continuous presence of the indicated concentrations of dib by including dib in both the plus and minus carb
buffers. the presented difference spectra are the average of (from top to
bottom) 57, 37, 58, 50, and 90 spectral differences.

that squalene is slightly more efficient than  xxxd1949xxx  at stabilizing the nachr in a native-like resting conformation (table i).
the similarity of the pattern of band intensity variations observed in difference spectra recorded from the nachr in epc/
chol, epc/dopa, epc/ xxxd1949xxx , and epc/squalene relative to
the difference spectra recorded from the nachr in epc membranes lacking both neutral and anionic lipids strongly suggests that chol, dopa,  xxxd1949xxx , and squalene all stabilize an
equivalent conformation of the nachr.
some evidence indicates that the nachr is stabilized in a
desensitized conformation in epc membranes lacking both
neutral and anionic lipids. this possibility implies that the
difference between spectra recorded in the presence and absence of carb from the nachr in epc reflect changes in the
structure and/or environments surrounding residues of the
nachr upon the binding of carb to a predominantly desensitized population of receptors. to test this possibility, the difference between spectra of the nachr in epc/dopa/chol recorded in the presence and absence of carb were monitored
while continuously maintaining the nachr in contact with
increasing concentrations of the desensitizing local anesthetic,
dib (i.e. dib is included in both the 1carb and 2carb buffers).
increasing concentrations of dib lead to dose-dependent variations in the intensities of a number of bands including the
same six bands near 1744, 1668, 1655, 1544, 1430, and 1059
cm21 that are sensitive to the absence of neutral and anionic
lipids from the reconstituted membrane (fig. 4). the striking
similarity of the subtle variations in the difference spectra
(other variations are discussed below) suggest that both the
presence of dib and the reconstitution of the nachr into epc
membranes lacking neutral and/or anionic lipids lead to the
stabilization of the same desensitized conformation (fig. 5).
note that the dib-induced variations in the difference spectra saturate at concentrations of ;200 mm, consistent with the
binding of dib to the ion channel pore of the nachr in native
and reconstituted epc/dopa/chol membranes with kd values, in the absence of carb, of roughly 80 mm and 30 mm,
respectively (21, 40). the difference spectra also exhibit a dosedependent increase in negative band intensity at frequencies
that correspond to the vibrational frequencies observed in the
solution spectrum of dib (fig. 5). the latter is consistent with
the additional binding of dib to the neurotransmitter binding

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

a

membrane
composition

24594

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr

site of the nachr (kd ;60 mm) and its subsequent displacement upon the addition of carb (21). the close correlation
between the dose dependence of the spectral variations and the
pharmacological properties of dib at the nachr, as determined
by others using radio ligand binding assays, illustrates the
sensitivity of the ftir difference technique and strengthens
our contention that the spectral variations observed in the
difference spectra recorded from the nachr in different lipid
membranes are reflecting subtle lipid-induced changes in the
structure of the nachr.
discussion

ftir difference spectroscopy has provided detailed insight
into the structural changes that occur upon the absorption of
light by light-activated proteins, such as bacteriorhodopsin and
the photosynthetic reaction center. for these integral membrane proteins, the positive and negative bands that are observed in the respective difference spectra have been assigned
to either changes in the orientation, protonation state, strength
of hydrogen bonding, and/or environments surrounding specific
tyr, asp, thr, arg, pro, trp, and his side chains, changes in
the conformation and/or orientation of the polypeptide backbone, or changes in the structure of bound prosthetic groups
(see refs. 34 –37 and 39, and references therein). similarly, the
positive and negative bands observed in the difference between
ftir spectra of the nachr recorded in the presence and absence of carb should reflect the structural changes induced in
the nachr upon the binding of carb. the specificity of the
bands to carb-induced structural alterations in the nachr is
demonstrated by the absence of positive and negative bands in
control difference spectra recorded from nachr films that have
been pretreated with the essentially irreversible competitive
antagonist, a-bungarotoxin (17), and by the increasing intensities of the bands in difference spectra recorded from samples
with increasing levels of nachr purity (fig. 1). the pattern of
positive and negative bands is also reproducible in difference
spectra recorded in other laboratories (17).2 furthermore, fluorescence spectroscopy demonstrates that similar nachr films
undergo the resting to desensitized affinity state transition
under parallel experimental conditions, suggesting that the
bands in the difference spectra reflect structural changes that
2

m. pézolet, personal communication.

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

fig. 5. comparison of the difference between spectra recorded in the presence and absence of 50 mm carb from affinitypurified nachr reconstituted into membranes composed of
epc/dopa/chol at a molar ratio of 3:1:1 (top trace), epc (second
from top trace), and epc/dopa/chol at a molar ratio of 3:1:1, but
in the continuous presence of 400 mm dib (second from top
trace). the bottom trace is an absorbance spectrum recorded using the
atr technique from a 250 mm aqueous solution of dib. the overlapping
water bands have been subtracted from the latter spectrum.

occur upon the binding of carb and subsequent desensitization
(15).
we show here for the first time that this spectral map of the
structural changes that occur upon ligand binding and desensitization is sensitive to the composition of the lipid membrane
that surrounds the nachr as well as to the presence of a local
anesthetic, dib. the lipid- and anesthetic-induced variations in
the difference spectra suggest subtle changes in the conformation and/or orientation of the polypeptide backbone as well as
perturbations in the structure of individual amino acid side
chains and/or possible modulations of the interactions between
the nachr and a bound phospholipid (see below). significantly, the pattern of the lipid-induced variations in the difference spectra correlate with the pattern of the effects of the
lipids on both the ion flux properties and the conformational
state of the nachr, as probed using biochemical techniques
(this correlation is discussed below). in addition, the effects of
dib are dose-dependent and saturate at concentrations consistent with the measured kd values for the binding of dib to both
the ion channel pore and the neurotransmitter binding site.
the close correlation between the spectroscopic and biochemical data provides further confidence in the difference technique
and suggests that the lipid-induced variations detected in the
difference spectra are reflecting changes in structure of the
nachr that are related to lipid-dependent modulations of
nachr activity. the data also illustrate the utility of the ftir
difference technique for probing the structural changes induced in the nachr by a variety of functional modulators and
suggest three important features regarding the mechanisms of
lipid action at the nachr.
(i) the most striking feature of the data is that the difference
spectra recorded from the nachr in diverse reconstituted
membranes all exhibit an essentially identical pattern of band
intensity variations relative to the difference spectra recorded
from the nachr in native membranes. in particular, the reproducibility of the pattern of variations induced in the difference spectra by the inclusion of either a neutral lipid, such as
chol or squalene, or an anionic lipid, such as dopa or  xxxd1949xxx ,
in an epc membrane relative to the difference spectra recorded from the nachr in epc membranes lacking both neutral and anionic lipids suggests that chol, squalene, dopa,
and  xxxd1949xxx  all have an essentially identical effect on the structures and environments surrounding those residues of the
nachr that are involved in ligand binding and desensitization.
given the previously demonstrated sensitivity of the difference
technique to subtle changes in protein structure, the reproducibility of these spectral variations implies that chol, squalene,
dopa, and  xxxd1949xxx  each stabilize an essentially identical conformational state of the nachr.
(ii) the similarity of the pattern of band intensity variations
observed in difference spectra recorded from the nachr reconstituted into epc membranes lacking neutral and/or anionic
lipids and from the nachr in epc/dopa/chol, but in the
continuous presence of increasing concentrations of dib, suggests that both the absence of neutral and anionic lipids and
the presence of dib lead to the stabilization of the same conformational state. dib is a member of a class of local anesthetics that bind near the ion channel pore and stabilize the desensitized conformation of the nachr in native membranes (19,
20). although the conformation of the nachr stabilized by dib
in epc/dopa/chol has not been defined, the nachr in epc/
dopa/chol retains the ability to conduct cations (3, 6, 7) and
undergoes an essentially identical resting to desensitized conformational change, as judged by the similarity of the difference spectra recorded from the nachr in native and epc/
dopa/chol membranes as well as other biochemical assays (4,

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr

3-trifluoromethyl-3-(m-[125i]iodophenyl)diazirine labeling suggests a slight increase in the proportion of receptors in the
desensitized state upon reconstitution into epc/dopa/chol
(4), in agreement with the slight increase in the magnitudes of
the intensity variations in the difference spectra characteristic
of a desensitized conformation. in addition, difference spectra
recorded from the nachr reconstituted in soybean asolectin
match most closely those recorded from the native nachr
membranes consistent with the optimal flux properties of the
reconstituted nachr in this complex lipid mixture (3).
the close correlation between the relative magnitudes of the
spectral variations in the difference spectra and the relative ion
flux activity of the nachr in different lipid membranes suggests that a perturbation of the equilibrium between the resting and desensitized states may be the predominant effect of
lipids on the structure of the nachr. the relative ability of
individual lipid mixtures to stabilize the nachr in a channelcompetent resting conformation, as opposed to a channel-inactive desensitized state, may therefore account for the ion flux
properties of the nachr in different reconstituted membranes.
in contrast, it has been suggested that the functional requirement of the nachr for neutral and anionic lipids stems from
the binding of each lipid to distinct sites on the nachr with
distinct effects on nachr secondary structure. mcnamee and
co-workers (10, 11) proposed that the rigid sterol ring of chol
may intercalate into the grooves of a-helices stabilizing transmembrane a-helical secondary structures, whereas the negatively charged head group of anionic lipids may form electrostatic interactions with extra membranous regions of the
nachr leading to the stabilization of b-sheet. others have
reported more dramatic alterations in the content of both a-helix and b-sheet with increasing levels of chol in reconstituted
neutral lipid-depleted soybean asolectin membranes (12).
however, several lines of evidence argue against lipid-induced stabilization of nachr secondary structures. first, the
lipid-induced changes in the intensity of bands in both the
amide i and amide ii regions of the difference spectra correspond to less than 0.1% of the total amide i and amide ii band
intensities (data not shown), respectively, indicating that the
lipid-induced conformational perturbations involve relatively
few amino acid residues (see ref. 17 for more details). second,
the frequencies and relative intensities of the majority of the
bands in the difference spectra are unaffected by reconstituted
of the nachr into epc membranes lacking neutral and/or
anionic lipids. large changes in the content of either a-helix or
b-sheet should lead to changes in the structures and environments of a large number of residues, especially in the case of a
compact, highly cooperative protein such as the nachr.
changes in the structure and environments surrounding a
large number of side chains should lead to variations in the
frequencies and relative intensities of a large number of bands
in the difference spectra, which is certainly not the case. finally, a recent ftir and hydrogen/deuterium exchange study
was unable to detect any definitive lipid-dependent alterations
in nachr secondary structure and attributed the lipid-induced
changes in secondary structure reported by others to either a
previously unappreciated dependence of the shape of the secondary structure sensitive amide i band to the time of exposure
of the nachr to 2h2o, and thus the extent of peptide 1h/2h
exchange, or to errors resulting from uncompensated water
vapor (13). the effects of water vapor on resolution enhanced
ftir spectra of the nachr are discussed in detail in ref. 22
(see also ref. 24). lipid-dependent modulation of nachr function must occur via subtle changes in structure of the nachr
as opposed to the stabilization of a-helix and/or b-sheet.
if neutral and anionic lipids are not required for the stabili-

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

16, 22). the dib-induced variations in the difference spectra
also saturate at concentrations consistent with the pharmacological properties of dib at the nachr in native membranes, as
noted above. in all respects, the nachr appears to be functional in epc/dopa/chol and should respond to dib by adopting a channel-inactive desensitized state. the absence of both
neutral and anionic lipids from a reconstituted membrane
therefore appears to lead to the stabilization of a desensitized
nachr.
(iii) although the pattern of band intensities variations is
always essentially the same in difference spectra recorded from
the nachr reconstituted into epc membranes lacking neutral, anionic, or both types of lipids, the magnitude of these
spectral variations differ according to the final lipid composition of the reconstituted membrane, suggesting a lipid-dependent variation in the percentage of receptors found in the resting
and desensitized states. relative to the difference spectra recorded from native membranes, the variations in band intensity indicative of desensitization are minimal for the nachr in
either epc/dopa/chol or asolectin (a complex mixture of soybean lipids), suggesting that membranes containing neutral,
anionic, and zwitterionic lipids stabilize a predominantly native-like (mainly resting) conformation. the spectral variations
are slightly more intense in difference spectra recorded from
the nachr in epc membranes with only a neutral or an
anionic lipid, and are relatively dramatic in epc membranes
lacking both types of lipids. within the four binary mixtures of
lipids, there are also slight differences in the magnitudes of the
band intensity variations, which suggest an increasing shift
toward the desensitized state in the following order: epc/
dopa , epc/squalene , epc/ xxxd1949xxx  , epc/chol (table i).
while the nature of the conformational perturbation induced
by the absence (or presence) of neutral and anionic lipids may
be the same, the various lipid membranes appear to differ in
their relative abilities to stabilize the nachr in a native like
resting conformation.
the stabilization of a desensitized nachr in epc membranes lacking both neutral and anionic lipids is consistent
with both the labeling pattern of the nachr in epc by the
conformational sensitive probe, 125i-labeled 3-trifluoromethyl3-(m-[125i]iodophenyl)diazirine, and the inability of the nachr
to either conduct cations across the membrane or undergo the
resting to desensitized affinity state transition (3, 4). a gradual
increase in the proportion of receptors in a channel-inactive
desensitized conformation in membranes with varying lipid
compositions is also consistent with both 3-trifluoromethyl-3(m-[125i]iodophenyl)diazirine labeling and the relative ion flux
responses of the nachr in the different lipid membranes,
although the latter types of experiments are usually interpreted in terms of the stabilization of either a channel-active or
-inactive conformation. 3-trifluoromethyl-3-(m-[125i]iodophenyl)diazirine labeling indicates that the nachr in epc/chol
adopts a conformation similar to that observed in epc,
whereas in epc/dopa the conformation resembles more
closely that observed in both epc/dopa/chol and native membranes (4). although usually treated as non-functional, the
nachr in either epc/chol (molar ratio of 2.24:1) or epc/
 xxxd1949xxx  has limited ability to conduct cations, whereas the ability of the nachr to undergo ligand-induced conformational
transitions is enhanced in epc/dopa (3, 6, 7). these results
correlate with the relative magnitudes of the variations in band
intensity found in the difference spectra (table i) and, thus, the
increasing proportion of receptors found in a channel-inactive
desensitized state versus a channel competent resting state in
epc/dopa, epc/ xxxd1949xxx , epc/chol, and epc membranes.
note also that relative to native membranes, 125i-labeled

24595

24596

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr
changes in intensity of the weak band near 1744 cm21 must be
interpreted with caution, given the sensitivity of the apparent
intensity of the band to base-line fluctuations (see fig. 1,
trace a).
future studies using isotopically labeled agonists and lipids should lead to a definitive interpretation of the lipidsensitive bands in the 1700 –1750 cm21 region that may
reflect the binding of phospholipids to distinct sites on the
nachr. we are also studying the effects of local anesthetics
on reconstituted nachr membranes in order to define the
conformation that is stabilized by both dib and reconstitution
into neutral and anionic lipid-depleted membranes. the possibility that the difference spectra recorded from the nachr
in either epc or epc/dopa/chol plus dib reflect the binding
of carb to an already desensitized receptor suggests that the
bands near 1744, 1668, 1655, 1544, 1438, and 1059 cm21 are
reflecting the resting to desensitized conformational change
itself, whereas other bands in the difference spectra reflect
structural changes at or near the ligand binding that occur as
a result of specific carb-nachr interactions. further analyses of these and other vibrations should lead to a better
understanding of both the nature of the structural changes
that occur upon desensitization and the structural basis for
nachr-agonist interactions.
acknowledgment—we thank dr. m. mccarthy for supplying some of
the affinity-purified nachr membranes and for performing the 125ilabeled a-bungarotoxin binding assays.
references
1. karlin, a. (1993) curr. opin. neurobiol. 3, 299 –309
2. mcnamee, m. g., and fong, t. m. (1988) in lipid domains and the relationship to membrane function (aloia, r. c., curtain, c. c., and gordon, l. m.,
eds) pp. 43– 62, alan r. liss, inc, new york
3. fong, t. m., and mcnamee, m. g. (1986) biochemistry 25, 830 – 840
4. mccarthy, m. p., and moore, m. a. (1992) j. biol. chem. 267, 7655–7663
5. sunshine, c., and mcnamee, m. g. (1994) biochim. biophys. acta 1191, 59 – 64
6. ochoa, e. l. m., dalziel, a. w., and mcnamee, m. g. (1983) biochim. biophys.
acta 727, 151–162
7. sunshine, c., and mcnamee, m. g. (1992) biochim. biophys. acta 1108,
240 –246
8. jones, o. t., and mcnamee, m. g. (1988) biochemistry 27, 2364 –2374
9. bhushan, a., and mcnamee, m. g. (1993) biophys. j. 64, 716 –723
10. fong, t. m., and mcnamee, m. g. (1987) biochemistry 26, 3871–3880
11. butler, d. h., and mcnamee, m. g. (1993) biochim. biophys. acta 1150, 17–24
12. fernandez-ballester, g., castresana, j., fernandez, a. m., arrondo, j-l. r.,
ferragut, j. a., and gonzalez-ros, j. m. (1994) biochemistry 33, 4065– 4071
13. méthot, n., demers, c. n., and baenziger, j. e. (1995) biochemistry 34,
15142–15149
14. braiman, m., and rothschild, k. j. (1988) annu. rev. biophys. chem. 17,
541–570
15. baenziger, j. e., miller, k. w., and rothschild, k. j. (1992) biophys. j. 61,
983–992
16. baenziger, j. e., miller, k. w., mccarthy, m. p., & rothschild, k. j. (1992)
biophys. j. 62, 64 – 66
17. baenziger, j. e., miller, k. w., and rothschild, k. j. (1993) biochemistry 32,
5448 –5454
18. braswell, l. m., miller, k. w., and sauter, j.-f. (1984) br. j. pharmacol. 83,
305–311
19. weiland, g., georgia, b., lappi, s., chignell, c. f., and taylor, p. (1977 j. biol.
chem. 252, 7648 –7656
20. krodel, e. k., beckman, r. a., and cohen, j. b. (1979) mol. pharmacol. 15,
294 –312
21. blanchard, s. g., elliott, j., and raftery, m. a. (1979) biochemistry 18,
5880 –5885
22. méthot, n., mccarthy, m. p., and baenziger, j. e. (1994) biochemistry 33,
7709 –7717
23. criado, m., eibl, h., and barrantes (1984) j. biol. chem. 259, 9188 –9198
24. reid, s. e., moffatt, d. j., and baenziger, j. e. (1996) spectrochim. acta 52,
1347–1356
25. marcelja, s. (1974) biochim. biophys. acta 367, 165–176
26. salmon, a., dodd, s. w., williams, g. d., beach, j. m., and brown, m. f. (1987)
j. am. chem. soc. 109, 2600 –2609
27. raines, d. e., and miller, k. w. (1993) biophys. j. 64, 632– 641
28. marsh, d., and watts, a. (1982) in lipid-protein interactions (jost, j. c., and
griffith, o. h., eds) vol. 2, pp. 53–126, john wiley & sons, new york
29. boyd, n. d., and cohen, j. b. (1980) biochemistry 19, 5344 –5353
30. auger, m., carrier, d., smith, i. c. p., and jarrell, h. j. (1987) j. am. chem.
soc. 112, 1373–1381
31. ellena, j. f., blazing, m. a., and mcnamee, m. g., (1983) biochemistry 22,
5523–5535
32. horváth, l. i., brophy, p. j., and marsh, d. (1988) biochemistry 27, 46 –52

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

zation of a-helix and b-sheet, respectively, and alter nachr
function via similar changes in structure, then alternate mechanisms are required to explain the apparent functional requirement of the nachr for both neutral and anionic lipids. one
possibility is that diverse lipid structures influence nachr
structure (i.e. the equilibrium between the resting and desensitized states) via nonspecific alterations of the physical properties of the lipid membrane. chol has a well characterized
ordering effect on lipid bilayers in the liquid-crystalline state.
the very small head group of dopa should lead to a condensation and thus a restriction in the amplitudes of motion of the
fatty acyl chains and thus a more ordered, less fluid lipid
bilayer (26, 27). the presence of both lipids could lead to a
relatively ordered lipid membrane that might be required for
maintaining the nachr in a predominantly resting conformation. conversely, a more fluid system in the absence of either or
both lipids might increasingly enhance the formation of the
desensitized conformation. this possibility could account for
both the reduced ion flux capabilities and the more substantial
band intensity variations detected in the difference spectra
recorded from the nachr in epc/ xxxd1949xxx  relative to the nachr
in epc/dopa (3, 7).  xxxd1949xxx  has a large head group that would
not influence the physical properties of the lipid bilayer in the
same manner as dopa. a recent spin-labeled study has also
shown that the negative charge on dopa is not responsible for
specific interactions at the nachr-lipid interface (27). furthermore, the nachr is stabilized in a high affinity conformation
(likely desensitized) in the presence of several detergents,
which disrupt the integrity and thus modulate the fluidity of
the lipid membrane (4).
a potential role for membrane “fluidity” in modulating
nachr function has been suggested previously, although modulations in fluidity, as monitored using either spin-labeled
fatty acid or fluorescent probes, cannot completely explain lipiddependent modulation of nachr activity (3, 5). however, the
lack of a clear correlation between membrane fluidity and
nachr function could reflect an inability to accurately characterize the complex structure and dynamics of a lipid bilayer by
monitoring the motions of either a rigid fluorescent or a spinlabeled probe. spectroscopic methods are generally sensitive to
motions occurring within a limited time frame (28, 30) and may
not provide a comprehensive description of the complex variations in membrane structure and dynamics brought about by
changes in membrane lipid composition. more comprehensive
analyses of the affects of different lipids on membrane structure and dynamics, such as those that can be performed using
a combination of nmr spectroscopy and molecular modeling
(30), may be required in order to fully understand the role
of membrane fluidity in the modulations of nachr
structure/function.
a second possibility is that both neutral and anionic lipids
bind to distinct sites on the nachr, but that the main effect of
binding is a modulation of the equilibrium between the resting
and desensitized states, as opposed to the stabilization of specific secondary structures. this possibility is supported by the
observed binding of chol to non-annular sites of the nachr
(38). the lipid-sensitive band in the difference spectrum near
1744 cm21 could also reflect a change in a phospholipid ester
c5o stretching vibration upon the binding of carb to the
nachr and subsequent desensitization. preliminary studies
suggest that the band does not downshift in frequency in difference spectra recorded in 2h2o buffer, consistent with the
assignment of the 1744 cm21 band to a lipid ester carbonyl. a
possible change in the structure of a lipid upon the binding of
carb to the nachr would imply a tight association between the
phospholipid and the receptor. however, the lipid-induced

lipid-protein interactions in the nachr
33. baenziger, j. e., chew, j. p., and méthot, n. (1995) biophys. j. 68, 377a
34. ludlam, c. f. c., sonar, s., lee, c.-p., coleman, m., herzfeld, j.,
rajbhandary, u. l., and rothschild, k. j. (1995) biochemistry 34, 2– 6
35. rothschild, k. j. (1992) j. bioenerg. biomembr. 24, 147–167
36. hienerwadel, r., grzybek, s., fogel, c., kreutz, w., okamura, m. y., paddock,
m. l., breton, j., nabedryk, e., and mäntele, w. (1995) biochemistry 34,
2832–2843

24597

37. gregoriou, v. g., jayaraman, v., hu, x., and spiro, t. g. (1995) biochemistry
34, 6876 – 6882
38. jones, o. t, and mcnamee, m. g. (1988) biochemistry 27, 2364 –2374
39. braiman, m. s., walter, t. j., and briercheck, d. m. (1994) biochemistry 33,
1629 –1635
40. moore, m. a., and mccarthy, m. p. (1994) biochim. biophys. acta 1190,
457– 464

downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

structural effects of neutral and anionic lipids on the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor: an infrared difference spectroscopy study
stephen e. ryan, caroline n. demers, jennifer p. chew and john e. baenziger
j. biol. chem. 1996, 271:24590-24597.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.40.24590

access the most updated version of this article at http://www.jbc.org/content/271/40/24590
alerts:
• when this article is cited
• when a correction for this article is posted
click here to choose from all of jbc's e-mail alerts
downloaded from http://www.jbc.org/ by guest on october 15, 2019

this article cites 39 references, 4 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/271/40/24590.full.html#ref-list-1

