|

iochem pha |
0)
;

rod sv: acute ag |
induced calcium i,
409-17
rsson l, ungersti
riatum after mi da
intracerebral micro
-16

akamura y, kataok
ns against ischemic
© excitatory aming
neurosci lett 1994

, |
actions of pentoby. |
‘ain cortex. anesth: |

‘ein g: neuroprotec.
ulator and glutamate
s and in gerbil globa

cole dj: etomidate |
the hippocampus in
anesth analg 199;

anaka m, kataokak :
the cai field of the
lysis study. j neue

|

ibution in the bran

of a large ca” inde
isolated nerve tem:
22-4

oldfield eh: cerebrd
e characteristics and
osurg 1990; 72:749-

iturates as protectit
vengers in vitro. acti

barbiturate treatmetl
il brain. j  xxxd122xxx  sd

anesthesiology

1996; 85:1431-8

© 1996 american society of anesthesiologists, inc
lippincott-raven publishers

  
  
 
 

halothane blocks synaptic excitation of

inhibitory interneurons

misha perouansky, m.d.,* eilon d. kirson, m.s.,¢ yoel yaari, ph.d.t

background: activation of principal hippocampal neurons
is controlled by feedforward and feedback inhibition mediated
by y-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons. the effects of halo-
thane on  xxxg981xxx -mediated synaptic excitation of
inhibitory interneurons have not been reported yet.

methods: the effects of halothane on glutamatergic excit-
atory postsynaptic currents and on spike threshold in visually
identified interneurons were studied with tight-seal, whole-
cell voltage- and current-clamp recordings in thin slices from
adult mouse hippocampus. the excitatory postsynaptic cur-
rents were pharmacologically isolated into their n-methy]-d-
aspartate and non—n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-mediated
components using selective antagonists.

results: halothane (0.37—2.78 mm) reversibly blocked non—
n-methyl-p-aspartate and n-methyl-d-aspartate excitatory
postsynaptic currents in hippocampal oriens-alveus interneu-
rons. half-maximal inhibition was observed at similar concen-
trations (0.59 mm and 0.50 mm, respectively). halothane inhib-
ited synaptically generated action potentials at concentrations
that did not elevate the spike threshold.

conclusions: halothane blocks  xxxg981xxx -mediated
synaptic activation of inhibitory interneurons in the mouse
hippocampus. (key words: anesthetics, volatile: halothane.
animals: mouse. brain: hippocampus. central nervous sys-

tem: excitatory postsynaptic currents. central nervous system,

 

this article is accompanied by a highlight. please see this issue

of anesthesiology, page 29a.

 

 

 

 

“instructor, department of anesthesiology and critical care.

+foulkes fellow, department of phy siology.

+associate professor of physiology.
hebrew university

received from the department of physiology,
and criti-

school of medicine, and the department of anesthesiology
cal care, hadassah university hospital-hebrew university, jerusalem,
israel. received for publication january 11, 1996.
cation august 6, 1996. supported by grants from t
of health (to dr. yaari) and the
research foundation (to dr. perouansky).

address reprint requests to dr.
thesiology and critical care, hadassah
university, pob 12000, 91010 jerusalem, israel.

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

accepted for publi-
he israeli ministry

joint i ladassah-hebrew university

perouansky: department of anes-
iniversity hospital-hebrew

receptors: glutamate; n -methyl-p-aspartate, non-n -methyl-p-
aspartate. central nervous system, neuron: interneuron, pyra-
midal cell. measurement technique: hippocampal slice; patch-
clamp.)

halothane affects synaptic transmission mediated by
glutamate and y- xxxd2177xxx  (gaba), the major
excitatory and inhibitory transmitters in the mammalian
central nervous system.’ halothane was shown consis-
tently to inhibit glutamatergic excitation,”~* whereas its
effects on gabaergic inhibition have been more contra-
dictory. in isolated preparations, halothane generally
enhanced gaba, receptor-mediated responses.° ° how-
ever, in intact preparations, depressant effects of halo-
thane on gabaergic inhibition were found.*”'° this
suggests that halothane also may modulate the synaptic
recruitment and the excitability of gabaergic interneu-
rons.

inhibitory interneurons are instrumental in the syn-
chronization of neuronal activity in the hippocam-
pus''!? and may contribute to the generation of hippo-
campal high-frequency'* and cortical 40-hz oscillations
implicated in cognitive function.'* thus understanding
the effects of volatile anesthetics on synaptic responses
and membrane properties of interneurons is important
for the development of a comprehensive view of the
central nervous system effects of this class of general
anesthetics. no studies investigating the effects of anes-
thetics on these cells have been published yet. there-
fore, we have obtained tight-seal, whole-cell recordings
from visually identified interneurons in adult mouse hip-
pocampal slices. the effects of halothane on excitatory
postsynaptic currents (epscs) and potentials (epsps)
were investigated and compared with its effect on in-
trinsic excitability. some of these results have been re-
ported previously in abstracts."

materials and methods

preparation of slices
institutional approval for the experiments was ob-
tained. experiments were performed on thin hippocam-

  
  
 
  
 
  
    
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
   
 
  
     
  
 
  
  
  
   
 

1432

perouansky, kirson, and yaari

pal slices from adult mice (7 to 13 weeks old), as de-
scribed previously.” briefly, each mouse was anesthe-
tized with ether and decapitated. the brain was quickly
removed and a block of tissue containing one hippo-
campus was glued to the stage of a vibratome. trans-
verse slices (150 um) were cut from the hemispheral
region containing the hippocampus and transferred to
an incubation chamber perfused with oxygenated saline
(95% oxygen/5% carbon dioxide) at 34°c. they were
used, one at a time, after at least 1 h of incubation. in
the recording chamber (200 yd, the slice was perfused
continuously (2.5 ml/min) with oxygenated saline at
room temperature (21 - 23°c).

solutions and drugs

the standard saline used to dissect and maintain slices
consisted of 125 mm nacl, 2.5 mm kci, 13 mm hepes,
1.25 mm nah,po,, 12.5 mm glucose, 1.5 mm  xxxg2125xxx , and
4 mm mgso,, ph 7.3. the concentration of nahco,
was 26.7 mm in the dissection and experimental solu-
tions and 13 mn in the incubation solution. experimen-
tal salines contained 5 um glycine to saturate glycine-
binding sites on n-methyl-d-aspartate (nmda) recep-
tors and 10 pm bicucculline methiodide to block gaba,
receptor-mediated chloride currents. bicucculline was
omitted in the current-clamp experiments. in the exper-
imental saline studies, the concentration of  xxxg2125xxx , was
increased to 2.5 mm. mgcl, was either omitted com-
pletely, as in experiments on isolated nmda epscs, or
added at the specified concentrations. dl-2-aminophos-
phonovaleric acid (apv) or 6-nitro-7-cyano-quinoxaline-
2,3-dion (cnqx) were added to block nmda or non-
nmda receptor-mediated currents, respectively.

the intracellular (pipette) solution was composed of
130 mm cesium fluoride (csf), 10 mm nacl, 10 mm
hepes, 10 mm egta, 2 mm mgcl, 1 mm  xxxg2125xxx ,, and 10
mm tetra-ethyl ammonium. for current-clamp _re-
cordings, csf was replaced by potassium fluoride (kf),
tetra-ethyl ammonium was omitted, and egta was re-
duced to 0.1 mm. the ph was adjusted to 7.2-7.3.
drugs were purchased from sigma chemical company
(st. louis, mo), with the exception of cnqx (tocris
neuramin, uk) and halothane (trofield surgicals, swit-
zerland).

application and measurement of halothane

the fresh oxygen-carbon dioxide mixture was di-
rected through a flowmeter through an enfluratec va-
porizer (cyprane, keighley, england) containing halo-

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

thane. this gas mixture was used to bubble through
the experimental saline for at least 15 min before it was
applied to the slice with a peristaltic pump.

halothane concentrations in the recording chamber
were determined as described previously, using a tra-
cor 540 gas chromatograph (tracor instruments, aus-
tin, tx).° a modified aquarium pump was used to scay-
enge for waste gases.'°

stimulation and recording

interneurons in the ca1 field of the hippocampal slice
were visualized at x400 magnification with a water
immersion objective using an upright microscope
equipped with nomarski optics (zeiss standard 18,
oberkochen, germany). tight-seal whole-cell _re-
cordings were made from multipolar neurons located
close to the oriens-alveus border. previous work identi-
fied them as gabaergic interneurons.'”'* recording pi-
pettes were pulled from borosilicate glass (hilgenberg,
maisfeld, germany) on a vertical puller (list-medical,
darmstadt, germany). the series resistance (5 - 10 mq)
was compensated to 50-90% by the patch-clamp ampli-
fier (list lm-epc 7 or axopatch 200 integrated ampli-
fier, axon instruments, foster city, ca). stimulating
pipettes were pulled from ‘‘boralex’’ disposable micro-
pipettes (rochester scientific, rochester, ny) and filled
with saline. they were positioned 20-70 ym from the
patched cell. stimuli were applied at 0.1 hz by a master-
8 stimulator ( xxxd165xxx , jerusalem, israel) via an isolation
unit (world precision instruments, sarasota, fl). stimu-
lus strength was adjusted to evoke submaximal stable
epscs.

data analysis

all currents recorded were filtered at 1 khz, digitized
on-line at sampling rates between 1 and 2 khz, and
analyzed off-line using a personal computer and com-
mercial software (pclamp, axon instruments). kinetic
analysis was performed on averaged signals (usually five
to ten consecutive epscs). the epsc rise times were
measured at the 10-90% peak. their decays were fitted
with an exponential function: y = ae”, where a is
the peak current amplitude and rt is the time constant
of decay. measurements are given as mean + sd or se,
as indicated. differences among multiple groups were
tested using one- or two-way analysis of variance, 4s
appropriate. when significant differences were indi-
cated in the f ratio test (p < 0.001), the significance
of differences between means of any two of these

haloth/
haloth

fig. 1. exp
of the
pals
pocampal e
ec
(schaffer) ¢
midal cells.
ing feedfor

ca1 pyram
box. the s
radiatum (

idal ,
excitatory |
interneuro!
axon colla

turn, form
on the ca1

tum pyram
tion of the
a. closed a1
(glutamater

groups w
method f
0.05. diffe
pared usit
the dos
by fitting

in which |
thane con

results

glutama:
tons origir
laterals of |
midal cells
diate eithe
pyramidal
vant neuro

artic

alveus inter
drepetit
a prolon,

‘nesthesiolog
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
     

ording chamber
sly, using g th
nstruments, ay
vas used to scar:

ippocampal si
on with a wate
ght microscopy, |
iss standard 18 |
whole-cell te
neurons located
ious work identi
” 1 recording pi
lass (hilgenberg
ler (list-medica
tance (5-10 mi) |
atch-clamp ampli:
integrated amp:
ca). stimulating
disposable micto
fer, ny) and filled
-70 pm from the
1 hz by a master
) via an isolation
rasota, fl). stiml
ubmaximal stable

at 1 khz, digitize
| and 2 khz, ant
ymputer and cot
‘ruments). kinett
ignals (usually fi
c rise times wert
decays were ite!
ae vee where as
the time consti
/mean + sp or
itiple groups "a
‘sis of variances ®
srences were #
1), the si ifican™
any two of thes

halothane and epscs in interneurons

 

fig. 1. experimental preparation. (4) dia-
gram of the circuitry within a transverse hip-
pocampal slice, showing the trisynaptic hip-
pal excitatory pathway. axons of den-
tate gyrus (dg) granule cells innervate ca3
pp idal cells, which send recurrent
(schaffer) collaterals to innervate ca1 pyra-
midal cells. the local ca1 circuitry mediat-
ing feedforward and feedback inhibition of
ca1 pyramidal cells is illustrated inside the
box. the schaffer collaterals (1) in stratum
radiatum (sr) and axon collaterals of ca1
pyramidal cells (2) in the alveus (ai) form
excitatory (glutamatergic) synapses on an
interneuron situated in stratum oriens (so).
axon collaterals of the interneuron (3), in
turn, form inhibitory (gabaergic) synapses
on the ca1 pyramidal cell situated in stra-
tum pyramidale (sp). () expanded descrip-
tion of the ca1 circuity, shown in the box in
a. closed and open circles denote excitatory
(glutamatergic) and inhibitory (gabaergic)
synapses, respectively. the arrows indicate
the direction of impulse propagation (pc =
pyramidal cell). (c) typical nonaccommo-
dating response of an oriens-alveus in-
terneuron to a long (400 ms) depolarizing
current pulse injected into the soma.

groups was determined using the modified tukey
method for multiple comparisons with an a value of
0.05. differences between paired sets of data were com-
pared using the paired student’s ¢ test.

the dose - response curve for halothane was obtained
by fitting experimental results with the hill equation:

[ = im/(1 + gcs0/[hal])")

in which im is the maximal inhibition, {hal] is the halo-
thane concentration, and n is the hill coefficient.

results

glutamatergic excitation of oriens-alveus interneu-
rons originates predominantly from recurrent axon col-
laterals of either ca3 (schaffer collaterals) or cai pyra-
midal cells. accordingly, oriens-alveus interneurons me-
diate either feedforward or feedback inhibition of ca1
pyramidal cells. figures 1a and 1b summarize the rele-
vant neuronal circuitry."®

this article is based on recordings from 26 ca1 oriens-
alveus interneurons. under current-clamp, these neurons
fired repetitively in a nonaccomodating manner in response
to a prolonged depolarizing current pulse (fig. 1©).

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

 

 

j 10 mv

2na

 

100 ms

glutamatergic excitatory postsynaptic currents in

adult oriens-alveus interneurons

previous analyses of glutamatergic epscs in hippo-
campal interneurons were performed in slices from im-
mature (2-3 weeks old) rats.'°2° the epscs were com-
posed of two components: a fast, voltage-insensitive
component that was blocked by the dl-a-amino-3-hy-
droxy-5-methylisoxazolepropionic acid/kainate recep-
tor blocker cnqx (non-nmda epsc), and a slow, volt-
age-sensitive component that was blocked by the
nmda receptor blocker apv (nmda epsc). because
the densities and properties of glutamate receptors may
change during development,” it was important first to
characterize the pharmacologic and kinetic properties
of glutamatergic epscs in adult interneurons.

native epscs reversed polarity close to o mv. at a hold-
ing potential of —60 mv, they had a fast rise time and
a dual component decay. with depolarization, the slow
component of decay became more prominent. this is
consistent with the voltage-dependent relief of the mg”*-
block of nmda receptor channels.””?> accordingly, this
component increased in mg*-free saline at negative po-
tentials and was blocked by 100 um apv (fig. 2a). the
fast component of the epsc was blocked by 5 um cnqx,
indicating its mediation by non-nmda receptors (fig. 2b).
 

1434

perouansky, kirson, and yaari

control b

  
 

30 30
eee ecrtttel ae my ay

-60 , oss as -60 .
mv mv

apv + cnqx
apv
control

seen

20 ms

the rise times and the decay time constants of the
pharmacologically isolated non-nmda epscs evoked at
a membrane potential of —60 mv were (mean + sd)
1.12 + 0.26 and 3.4 + 1.7 ms (m = 8), respectively.
the respective rise times and decay time constants of
nmda epscs in mg”*-free saline were 10.36 + 4 ms (n
= 10) and 176 + 33 ms (n = 6).

effects of halothane on excitatory postsynaptic

currents

as illustrated in figure 3, native epscs at both negative
and positive potentials were reversibly depressed by

 

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

control
bs ae tern

    
  
 

fig. 2. dual-component excitatory post-
synaptic currents (epscs) in adult oriens-
alveus interneurons and their pharmaco-
logic separation. (4,b) two representative
experiments conducted in saline con-
taining 1 mm mg’’. the epscs were evoked
by stimulating afferent fibers while the
neurons were voltage-clamped at either
—60 mv (lower) or 30 mv (upper). at —60
mv, only a small, slow component of the
native epsc was blocked by 100 po apv.
the dominating dl-2-aminophosphono-
valeric acid (apv)-insensitive fast current
was blocked by 5 pm 6-nitro-7-cyano-quin-
oxaline-2,3-dion. at +30 mv, the relative
size of the slow, apv-sensitive epsc com-
ponent markedly increased.

cnqx + apv
cnqx

control

00a

200 ms

0.64 mm halothane (n = 4). at both potentials, halo-
thane similarly depressed the fast and slow epsc com-
ponents, suggesting that it blocks indiscriminately both
non-nmda and nmda epscs.

this notion was tested further by investigating the effects
of halothane on pharmacologically isolated non-nmda and
nmda epscs. in the experiment illustrated in figure 4a,
0.64 mm halothane reduced the peak amplitude of non-
nmda (a) and nmda (6) epscs by 64% and 58%, respec-
tively. while depressing epsc amplitude, halothane at-
fected neither the rise time (fig. 4b) nor the decay time
course (fig. 4c) of non-nmda (a) and nmda epscs (0).

fig. 3. halothane depresses dual-compo-
nent excitatory postsynaptic currents
(epscs) in an adult oriens-alveus in-
terneuron. the experiment was con:
ducted in saline containing 1 mm mg’:
the epscs were evoked while the cell was
voltage-clamped at either —60 mv (4) of
30 mv (8). at these two potentials, the n2-
tive epscs consisted predominantly of ei-
ther non-—n-methyl-p-aspartate or n-
methyl-p-aspartate receptor-mediated com
ponents, respectively. (a) control epscs.
(b) epscs after 10 min of exposure to 0.64
mm halothane. (c) epscs after 20 min of
wash. both fast and slow components of
the epscs were similarly depressed by
halothane in a reversible manner.

 

2ms

fig. 4, hal
n-methy1-
aptic curre
ties. (a) h;
non-nmda
and 58%, r
of the sele
nitro-7-cya
epscs wer
nmda eps
the rising
were norm
control ep:
that of the |
same proc
of the non
temained y
brations, t.
in a,

concent

to quan}
matergic f
halothane
mm. samp
nmda ep:
halothane

mesthesioto,
    

   

ent excitatory «|
scs) in adult o

ind their p
) two representa,
ted in saline 4
e epscs were ory
nt fibers while te
e-clamped at ci,
a (upper). at ~(|
component of.
ked by 100 ne
2-aminophosphons
ensitive fast curren,
-nitro-7-cyano-qj,|
30 mv, o ae
sensitive epsc cop.
reased.

1 potentials, hale |
1 slow epsc com
iscriminately both

tigating the effect |
‘ed non-nmdaaai
rated in figure 4
amplitude of not
% and 58%, respe
ude, halothane a
or the decay time
nmda epscs (0)

esses dual-comp?
tsynaptic currents
+ oriens-alveus i
eriment was cot
aining 1 mm mb:
.d while the cell w#
ther —60 mv a)
oo potentials, the 0%
,redominantly of e
p-aspartate * |
eptor-mediate

a) control ert
. of exposure to 0. f
scs after 20 :
low components
ilarly depres
ible mannet-

halothane and

 

epscs in interneurons

10 um cnqx

100 pm ap

 

 

100 ms

2ms 10 ms

fig. 4. halothane depresses pharmacologically isolated non—
n-methyl-p-aspartate (nmda) and nmda excitatory postsyn-
aptic currents (epscs) without affecting their kinetic proper-
ties. (a) halothane (0.64 mm) reduced the peak amplitudes of
non-nmda (a) and nmda (0) receptor-mediated epscs by 64%
and 58%, respectively. the epscs were evoked in the presence
of the selective blockers aminophosphonovaleric acid and 6-
nitro-7-cyano-quinoxaline-2,3-dion, as indicated. the nmda
epscs were evoked in mg’’-free saline. the illustrated non-
nmda epsc was recorded in saline containing 1 mm mg’. (b)
the rising phases of the epscs recorded in 0.64 mm halothane
were normalized and superimposed on the rising phase of the
control epsc. neither the rise time of the non-nmda (a) nor
that of the nmda (b) epsc were affected by halothane. (c) the
same procedure as in b was applied to the decaying phases
of the non-nmda (a) and the nmda epscs (b), which also
remained unaffected by halothane. note the different time cali-
brations. traces in b and c were taken from the epscs shown
in a.

concentration - response relation

to quantify the inhibitory effect of halothane on gluta-
matergic epscs in oriens-alveus interneurons, we tested
halothane at concentrations ranging from 0.37 to 2.79
mm. sample traces for non-nmda (fig. 5a, upper) and
nmda epscs (fig. 5a, lower) in 0.64 mm and 2.79 mm
halothane are shown together with the control cur-

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

2.79mm halothane
spa epee

{100 pa

20 ms

| aeamyera veer

[100 pa

200 ms

control 0.64mm halothane

 

100

80
=
c 60
2
no
sete ten ersten eet nacre v nmda
s @non-nmda
35
oo 40
nw
oo:
uw

20

 
  

0.1 0.25 0.5 1:0" 1:9 3.0

halothane concentration (mm)

fig. 5. dose-dependent suppression of non—n-methyl-p-aspar-
tate (nmda) and nmda excitatory postsynaptic currents
(epscs) by halothane. (4) exemplary records of non-nmda
(upper) and nmda (lower) epscs evoked at —60 mv and re-
corded at the indicated halothane concentrations. note that
the time calibration is different. (b) dose-response relation of
halothane-induced depression of the epscs. the curve summa-
rizes the results from 13 oriens-alveus interneurons clamped
at —60 mv. the nmda receptor-mediated currents were re-
corded in mg’’-free saline. each cell was exposed to several
concentrations of halothane. non-nmda and nmda receptor-
mediated currents were isolated pharmacologically with 100
pm aminophosphonovaleric acid and 5 pm 6-nitro-7-cyano-
quinoxaline-2,3-dion, respectively. solid lines were fitted
through the data points, as described in materials and meth-
ods. the dotted lines indicate the halothane concentrations
producing 50% inhibition: 0.59 mm for non-nmda and 0.50
mm for nmda epscs.

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
      
  
   
  
  
    
    
    
   
  
    
  
   
   
 

1436

perouansky, kirson, and yaari

 

 

control 1.5 mm halothane wash
110 mv
25 ms
68 ste
mv
b | 5mv
25 ms
-77

 

fig. 6. halothane blocks synaptically generated spikes in an
oriens-alveus interneuron without elevating spike threshold.
(a) stimulation of afferent fibers induced solitary action po-
tentials (left), which were suppressed by 1.5 mm halothane
(middle) in a reversible manner (vight). (b) hyperpolarization
of the cell by steady negative current injection unmasked the
underlying excitatory postsynaptic potentials (left), which
were markedly depressed by halothane (middle). (c) at the
same time, action potentials evoked by injection of just-supra-
threshold, brief depolarizing current pulses (left), were not
inhibited by halothane (middle). samples represent unaver-
aged traces recorded in saline containing 1 mm mg’’. spikes
were truncated. note the differences in calibrations.

rents. the results obtained from 13 oriens-alveus inter-
neurons are summarized in figure 5b. halothane inhib-
ited both epsc components in a dose-dependent man-
ner. at the lowest concentration tested (0.37 mm), non-
nmda and nmda epscs were inhibited by 16.5 + 4.9%
(n = 3) and 27.7 + 4.9% (n = 3), respectively (differ-
ence not significant). nearly complete blockade (96.3
+ 3.7% and 97.2 + 2.8%, n = 5) was achieved at 2.79
mm. the calculated concentrations producing 50% inhi-
bition were 0.59 mm and 0.50 mm for non-nmda and
nmda epscs, respectively.

effects of halothane on synaptically and

electrically evoked action potentials

in current-clamp recordings, afferent fiber stimulation
evoked glutamatergic epsps in oriens-alveus interneu-
rons. as shown in figure 6, large epsps triggered action
potentials (fig. 6a, left). these could be blocked by

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

hyperpolarizing the in with negative current, thereby
unmasking the underlying epsp (fig. ob, left). single
action potentials also could be evoked by injecting the
interneuron with brief positive current pulses (fig. 6c,
left).

the effects of halothane on synaptically and electri-
cally evoked spikes were compared in four oriens-al-
veus interneurons. the intensities of the orthodromic
and the depolarizing stimuli were adjusted to be just
more than the threshold value for eliciting a single
spike. as illustrated in figure 6a, 1.5 mm halothane re-
versibly inhibited synaptically evoked action potentials.
this effect was due to the suppression of the epsp (fig.
6b), because halothane did not increase the threshold
for evoking spikes by direct electrical stimulation (fig.
6c).

discussion

the main finding in this study is that halothane sup-
presses synaptic excitation of oriens-alveus interneu-
rons. this effect is due to a dose-dependent suppression
of glutamatergic epscs in these neurons, rather than to
changes in their intrinsic excitability.

glutamatergic excitatory postsynaptic currents in

adult oriens-alveus interneurons

as in the immature preparation,'? native gluta-
matergic epscs in adult oriens-alveus interneurons com-
prised both non-nmda and nmda receptor-mediated
components, which could be studied in isolation in
apv- or cnqx-containing salines, respectively. non-
nmda epscs had faster kinetics than did nmda epscs,
although we did not detect any nmda epscs with very
slow rise times, similar to those previously seen in the
juvenile preparation.”°

depression of glutamatergic excitatory

postsynaptic currents

halothane indiscriminately inhibited the non-nmda
and the nmda receptor-mediated epscs in adult oriens-
alveus interneurons in a dose-dependent manner. this
block was not associated with changes in the rise time
or decay time course of these currents, which suggests
that halothane may inhibit glutamatergic epscs by 4
predominantly presynaptic mechanism of action. sup-
porting this hypothesis, we showed previously that hal
othane indiscriminately reduces non-nmda and nmda

 

halotha
es

epscs in |
epsc time
glutamate
gaba, te
jnteractins

6-8,24,2

tors.

suppres.

potentic

as expe
suppresse
neurons. ‘
viously n
blocked e
interneurc
not suppr
tion. thus
of oriens-
matergic |
findings th
old curren
campal ca

implicat
we perf
by thems«
23°c), but
also affect:
mal body
tions proc
pressures
the increas
with decre
dressed by
of volatile
matergic e
at concent
ported “aq
mice (0.27
ture), 28:29 t
increasing}
thane anes;
under ex
synaptic ef
"eceptor-m,
induce ane:
‘ating the
‘abaergic.
neurons! ar

“sthesiology
 
 
 
   
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
    
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
    
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
    

|
{
ee '
|
|
|

t

:

“urtent, thereby |
i

gb, lef). sng

py injecting ih

- pulses (fig. 6¢ |

‘ally and elects.
n four oriensa.
he orthodromic
usted to be jus
liciting a single
1m halothane te. |
ction potential,
of the epsp (fip
e the threshold |
stimulation (fig

- halothane sup |
alveus interneu-

lent suppression |

s, rather than to

tic currents in

° native glutt
terneurons cott
ceptor-mediated
| in isolation i
spectively. not
id nmda epscs.
epscs with very
usly seen in the

tory

the non-nmda
‘s in adult oriens
sat manner. ths
5 in the rise time
— which sugges
rgic epscs by #
n of action. sup
eviously that hat
mda and n

halothane and epscs in interneurons

 

epscs in adult ca1 pyramidal cells without affecting
epsc time course or currents induced by bath-applied
glutamate agonists.” in contrast, halothane prolonged
gaba, receptor-mediated responses, presumably by
interacting with the postsynaptic gabaergic recep-

-8,24,25

tors.”

suppression of synaptically evoked action

potentials

as expected from its effect on native epscs, halothane
suppressed glutamatergic epsps in oriens-alveus inter-
neurons. suppression of glutamatergic epsps was pre-
viously noted in spinal motoneurons.” halothane
blocked epsp-evoked action potentials in oriens-alveus
interneurons. under the same conditions, halothane did
not suppress spike generation by direct current injec-
tion. thus halothane inhibits the synaptic recruitment
of oriens-alveus interneurons by depressing gluta-
matergic epscs. this notion is supported by previous
findings that 1.5 mm halothane did not affect the thresh-
old current necessary to elicit a single spike in hippo-
campal ca1 neurons.”

implications for the mechanisms of anesthesia

we performed the experiments at temperatures that,
by themselves, appear anesthetic in mammals (21 -
23°c), but other researchers have shown that halothane
also affects excitatory neurotransmission at close to nor-
mal body temperatures.”*”° however, the concentra-
tions producing 50% inhibition expressed as partial
pressures are very temperature dependent because of
the increase of halothane solubility in aqueous solutions
with decreasing temperature. this problem can be ad-
dressed by comparing the free aqueous concentrations
of volatile anesthetics.* the depression of gluta-
matergic epscs in oriens-alveus interneurons occurred
at concentrations (0.5 to ().6 mm) about twice the re-
ported ‘‘aqueous minimum alveolar concentration” for
mice (0.27 mm = 0.95% at normal body tempera-
ture).°~’ thus glutamatergic epscs probably become
increasingly inhibited with deepening levels of halo-
thane anesthesia.

under experimental conditions that test only its post-
synaptic effect, halothane consistently enhances gaba,
receptor-mediated responses,” an action that may help
induce anesthesia2® however, in preparations incorpo-
rating the presynaptic element, halothane depresses

gabaergic inhibitory synaptic potentials in spinal moto-
neurons’ and in ca1 pyramidal cells,!° possibly by pre-

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

synaptically inhibiting evoked gaba release. here we
show that, at similar concentrations, halothane also
blocked the synaptic recruitment of gabaergic inter-
neurons. therefore we expect that the overall effect
of halothane on feedforward and feedback gabaergic
inhibition would be depressant in nature. the potentia-
tion of tonic gabaergic inhibition mediated by asyn-
chronous gaba release may contribute to the anesthe-
tic action of halothane.*’ halothane’s inhibitory action
on oriens-alveus interneurons may affect other neuro-
transmitter systems as well, because oriens-alveus inter-
neurons have been found to colocalize various neuro-
peptides in addition to gaba."

together the data presented here and in our previous
study in pyramidal cells’ suggest that halothane indis-
criminately reduces glutamatergic excitation of inter-
neurons and principal neurons in the hippocampus.
because glutamate is the most ubiquitous excitatory
neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, this ac-
tion may be important for achieving or maintaining the
anesthetic state.

the authors thank haviva aharon for technical assistance.

references

1. pocock g, richards cd: excitatory and inhibitory synaptic
mechanisms in anaesthesia. br j anaesth 1993; 71:134-47
2. richards cd: on the mechanism of halothane anaesthesia. j

physiol (london) 1973; 233:439-56

3. richards cd, white ae: the actions of volatile anaesthetics on
synaptic transmission in the dentate gyrus. j physiol (london) 1975;
252:241-57

4. takenoshita m, takahashi t: mechanisms of halothane action
on synaptic transmission in motoneurons of the newborn rat spinal
cord in vitro. brain res 1987; 402:303- 10

5. perouansky m, baranov d, salman m, yaari y: effects of halo-
thane on  xxxg981xxx -mediated excitatory postsynaptic cur-
rents. anesthesiology 1995; 83:109-19

6. wakamori m, ikemoto y, akaike n: effects of two volatile anes-
thetics and a volatile convulsant on the excitatory and inhibitory
amino acid responses in dissociated cns neurons of the rat. j neuro-
physiol 1991; 66:2014-21

7. yeh jz, quandt fn, tanguy j, nakahiro m, narahashi t, brunner
ea: general anesthetic action on y- xxxd2177xxx -activated chan-
nels. ann ny acad sci 1991; 625:155-73

8. jones mv, brooks pa, harrison nl: enhancement of y-aminobu-
tyric acid-activated cl" currents in cultured rat hippocampal neurones
by three volatile anaesthetics. j physiol (london) 1992; 449:279 - 93

9. shimoji k, fujioka h, fukazawa t, hashiba m, maruyama bes
anesthetics and excitatory/inhibitory responses of midbrain reticular
neurons. anesthesiology 1984; 61:151-5

10. yoshimura m, higashi h, fujita s, shimoji k: selective depres-
 

1438

perouansky, kirson, and yaari

sion of hippocampal inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and  xxxd200xxx -
ous firing by volatile anesthetics. brain res 1985; 340:363-8

11. stelzer a: gaba, receptors control the excitability of neuronal
populations. int rev neurobiol 1992; 33:195 - 287

12. cobb sr, buhl eh, halasy k, paulsen o, somogyi p: synchroni-
zation of neuronal activity in hippocampus by individual gabaergic
interneurons. nature 1995; 378:75-8

13. buzsaki g, horvath z, urioste r, hetke j, wise k: high-fre-
quency network oscillation in the hippocampus. science 1992;
256:1025-7

14. whittington ma, traub rd, jefferys jgr: synchronized oscilla-
tions in interneuron networks driven by metabotropic glutamate re-
ceptor activation. nature 1995; 373:612-15

15. perouansky m, baranov d, yaari y: halothane effects on excit-
atory postsynaptic currents in hippocampal interneurones. br j an-
aesth 1995; 74:a.214

16. perouansky m, kirson ed: anesthetic gas scavenging in the
laboratory. anesthesiology 1996; 84:751

17. schwartzkroin pa, mathers lh: physiological and morphologi-
cal identification of a nonpyramidal hippocampal cell type. brain res
1978; 157:1-10

18. lacaille j-c, muller al, kunkel dd, schwartzkroin pa: local
circuit interactions between oriens/alveus interneurons and ca1 py-
ramidal cells in hippocampal slices: electrophysiology and morphol-
ogy. j neurosci 1987; 7:1979-93

19. sah p, hestrin s$, nicoll ra: properties of excitatory postsynap-
tic currents recorded in vitro from rat hippocampal interneurones. j
physiol (london) 1990; 430:605 - 16

20. perouansky m, yaari y: kinetic properties of nmda receptor-
mediated synaptic currents in rat hippocampal pyramidal cells versus
interneurones. j physiol (london) 1993; 465:223 -44

anesthesiology, v 85, no 6, dec 1996

21. mcdonald jw, johnston mv: physiological and pathophysio-
logical roles of excitatory amino acids during central nervous system
development. brain res rev 1990; 15:41-70

22. nowak l, bregestowski p, ascher p, herbet a, prochiantz a:
magnesium gates glutamate-activated channels in mouse central neu-
rones. nature 1984; 307:462-5

23. mayer m, westbrook gl, guthrie pb: voltage-dependent block
by mg?" of nmda responses in spinal cord neurones. nature 1984;
309:261-3

24. gage pw, robertson b: prolongation of inhibitory postsynaptic
currents by pentobarbitone, halothane and ketamine in ca1 pyrami-
dal cells in rat hippocampus. br j pharmacol 1985; 85:675-81

25. jones mv, harrison nl: effects of anesthetics on the kinetics
of inhibitory postsynaptic currents in cultured rat hippocampal neu-
rons. j neurophysiol 1993; 70:1339-49

26. kullman dm, martin rl, redman sj: reduction by general
anaesthetics of group la excitatory postsynaptic potentials and cur-
rents in the cat spinal cord. j physiol (london) 1989; 4 12:277-96

27. southan ap, wann kt: inhalational anaesthetics block accom-
modation of pyramidal cell discharge in the rat hippocampus. br j
anaesth 1989; 63:581-6

28. franks np, lieb wr: selective actions of volatile general anaes-
thetics at molecular and cellular levels. br j anaesth 1993; 71:65-76

29. mazze ri, rice sa, baden jm: halothane, isoflurane and enflur-
ane mac in pregnant and nonpregnant female and male mice and
rats. anesthesiology 1985; 62:339-41

30. tanelian dl, kosek p, mody i, maciver mb: the role of gaba,
receptor/chloride channel complex in anesthesia. anesthesiology

1993; 78:757-76

31. mody i, tanelian dl, maciver mb: halothane enhances tonic
neuronal inhibition by elevating intracellular calcium. brain res 1991;
538:319-23

anesthesiolog
1996; 85:143:
© 1996 amel
lippincott-r:

imm

after
circt

paula m. |
kenneth c

backgro
mic circul:
injury. alt
idly in the
metabolic
molecular
effects of |
early gene

methods
38°c (n =
(n = 6) o
38°c, the |
fos-like i
other ani
protocol, \
were exan

results:
served in 1
pass and c
proteins w
blood vess
not in the
cfos mrn

 

*staff, de
tassistant
#researct
§perfusio:
assistant
*professo
“professo

received
cleveland 1
of anesthes;
yersity scho
chusetts. sut
lication augi
the americay
19, 1994.

address re
aie anesthe
venue, cley

anesthesioto,
