liiitish louriial oj dermatology 19^6: 135: 18-25

 xxxd3297xxx —first of a new generation of receptor-selective
retinoids
r.a.s.chandraratna
allergan inc., irvine. california, u.s.a.

summary

ttizarotene is a topically applied retinoid that tm"gcts the skin, the site of the fundamental dcfect(s) in
psoriasis, modulating the major causes of ihc disease and achieving sustained eflicacy. in vhro.
binding of tazurolenic acid has been demonslrtiled lo relinoic acid receptors irars). the probable
molecular target of retinoid action in adult human skin, but not to retinoid x receptors (rxrs). in
gene activation assays, lazarolene is selective for the rarj and rari subtypes. this selectivity
could theorelically limit undesirable effects at ihe receptor level. in vino, animal and clinical evidence
reveals that topical  xxxd3297xxx  modulates all three pathogenic factors in psoriasis: abnormal
keratinocyte differentiation, hyperprolifcration. and increased expression of inflammatory markers.
 xxxd3297xxx  is minimally absorbed sysiemicalh' after topical administration. tazarolene is rapidly
metabolized by esterase metabolism to its active free-acid form, tazarotenic acid, which has a
relatively short elimination half-life ( l - 2 h ) . the pharmacokinetic profile of tazarolenic acid is
predictable, with no significant accumulation. in preclinical toxicity studies, high topical doses
produced only reversible topical irritation, and lower doses were well tolerated. topical doses were
neither carcinogenic nor teratogenic. had no effect on fertility or general reproduction, and were not
phototoxic. sensitizing, or photoallergenic. the pharnuicologica! selectivity of  xxxd3297xxx  and limited
systemic exposure result in minimal systemic effects, while the lesser cytotoxic effects (relative lo
other retinoids) result in reduced local effects.

 xxxd3297xxx  is the first of a new generation of receptorselective retinoids thai luis resulted from allergan's
efforts tt) pursue the strategy of retinoid receptor and
function selectivity. the development of lazarotene
from the pursual of this strategy are described in this
paper.

retinoids
the actions of  xxxd3105xxx  analogues are exerted through
hormone-like receptors in both the cytoplasm and
nucleus.' activated retinoid-receptor complex can regulate transcription of genes in two distinct ways (fig. 1).
it can bind directly to promoter regions of specilic genes
and directly regulate gene transcription. u is generally
believed that most of the differentiation inducing
actions ol' retinoids are associated with this type of
mechanism."' alternately, the aclivated retinoidreceptor complex can block the transcriptional effects
'; dr r.a.s.chandraraliiii. director, retinoid rescarcti.
ttic. l-tl"^ dupimi drive, po box t y 5 h , trvine. ca 927159 s i 4 . tj.s.a.

18

of other nuclear transcription factors such as api. api
is an oncogenic protein which is highly over-expressed
in a \'ariety of hyperproliferittive and inlianimittory
conditions. al'j regulates the transcription of many
genes that are associated with inflammation and proliferation. the activated retinoid-receptor complex can
interact with api either directly or indirectly, leading to
an inactive complex and thereby downregulating the
transcription of api-regulated genes (fig. i). it is
believed that the anti-prolifcrative and anti-inflammatory activities of retinuids are mediated primarily by ihis
type of general mechanism.'^~*'

 xxxd3417xxx  receptor effects
the biology associated with retinoids is very complex. a
nuijor factor contributing to this complexity is the
multiplicity of retinoid receptore. two families of retinoid
nuclejir receptors have been identified,  xxxd3417xxx 
receptors (raks) and retinoid x receptors (lixrsi, each
of which include three subtypes (a. /.i. and 7) encoded by
distinct genes.' rars lunction as transcription factors
1996 bdtisti associalioq of dermatologists

 xxxd3297xxx —first of a new generatron

blocks ap-1 binding to
j i proliferation genes

i igiirc 1. ('tene regulatory activities of
tawirotenic acid-retinoid receptor complex.

anti-hyperproliferative action
anti-infiammatory action

normalizalion of
differentiation

that enhance transcription nf genes in the presence of
rctinoic add or otlitt rotiiioid agonists.^  xxxg1931xxx -r is the
predominanl  xxxg1931xxx  species expressed in human epidermis.
iinci thus may he ihe primary molecular target of relinoid
aclion in adull human skin."  xxxg1931xxx  and rxr exhibit a high
degree of cooperativity in binding to target dna.*^ indeed
rars retiuire interaction with rxrs for effective dna
binding and function.'"'* in contrast, kxrs also act as
homodimers. as well as forming stable heterodimcrs
with hormone receptors other than  xxxg1931xxx  (e.g. thyroid
hormone receptors, vitamin i)j receptors)."''"'" thus,
rxrs appear to influence a wide range of physiological

responses through multiple honnonal signalling pathways (pig. 2).
the multiplicity of retinoid pathways is a source of
both therapeutic opportunity as well as problems
associated with retinoid therapy. the wide array of
biological eflects mediated by these diltert-nt pathways
enable the use of retinoids in a variety of disease
applications. however, the indiscriminate activation of
all of these pathways by non-specific retinoid ligands
invariably results in an unacceptable range of toxic
side-effects that accompany the therapeutic efficacy. if
only those specific retinoid pathways that are required

 xxxg1931xxx  agonist
{rxr agonist?)

rxr agonist

 xxxg1931xxx  hormone pathway

rxr hormone pathway

tr agonist
(rxr agonist?)

thyroid homione pathway

vdr agonist
(rxr agonist?)

vit. dg hormone pathway

(rxr agonist?)
2. multiplicity oi rlninoid-reccplor pathways.
1996 british association of dermatologisls. hrilish journa} of dermalology. 135. suppl. 49. l s - 2 5

20

r.a.s.chandraratna

co,et
co,h

betinoic acid

 xxxd3297xxx 

co,h

cojh

tazarotenic acid
figure 3. slruflliral ibrmulae of  xxxd3297xxx  and lazarotenic add.

lor efficacy in a target disease could be activated, then
the therapeutic efficacy would be accompanied by only
a few toxic eflecls. this improved therapeutic index can
be realized by the use of synthetic retinoids which are
selective for individual receptor subtypes as well as for
function.
 xxxd3297xxx  and tazarotenic acid, the free-acid
metaboiile of tiizarotene, belong to a novel class of
retinoids called acetylenic retinoids (fig. ?). because
of its structure of alternating double und single bonds.
all-/ran.s  xxxd3417xxx  is a very tiexible molecule which
can interact with a variety of retinoid receptors. to
develop a receptor-selective retinoid, the conformational mobility of this molecule was restricted by
incorporating the double bonds of ihe relinoic acid
polycne chain in two ring structures and a linear
iriple bond system as in  xxxd3297xxx  (fig. 4). other
structural modifications introduced into  xxxd3297xxx 
included converting the free acid into an ethyl ester
prodrug form, because ethyl esters exhibited a better
therapeutic index in models of topical efficacy and
toxicity. a  xxxd2715xxx  moiety was introduced in
order to ensure that the ethyl ester of  xxxd3297xxx 
would be rapidly metabolized systemically into its
active free-acid form, thereby circumventing the deep
storage problems and long half-lives associated with
lipophilic retinoid ester drugs such as  xxxd2071xxx . in
addition, a sulphitr atom was introduced in the

co,et

 xxxd3297xxx 

acid

. the design of  xxxd3297xxx : stiictiiral progression from retinoic
lazaroienc.

lipophilic ring to facilitate rapid oxidative deactivating
metabolism.
the ciffinities for the different retinoid nuclear receptors were determined using in vitro synthesized retinoid
receptors.  xxxd3297xxx  itself does not bind to any of the
rars or rxrs. however, tazarotenic acid binds with
high at&iity to the rars. with the rank order of aftinily
being  xxxg1931xxx /? > rar7 > >  xxxg1931xxx ."^ tazarotenic acid is
completely specific for the  xxxg1931xxx  family of receptors as it
does not bind to any of the rxrs. in contrast. ali-(rhn.s
 xxxd3417xxx  binds with approximately equal affinity to
all tliree rars and weakly to the rxrs. the putative
physiological ligand for the rxrs. 9-ns retinoie acid^'^^
binds to both rxrs and rars. also, because all-trans.
9-t'is and 13-ds  xxxd2071xxx  are geometric isomers.
they can potentially be interconverted under in vivo

© 1996 british assoialion of dermatologists. british lourmil of dermafolosn. 135. suppi, 49. t 8 - 2

 xxxd3297xxx —first of a new generation

conditions. as lazarotenic acid does not contain any
isoinerizable double bonds, it cannot be converted to any
other forms that iictivate alternate retinoid receptors.
the functional gene-inducing activity of retinoids
was determined using assays of receptor-mediyted
transactivation of reporter genes in cell culture.
tazarotenic acid activated gene transcription preferentially through the  xxxg1931xxx /3 and rar7 subtypes and only
weakly through raro."* it had no activity at any of the
rxrs. hiterestingly. the parent compound  xxxd3297xxx 
showed approximately equal potency to tazarotenic
acid in these cell-culture assays. given the demonstrated rapid conversion of  xxxd3297xxx  to tazarotenic
acid in vivo (see pharmacokiiietics, below), these data
suggest that  xxxd3297xxx  functions as an eflective prodrug being rapidly converted in biological systems to
its active form, tazarotenic acid, as expected from our
drug-design stratagem of introducing the metabolically
labile nicotinate ester moiety into  xxxd3297xxx . in conirast,  xxxd2071xxx  which is much less readily hydroiysed,
was completely inactive in these transactivation assays.
the sulphone and sulphoxide derivatives of tazarotenic
acid, which are also the major im vivo metabolites of
tazarotenic acid, were inactive in the receptor assays.
this suggests that the goal of rapid systemic deactivating metabolism has been achieved by the incorporation of the oxidizable sulphur atom into the  xxxd3297xxx 
structure.
api is a transcription factor consisting of c-]un and
c-fos, which are transiently expressed in response to
mitogens and tumour promoters. because api is
ass(jciated with cell proliferation and inflammatory
signal transduction pathways, which play a critical
role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis as well as other
diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, tumour metastasis), the
effect of  xxxd3297xxx  on apl-dependenl gene expression
was examined.  xxxd3297xxx  and tazarotenic acid
potently down-rcgiilated the api-dependent gene
expression through all three  xxxg1931xxx  subtypes. this (ype
(}f negative gene regulatory activity by the antagonism of api and other nuclear transcription factors is
likely to be very important in the antiproliferative
and anti-inflammatory activities of  xxxd3297xxx .
the positive and negative gene regulatory activities of
tiizarotene have also been demonstrated clinically. in
patients with long-standing bilaterally symmetrical
plaque psoriasis, a variety of psoriasis-related markers
that are dysregulated in the disease situation were
normalized upon  xxxd3297xxx  treatment. "*~^'' the relevance of some of these changes to the therapeutic
efficacy of  xxxd3297xxx  are discussed below.
iq 1996 british association ot"t)ermatologists,

21

molecular effects
topical  xxxd3297xxx  modulates all three pathogenic factors in psoriasis: abnormal keratinocyte differentiation,
keratinocyte hyperproliferation and increased inflammation.
abnormal keratinocyte differentiation
retinoids exert differentiating effects on both epithelial
and mesenchymal cells in culture, in organ culture, and
in vivo, and the effects on differentiation appear to differ
from tissue to tissue.' the normalization of abnormal
keratinocyte differentiation by  xxxd3297xxx  is supported
by in vitro, animal, and clinical evidence. in vitro.
 xxxd3297xxx  inhibits tumour promoter 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbal 13 acetate {tpa)-induced comified envelope formation in cultured human keratinocytes. in
rhino mice,  xxxd3297xxx  resolves horn-tilled utriculi,
with reduction of follicle size and excess keratinization
(allergan inc., data on file). in psoriatic patients,  xxxd3297xxx  o-osto gel, applied twice daily lor 2 weeks,
produced a more normal expression of skin differentiation. ^ histological examination showed a return to a
more normal morphology in four of seven biopsy specimens, including a reduction in hyperkeratosis,
decreased acanthosis and reappearance of the granular
layer. histological improvement was accompanied by
normalization of expression of epidermal differentiation
markers: lilaggrin expression in the upper strata spinosmn and granulosum was increased: the precocious
expression of keratinocyte transglutaminase was
decreased and restricted to the strata granulosum and
corneum: and  xxxg1217xxx  expression was decreased. in a
separate study, the keratinocyte differentiation markers
 xxxg1743xxx  ( xxxg1743xxx ) and macrophagc migration inhibitory related-factor {kfrp-81. which
are upregulated in psoriatic epidermis'''''^ were downregulated in psoriatic lesions by  xxxd3297xxx  treatment
(allergan inc.. data on file).

hyperproliferation
retinoids have a reversible antiproliferative activity in
many cell cultures, which is probably cell-cycle specific,
with cells accumulating in the g| phase." the potent
anti-byperproliferative effects of  xxxd3297xxx  have been
demonstrated in in vitro, animal, and clinical studies.
 xxxg1626xxx  (odc) is highly elevated in the
h5^erplastic epidermis of psoriasis, and is an early
marker of hyperproliferation. among pharmacologically
, 135, suppl. 49, l s - 2 5

22

r.a.s.chandraratna

useful retinoids (including  xxxd2071xxx ,  xxxd71xxx  and
isolretmoin).  xxxd3297xxx  is the most potent inhibitor of
tpa-induced activity of odc in hairless mouse
epidermis."*
as described above. api is a transcription factor
associated with cell proliferation and inflammatory
signal transduction pathways. tpa-induced transcription from an api responsive reporter gene was
repressed by  xxxd3297xxx  and tazarotenic acid through
 xxxg1931xxx  n, li. and -). anti-proliferative activity has also
been shown in kaposi's sarcoma, human papillomavirus (hpv)-immortalized cervical. b-cell myeloma,
cervical carcinoma, and other cell lines in vilro
(allergan inc.. data on tile).
in the clinical study by esgleyes-ribol et al}^
described above,  xxxd3297xxx  ()-()5% gel applied twice
daily for 2 weeks also produced a more normal expression of skin proliferation.  xxxd3297xxx  treatment decreased
epidermal growth-iactor receptor expression and limited
its expression to the basal and lowest spinous layers. also,
 xxxd3297xxx  treatment decreased expression of the hyperproliferative keratins, k16 and k6.
inflammation
the beneficial effects tif  xxxd3297xxx  on inoammatlon is
supported by in vitro and clinical evidence. as described
above, api is a transcription factor associated with cell
proliferation and inllammatory signal transduction
piilhways. tfa-induced transcription irom an api
responsive gene was down-regulated by  xxxd3297xxx 
and tazarotenic acid.
the potent pro-inllammatory cytokine. interleukin-6
(il-6). is overexpressed in psoriasis.  xxxd3297xxx  effectively down-regulates il-b levels in cultured human
keratinocytes and kaposi's sarcoma cells (allergan inc..
data on file). however,  xxxd3297xxx  effects on il-6 in
psoriatic plaques have not yet been demonstrated.
macrophage migration inhibitory-related factor ( xxxg19xxx   xxxg2006xxx ) is highly up-regulated in psoriasis and other chronic
inflammatory diseases and is believed to play a direct
role in the inflammatory processes.'*^""' induced levels
of  xxxg2006xxx  ai"e markedly down-regulated by tfizarotene
in a variety of skin systems as well as in psoriatic lesions
(allergan inc., data on file).'*
in the clinical study by esgleyes-ribot and colleagues. ' ' in addition to the cell differentiation and antiproliferative efiects of  xxxd3297xxx  ()-()5"/. gel in psoriatic
patients, a more normal expression of inllammatory
markers was also produced, e.g. the number of epidermal and dermal cells expressing hla-or and icam-1

was decreased. histological examination showed reduction of the lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate in the
papillary dermis.
thus, tazarotenic acid, the free-acid metabolite of
 xxxd3297xxx . interacts selectively with the  xxxg1931xxx /i and
rart subtypes of the nuclear retinoid receptors and
exerts both positive and negative gene regulatory
efiects. by these effects,  xxxd3297xxx  modulates all
three of the pathogenic factors in psoriasis: i.e. it
normalizes abnormal keratinocyte diflerentiation, has
potent anti-hyperprolilerative effects in skin and
decreases inllammation. in contrast to non-selective
retinoids.  xxxd3297xxx  limits its interaction to the
nuclear retinoid receptors which are pertinent to
efficacy in psoriasis, thereby minimizing the potential
for adverse events.

toxicity
the disadvantages of systemically administered retinoids. such as  xxxd2071xxx  and isotretinoin. are a relatively narrow therapeutic index and a variety of toxic
efiects including teratogenicity."" for  xxxd2071xxx . the
problem of tcratogenicity is compounded by a half-life
of up to 120 days, secondary to storage in adipose
tissue.
preclinical toxicology studies for  xxxd3297xxx  were
very extensive and were conducted in multiple categories using several tlllterent routes of administration in
a variety of relevant species. in addition, these sttidies
were accompanied by extensive toxicokinetic analyses
that measured the levels of drug and metabolites during
the course of the studies,
topica]  xxxd3297xxx  toxicity
while topical retinoids should circumvent many of the
toxicity problems associated with systemic retinoid
therapy, they have generally been either ineffective or
too irritating."' the erythema of topically applied retinoids typically arises after about 10 days of continuous
exposure. erythema appears to result from the induction of inllammatory cytokines secondary to the loss of
barrier function, as measured by a substantial increase
in trans-epidermal water loss. harrier function appears
to be lost following alterations in the morphology of the
stratum corneum mediated via retinoid binding to  xxxg1931xxx 
receptors (allergan. inc.. data on file). however, intlammatory cytokines are not induced solely via binding of
the retinoid to  xxxg1931xxx . the inflammatory cytokine and
neutrophil attractant, 11.-8. has been shown to be

1 9 9 6 british assoiation of dermatologisls. tiiitisli laiinial i<f dcriinnohcjt!. 1 5^. siippl. 4 9 .

ih-is

 xxxd3297xxx —first of a new generation

released secondary to the cytotoxic effects ol' retinoids,
with cell lysis being the major precipitating factor.
 xxxd3297xxx  is not cytotoxic to cho cells or keratinocytes
fit even the highest doses tested. tazarotenic acid is 50fold less cytotoxic in cho cells and about 10-foid less
cytotoxic in human kerntinocytes than ali-trrois retinoic
acid. this reduced cyiotoxiclty of lazarotene and its
metabolite could lead to less topical irritation restdting
from non-specific eftects/"*
chronic topical dosing studies ibr  xxxd3297xxx  were
conducted in rats and mini-pigs. the mini-pigs species
was specially selected because of the similarity of minipigs skin to human skin particularly as it pertains lo
percutaneous absorption. in mini-pigs, high topical
doses of  xxxd3297xxx  produced only reversible local irritation, and lower doses were well tolerated topically.
importantly, after i year of chronic dosing in minipigs there were no systemic toxic effects observed even
at the highest possible dose which was limited by topical
irritation lallergan inc., data on tile).
in rats, topical  xxxd3297xxx  administration resulted in
no adverse effects on reproduction in segment i fertility
tests and f1/f2 development was normal in perinatal
and postnatal (segment iti) tests. teratology (segment
ij) after topical  xxxd3297xxx  administration was examined
in two species (rat and rabbit).  xxxd3297xxx  was applied
topically in a dose-dependent manner, with the highest
dose being limited by topical irritation. no teratogenicity was observed, even at the highest doses applied in
either species.
in a series of in vitro mutagenicity tests (ames, liquid
pre-incubatlon, chromosomal aberration, micronucleus
test),  xxxd3297xxx  was non-mutagenic and had no
chromosomal or clastogenic effects. topical administration of  xxxd3297xxx  over 21 months in mice showed no
carcinogenicity. in the highly sensitive hairless mouse
photocurcinogenicity model,  xxxd3297xxx . like other retinoids, was found lo enhance the photocarcinogenicity
associated with uv radiation. the relevance of this
hairless mouse photocarcinogenicity model to the
human situation has not been established.
thus, in predinical toxicity studies, topical  xxxd3297xxx  application was characterized by reversible dosedependent local irritation. in addition, topical doses
were non-mutagenic. non-carcinogenic and non-teratogenic. had no eltect on fertility or general reproduction, and were neither phototoxic. sensitizing, or
photoallergenic. importantly, chronic (! year) topical
dosing in mini-pigs, an animal model with skin and
percutaneous absorption characteristics similar to
human, resulted in no systemic toxic effects.
british association of dermatologists. british joiinial of d

23

systemic  xxxd3297xxx  toxicity
 xxxd3297xxx . when administered at high oral doses,
caused various retinoid-like toxicities but lower doses
were well tolerated systemically. oral administration
of  xxxd3297xxx  in two different species at high enough
doses did cause teratogenicity. however, lower
oral doses were found to be non-teratogetiic. chronic
oral administration of  xxxd3297xxx  in rats showed no
carcinogenicity.

pharmacokinetics
comprehensive pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in several animal species using multiple routes
of administration. systemic absorption of  xxxd3297xxx 
following topical application is species-dependent, and
absorbed drug is rapidly metabolized via activating
esterase metabolism to the active free-acid metabolite,
tazarotenic acid. tazarotenic acid is then further readily
converted by a deactivating oxidative metabolism into
the sulphoxide and sulphone metabolites as avell as
more polar conjugate metabolites. thus, the prodrug
 xxxd3297xxx  is rapidly metabolized (half-life of 2 - 1 8 min)
to its free-acid form, tazarolenic acid, which in turn has
a relatively short elimination half-life of 1-2 h in all of
the animal species that have been studied,•^^•"*' this
compares with an elimination half-life in humans of
2 days for  xxxd71xxx  and of up to 120 days lor  xxxd2071xxx .^^ the pharmacokinetic profile of tazarotenic acid
is predictable and can be described by linear pharmacokinetic models. importantly there was no evidence for
any accumulation of  xxxd3297xxx  t)r tazarotenic acid in
any tissue in any of the animal species that were
studied.
after single dose iv administration of  xxxd3297xxx , no
 xxxd3297xxx  was detected immediately post-dose, and
concentration-time profiles of tazarotenic acid were
monoexponential in hamster, rabbit, monkey and
mouse species.^^ in the same study, the elimination
half-life for the metabolite tazarotenic acid correlated
well among species and was predictive of estimated
human pharmacokinetic parameters.
tape-stripping of skin after topical administration of
radiolabelled  xxxd3297xxx  ()• 1 % gel in mini-swine showed
that the majority of the dose recovered unabsorbed from
the skin was the parent compound (75-90% of total
radioactivity). other minor metabolites recovered
included tazarotenic acid and the sulphoxide metabolite. these data confirmed that  xxxd3297xxx  is rapidly
absorbed into the stratum corneum and into the
. 1 is. suppl. 49. \fi-2-)

24

r.a.s.chandraratna

viable epidermis, with a minor degree of accumulation.
biliary excretion appears to be the major pathway of
elimination.
the minimal systemic absorption of  xxxd3297xxx  after
topical application, its rapid metabolism to tazarotenic
acid and subsequent conversion to inactive metabolites,
and lack of accumulation indicate that the potential ibr
systemic adverse effects or toxicity with topical  xxxd3297xxx  application are minimal.

future research
ailergan is very strongly committed to an ongoing
retinoid research eftbrt. the basic strategy is to achieve
receptor subtype and function selectivity with novel
analogues. a series of molecular level assays has
been set up for each of the known receptor subtypes
as well as for function, i.e. for both the positive and
negative gene regulatory functions of retinoids as well
as for recognizing agonistic and antagonistic compounds. by an iterative discovery process of design,
synthesis, assay and redesign, a new generation of
receptor- and function-selective retinoids has been
developed. in the drug selection phase. ihese retinoids
are subjected to a series of biological assays for both
efficacy and loxicity. the primary focus is on dermatology (both topical and oral drugs ibr the treatment of
psoriasis and acne) and oncology. however, the activity
of these receptor-selective retinoids is also being examined in other applications such as ophthalmology and
human papilloma virus-related diseases. by this strategy of drug discovery and drug selection, further development of newer specific retinoid drugs tailored for
specific disease application will be pursued. to date.
allergan has developed compounds that are completely
speciiic for the  xxxg1931xxx  family (i.e.  xxxd3297xxx ) and the rxr
family of receptors as well as compounds that are
selective for the individual subtypes, i.e. compounds
that bind with complete specificity for the raro subtype as well as transactivate specifically irom the rard
subtype. recently, both selective and non-selective  xxxg1931xxx 
antagonists have also been developed. biological testing
of these new compounds is currently underway and this
will facilitate the understanding of the functions associated with the individual receptor subtypes and help to
determine what specific disease applications would be
suitable for these subtype-selective retinoids. the next
generation of retinoids will emerge from these types of
compounds. these would be compounds "tailored" for
specific cfinical applications, further advancing the
frontiers of retinoid therapeutics and expanding the

use of retinoids not only in dermatology but iu other
diseases as well.

conclusions
 xxxd3297xxx  is a topically applied retinoid that targets the
site of the defectls) in psoriasis- modulating the major
causes of the disease and achieving sustained eflicacy.
the inherent pharmacological selectivity of  xxxd3297xxx 
and limited systemic exposure to drug after topical
administration result in minimal systemic effects,
while the lesser cytotoxic effects (relative to other
retinoids) result in minimal local effects. these properties suggest that  xxxd3297xxx  can be used not only for ihe
acute treatment of psoriasis but on an intermittent,
chronic basis to maintain a psoriasis-free state.

references
1 goss (si). mcburney m\v. physiologiail aritl diiiical iispects oi
vitamin-a and its metaboliles. clin uib sii l y y i : 29: 18!j-215.
2 love jm. gudas ij,  xxxd3105xxx . differentiation and cancer. curr
opiu cell biot 1994: 6: «25^31.
j de i,uca lm. retinoids and tkeir receptors in differentiation,
embryogenesis and neop!a.sia. i-'asub } 1991: 5: 2 9 2 4 - j j.
4 nagpal s. alhanikar [. cliandrarainti has. separallon of transactivation iind api antagonism i'lintrlionsorretinoic acid receptor
n. ] biol aiein 1995: 270: 92 i - 7 .
5 yang-yen h. zhang x. graupner g h ill. antagonism tielween
rctinoic acid receptors and api: implicatlonsforlumor promotion
anil intlamniation, new biol 1991; 3: 1206-19.
b herrlich p. ponta h. mutual cross-moduiation of steroid/retinolc
acid receptor an api transcription lactor activities. trends enihicrhw! meiiih 1994: s; j 4 i - 6 .
7 pfaht m. nuclear retinoid receplors as central regulators of
retinoid response patliways. ]n: derinntobjin proiirpss iuiil persperliws. (hurgdorfwhc.katzsi.eds). new york: parllit-non publishing tiroup. 199}. i t 5 - 9 .
h vmer |t, i-isher gj, zliaiig q-v el ai  xxxd3417xxx  receplor gene
expression in human skin. / iiivesi dfnnalol 1991: 9f»: 4 2 5 - 3 3 .
9 kllewer sa. umcsono k. mangelscorf dj vl til. retinoid x receptor
interacts with nuclear receptors in  xxxd3417xxx , ihyroid homione
and vitamin d, signalling. naliire 1992: 355: 4 4 6 - 9 .
10 yu vc. t)eiscrl c. andersen 13 ct al. kxrii: a coregulator that
enhances binding of  xxxd3417xxx , ihyroid hormone, and vitamin
d receptors to their cognate response demonls. ceil 1991: 67:
1251-66.
11 zhang x-k. lchmann ]. hoffinann b et (i/. homodimer formation of
retinoid x receptor induced by 9-cte  xxxd3417xxx . nature 1492;
358: 5 8 7 - 9 1 .
12 zhang x-k. hof&nann b. tran pv-v et al. retinoid x receptor is an
auxiliary protein for thyroid hormone and  xxxd3417xxx  receptors.
nature 1992: 5 5 5 : 4 4 1 - 6 .
13 levin aa, slurzenbecker l|, kamner s cf ill. 9-c/.\  xxxd3417xxx 
stereoisomer binds and activates the nuclear receplor rxrfv,
nature t992: 355: 559-61.
14 asano at, nagpal s, chandraratna ras et al.  xxxd3297xxx 
( xxxd3297xxx ). a topical retinoid. improves psoriasis and alters

1996 british assoiatlon of dermatologists. british journal of dermatology. 135. suppl. 49. l s - 2 5

 xxxd3297xxx —first of a new generation

15

ui

17

18

19

20
21

22
2i

24

25

26

epidermal gene expression in vivo. } invest derinalol 1 9 9 t ; 104:
f.94 labslrnct).
izsgleyes-ribot t, chandraratna ras. l^w-kaya 1) i-f iii. kesponse
of psoriasis in a new topica! retinoid. afin 19() xxxg1302xxx , / am acad
dernmlol 1994: 50: 5s1-9i),
nagpal s. palc[ s. asano at ft «/.  xxxd3297xxx -indiiced gene 1
itigl). a novel relinoic acid receptor-responsive gene in skin.
/ invest denmtol 1996: 106: 269-74.
nonomnra k. yamaishi k. yasuno het ul. up-regulation ofelafin/
 xxxg1743xxx  gene expression in p.soriaui: epidermis. / invest dermatol
1994: l o i : 8 s - 9 j .
strlialwijk ja, chang p. janssen g] et al. skin-derived antlleukoprolease (skali'sl: characlerizadon ofiwo new elaslase inhibitors
irom psorialif fpidermis. hr / dermmol 1990: 122; (i5] - 4 1 .
gabrit'lst'n t-o. dale i. lirandl/aeg p cl ul. epidermal and dermal
distribution of a myelomonocytic anligeu i li) shfured by epithelial
(.ells in various inllammatory skin diseases. / am acad dermatol
t9s7: 13: 1 7 j - 9 .
kligman d. hilt dc. the sioo protein family. trends biochem
1988: 1 3 : 4 3 7 - 4 2 .
odink k. cerletti n, brugen | et al. two calcium-binding proteins
in infiltrate macrophages of rheumatoid arthritis. nature 1987:
330: 8 0 - 2 .
fritsch po. relinoids in psoriasis and disorders ol' keratintzation.
; .am .acad dcnmitcl 1992: 27: ss-s14.
i'rost p, vveinslein (id. topical adminislralion ofviuimin a acid
for ichthyosit-'fiirin dermatoses and psoriiisis. / am mcd assuc
1969:207: 1863-8.
oda rm. shimizu rw. sabadne sc et. al. effa-ts of struetural
changes on relinnid cytotoxicity in the cho clonal assay, in vitro
toxicol 1996:9: i 7 j - 8 1 .
matstimoto rm. sun h, duff sb et ai skin distribution and
nielabulism oi' 14c- xxxd3297xxx  in minipigs. pbarm res 1992:
9(snppl.): 289 labstract).
matsumolt» km. sun h. tang-liu i). species correialion of agn
190168 disposition in mouse, hamster, rat. rabbil. monkey and
man. pharm res 1992: 9 (suppl.): 274 (abstract).

discussion
clukas (cird galdernm. sopiua-antipous. france): you

place a lot of emphasis in your talk on receptor selectivity to increase activity and avoid toxic effects; well
that's a very nice theory. i would like to know what
makes you tliink that you have achieved that with
 xxxd3297xxx  because from what tve heard  xxxd3297xxx  is
still teratogenic and ilstil! causes skin irrilation which is
the major toxic effect of currently available retinoids.

chandraratna: that's very true. as i mentioned, we
have achieved only a cerlaln level of relinoid receptor
selectivity with  xxxd3297xxx  and the next generation of
retinoids will have a much higher level of selectivity. as
you obviously saw, the selectivity that has been
achieved with  xxxd3297xxx  is not complete. it is selective
for gene transcriptional activation through the  xxxg1931xxx /ij
and 7 subtypes. it is teratogenic at higher doses but
given by a topical route  xxxd3297xxx  is not very likely to
cause any teratogenic effects as we have demonstrated
in the animal models. now that we have compounds
that are completely specific for the  xxxg1931xxx  subtypes, we
have been able to demonstrate that with increasing
selectivity you are going to be able to dissect out the
toxic etfects and you clearly dissect out some of the
therapeutic effects as well. specific compounds, therefore, are not going to have the same range of efficacy as
non-selective compounds.

zoithouus (ijniveraitii medical center benjamin

frankun.

berlin. gernmnn): i would like to ask about the lipophilicity of this molecule. is  xxxd3297xxx  more or less
lipophilic than other retinoids.^ and secondly, what
about light stability.^

chandraratjia: that's im important point.  xxxd3297xxx 
has hetroatom substitutions in the sulphur and the
nitrogen atoms. esters are lipophilic. but this compound
is much less lipophilic than etrelinate even as an
ester, and the design incorporating a nicotinic ester
enables it to be very rapidly converted into its freeacid form. essentially, no tazcirotene. the piirent drug,
is observed in the systemic circulation, and tazarotenic acid, because it's a  xxxd2715xxx , probably exists
as a zwitter ion. and is actually quite hydrophilic. hence it has a low propensity for accumulation
in any kind of fatty tissue. in terms of light stability,
 xxxd3297xxx  has no double bonds that can be isomerized.
therefore, it doesn't undergo isomerlzalion. however,
it can imdergo light-induced oxidative degradation.

1996 british association of dermatologist. british joiinvil af dermatology. 135. suppl. 49. 18-2 =

