antibodies to vla4 integrin mobilize long-term repopulating cells and augment cytokine-induced mobilization in primates and mice.  although the use of cytokine-mobilized peripheral blood stem cells has gained a significant momentum in clinical transplantation, the mobilization schemes practiced are guided by a great deal of empiricism. the mechanism(s) by which cytokines or chemokines, alone or in combination, bring about redistribution of stem/progenitor cells from bone marrow to peripheral blood are poorly understood. likewise the fate of mobilized stem/progenitor cells and their biological properties are incompletely defined. one of the leading hypotheses to explain the mechanism of cytokine-induced mobilization encompasses the view that cytokines disrupt, directly or indirectly, cytoadhesive interactions of stem/progenitor cells with their bone marrow stroma. compatible with this view are changes in the expression and/or function of several cytoadhesion molecules, especially integrins, postmobilization, and extensive in vitro experimentation supporting the concept of cytokine/integrin interactions. to provide a further insight on the cytokine/integrin interplay in vivo, we have combined cytokine treatments with anti-integrin treatments for mobilization in primates and mice. we found that  xxxd2701xxx  treatment combined with either granulocyte  xxxg526xxx  (g-csf ) treatment or kit ligand treatment leads to significant enhancement of mobilization efficiency (fivefold to eightfold) well above the levels produced by either cytokine alone or  xxxd2701xxx  treatment alone. similar enhancement was seen when combinations of cytokines, ie, g-csf plus kit ligand or g-csf plus  xxxg801xxx -ligand were used with  xxxd2701xxx  in primates and mice. furthermore, when  xxxd2701xxx  was given in 5-fluorouracil-treated primates, significant numbers of progenitor cells were circulating for several days during the recovery period only in the  xxxd2701xxx  treated animals. these data suggest that (1) the effect of  xxxd2701xxx  on mobilization, when used alone, is unlikely to be mediated by secondary cytokine elaboration in vivo; (2) three different cytokines and their combinations do not appear to influence the in vivo responsiveness to  xxxd2701xxx  in coadministration schemes; (3) even if cytokine treatments on their own exert downmodulation of vla4 function, the target progenitor cells influenced by  xxxd2701xxx  or by cytokines may not necessarily overlap; and (4) augmentation of mobilization in cytokine/ xxxd2701xxx  treatments is most likely caused by an amplification of the pool of target cells on which  xxxd2701xxx  exerts its effects. because cytokines or  xxxd2701xxx  are each capable of mobilizing long-term repopulating cells and because we show with the present studies that  xxxd2701xxx  in an autologous bone marrow cell transplantation setting does not cause any delay in engraftment, the combination of cytokine/anti-integrin treatment enhancing mobilization may have a clinical use.