overview of the effects of b-adrenergic receptor agonists on animal
growth including mechanisms of action1,2,3,4
harry j. mersmann5
usda/ars children’s nutrition research center, department of pediatrics,
baylor college of medicine, houston, tx 77030

administration of some b-ar agonists increases muscle and decreases fat accretion in cattle, pigs, poultry,
and sheep. the large number of physiological functions controlled by b-ar suggests that the mechanism(s) for the observed changes in carcass composition may be extremely complex. any proposed
mechanism must begin with the possibility of direct
effects of the agonist on skeletal muscle and adipocyte
b-ar. however, many other mechanisms, such as
modification of blood flow, release of hormones, or
central nervous system control of feed intake may
contribute to the overall effects observed with a given
b-ar agonist in a given species. furthermore, the
pharmacodynamic properties of a particular agonist
are complex and expected to vary among species as
well as within the same species at different ages or
when fed different diets.

abstract:
the b-adrenergic receptors ( b-ar)
are present on the surface of almost every type of
mammalian cell. these receptors are stimulated
physiologically
by
the
neurotransmitter,
 xxxd2750xxx  and the adrenal medullary hormone,
epinephrine. there are three subtypes of b-ar,
namely, b1-ar, b2-ar, and b3-ar; the pharmacological
and physiological responses of an individual cell result
from the particular mixture of the three b-ar
subtypes present on that cell. species-specific structure (amino acid sequence) also causes modification
of the function of a given b-ar subtype. knowledge of
the b-ar subtypes present in various cell types,
coupled with knowledge of receptor structure (sequence), will allow an understanding of the complexity of physiological function regulated by b-ar. oral

key words: b-adrenergic agonists, b-adrenergic receptors, adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, growth
1998 american society of animal science. all rights reserved.

j. anim. sci. 1998. 76:160–172

introduction
a physiological response is produced when a badrenergic agonist binds to a b-adrenergic receptor ( bar) .
the physiological b-ar agonists
are
 xxxd2750xxx  and epinephrine. oral administration
of some synthetic b-ar agonists causes modification of
growth with increased accretion of skeletal muscle and
decreased accretion of fat. there are three b-ar
subtypes, the b1-ar, the b2-ar, and the b3-ar. the bar are present on most mammalian cells, but the
distribution of subtypes and proportion of each varies
between tissues in a given species. the b-ar subtype
distribution also varies within a given tissue between
species. finally, the amino acid sequence varies for a
given b-ar subtype across species. as a consequence
of the variation in receptor subtype structure and
distribution across tissues and species, the multitude
of physiological effects controlled by b-ar, and the use
of several different agonists, the mechanisms operative to produce the pharmacological effects observed
with oral administration of a b-ar agonist are
complex and difficult to discern. this review describes

1presented at a symposium titled “pharmacology, toxicology,
and the illegal use of b-adrenergic agonists,” july 1996, at the
asas 88th annu. mtg., rapid city, sd.
2this review is not intended to be comprehensive. the literature
cited encompasses other reviews, articles not included in previous
reviews, and articles necessary to document a particular point. the
literature cited dates through june 1, 1996.
3i thank sharon miller and roberta adams for secretarial
assistance, adam gillum for graphic and photographic services, and
leslie loddeke for editorial guidance.
4this work is a publication of the usda/ars children’s
nutrition research center, department of pediatrics, baylor
college of medicine, houston, tx. this project has been funded in
part with federal funds from the usda, ars under cooperative
agreement no. 58-6250-1-003. the contents of this publication do
not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the usda, nor does
mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations
imply endorsement from the u.s. government.
5to whom correspondence should be addressed: 1100 bates
street, houston, tx 77030-2600; phone: 713/798-7128; fax: 713/
798-7130; e-mail: mersmann@bcm.tmc.edu.
received october 21, 1996.
accepted may 1, 1997.

160
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth

161

aspects of the modulation of animal growth by b-ar
agonists and some of the proposed mechanisms
leading to such effects.

beta-adrenergic receptor agonists
the b-adrenergic receptor agonists are organic
molecules that bind to b-adrenergic receptors such
that the agonist-receptor complex activates the gs
protein. the a-subunit of the gs protein then activates
adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme that produces cyclic
 xxxd81xxx  ( camp) , one of the major
intracellular signaling molecules. the mechanism by
which camp produces effects is to bind to the
regulatory subunit of  xxxg1836xxx  to release the
catalytic subunit that then phosphorylates a number
of intracellular proteins. some of these proteins are
enzymes that are activated when phosphorylated
(e.g., hormone sensitive lipase, the rate-limiting
enzyme for adipocyte triacylglycerol degradation). the
camp response element binding protein ( creb) is
phosphorylated by  xxxg1836xxx ; the creb binds
to a camp response element in the regulatory part of a
gene and stimulates the transcription of that gene.
phosphorylation increases the transcriptional activity
of the creb, providing the mechanism for b-ar
agonist-mediated transcription of a number of genes in
the mammalian cell. other enzymes become inactivated when phosphorylated (e.g., acetyl-coa carboxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme for long-chain fatty acid
biosynthesis (mersmann, 1989a; strosberg, 1992;
liggett and raymond, 1993).
the physiological b-ar agonists are  xxxd2750xxx 
and epinephrine (figure 1).  xxxd2750xxx , the
catecholamine sympathetic nervous system neurotransmitter molecule, is biosynthesized from tyrosine; it also circulates in the serum at relatively high
concentrations. the catecholamine epinephrine is
synthesized in and secreted from the adrenal medulla;
it
circulates
at
lower
concentrations
than
 xxxd2750xxx  in most mammalian species, but
during stress it usually responds to a greater extent
than  xxxd2750xxx . epinephrine is biosynthesized
from  xxxd2750xxx  and is the methylation product of
 xxxd2750xxx .
extensive interest in b-ar in the biomedical
community led to the synthesis of thousands of
organic molecules that bind to b-ar; some of these
ligands are agonists, whereas some are antagonists
(bind to the receptor but do not activate the gs
protein and thus block the receptor function). much of
the interest in b-ar agonists and antagonists has
focused on the production of compounds that have
relative specificity to stimulate the b-ar of bronchialtracheal musculature, causing relaxation and dilation
of the airways (relieve asthma), or that have relative
specificity to change cardiovascular function by moderating heart rate, contractility, or blood pressure.
it is necessary to dispose of receptor agonists in an
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

figure 1. structure of the physiological b-ar agonists.
 xxxd2750xxx  is the neurotransmitter substance
released at central nervous system and sympathetic
nervous system nerve endings; it also circulates in the
plasma at relatively high concentrations. epinephrine is
the hormone produced by the adrenal medulla and
released to the plasma.

efficient manner so the receptor does not remain
activated.  xxxd2750xxx  and epinephrine are inactivated by catechol-o-methyl transferase, an enzyme
that methylates the catechol-ring hydroxyl groups,
and by  xxxg1357xxx   xxxg1358xxx , an enzyme that
deaminates the ligand. after release from sympathetic
nerve endings,  xxxd2750xxx  may be reabsorbed by
specific reuptake mechanisms (at synaptic clefts and
myoneural junctions) to decrease the concentration at
the effector site ( mersmann, 1989a; hoffman and
lefkowitz, 1990; landsberg and young, 1992).

use of beta-adrenergic receptor agonists
in growing animals
cunningham (1965) presented data that indicated
the possibility of changing mammalian growth by
administration of agents (e.g., caffeine, theophylline,
nicotine, and epinephrine) that directly or indirectly
might function by changing the intracellular concentration of camp. in the early 1980s, workers at
american cyanamid co. published data on the modulation of growth in animals fed clenbuterol, a b-ar
agonist (ricks et al., 1984). in growing cattle,

162

mersmann

chickens, pigs, and sheep, oral clenbuterol increased
muscle mass and decreased fat mass. in some cases,
there was also an increase in weight gain and in the
gain-to-feed intake ratio. in the following years,
several other b-ar agonists (e.g., cimaterol, ractopamine, l 664,969, salbutamol) were fed to various
species; effects similar to those of clenbuterol were
produced. to date, none of these compounds has
governmental approval to modify growth of animals
raised for meat production in the united states or in
any other country.
a simplified summary of the effects of oral b-ar
agonists in several species is presented in table 1.
there are extensive summaries of the effects of these
compounds on avian and mammalian growth (hanrahan, 1987; beermann, 1989, 1994; anderson et al.,
1991; bergen and merkel, 1991; moloney et al., 1991;
wellenreiter, 1991; mckeith et al., 1994; nrc, 1994;
steele et al., 1994); the moloney treatise is particularly comprehensive.
the effects of b-ar agonists are not as pronounced
in chickens as they are in sheep; the effects in pigs are
intermediate, and in cattle, the effects tend to be
somewhat as in sheep. one possible reason for major
species differences in response to b-ar agonists is that
some species have been intensely selected for growth
rate and have less potential to increase growth
because they are closer to the biological maximal
growth rate (e.g., broiler chickens). other species
(e.g., sheep) have not been so intensely selected for
growth rate and thus have more potential for increased growth rates. another reason for species
differences is that a particular b-ar agonist may not
be as effective in one species as in another. this type
of disparate response may result because a given
agonist may not activate the target tissue b-ar as
well in one species as in another; possible mechanisms
include agonist affinity for the receptor(s), coupling of
the agonist-receptor complex to the signal transduction system, and factors that influence delivery of the
compound to the receptor sites. in addition, the b-ar
in target tissues may be rapidly inactivated, or a
particular species may have a limited number of b-ar
on target tissues, reducing the response to the agonist.
although attempts have been made to compare
quantitative responses (the efficacy and potency) of
several agonists in a single species, this type of
comparison is valid only when the agonists are
simultaneously tested in a dose × response manner in
the same experiment. there are far too many tangible
and intangible factors in animal growth experiments
and in drug trials to draw comparative conclusions
from different individual experiments.

beta-adrenergic receptors
almost every mammalian cell type has b-ar
embedded in the plasma membrane. these receptors
have > 400 amino acids in a continuous chain. models
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

for the b-ar (figure 2 ) indicate seven relatively
hydrophobic transmembrane domains that anchor the
receptor in the plasma membrane. there are four
extracellular portions on the outside of the membrane
(three loops connect adjacent transmembrane domains) and four intracellular portions on the inside of
the membrane (three loops connect adjacent transmembrane domains). the ligand binding site is in the
center of the seven transmembrane domains and
involves amino acids from several of the domains. the
sites for interaction with the gs protein have been
localized to portions of intracellular loops 2, 3, and 4.
to avoid indefinite activation of the b-ar, either the
agonist may be removed by reuptake mechanisms or
degraded, as already mentioned, or the receptor may
be inactivated by several mechanisms. after binding
of the agonist, the b-ar may be phosphorylated by a
specific kinase, the b-ar kinase at sites localized in
intracellular loop 4. phosphorylation inactivates the
receptor.  xxxg1836xxx  can also phosphorylate the
receptor. the b-ar may be removed from the plasma
membrane during conditions of chronic stimulation to
decrease the response by a reduction in available b-ar
(ostrowski et al., 1992; schwinn et al., 1992; strosberg, 1992; kobilka and hoffman, 1995).

beta-adrenergic receptor subtypes
functional classification. the systematic investigation of physiological functions stimulated or inhibited
by  xxxd2750xxx , epinephrine, and a few other
compounds led to the concept of a-adrenergic receptors
( a-ar) and b-ar in the late 1940s.  xxxd2750xxx 
and epinephrine stimulate a-ar and b-ar, but
epinephrine is more potent (effective at lower concentrations) than  xxxd2750xxx  for a-ar. twenty years
later, the b-ar were subclassified into b1-ar and  xxxg92xxx .  xxxd2750xxx  is more potent for b1-ar than for
b2-ar. the classification schemes allow better comprehension of the complexities of adrenergic function.
they also led to the use of prototypical tissues (i.e., a
tissue that predominantly has a single adrenergic
receptor subtype as evidenced by its responses in the
classification studies). examples of prototypical tissues are rat heart for b1-ar responses and guinea pig
tracheal musculature for b2-ar responses. the prototypical tissues were subsequently used to classify
large numbers of individual agonists or antagonists
regarding their specificity for the receptor subtypes. a
few compounds are relatively specific for a receptor
subtype; these compounds were used to classify b-ar
subtypes in tissues and species other than the
prototypical ones. evidence for a third b-ar subtype,
the b3-ar, began to appear in the mid-1970s.
ligand binding classification. in the mid-1970s, the
technique of measuring ligand binding to the b-ar
was developed (williams and lefkowitz, 1978). this
approach has been used to supplement the measurement of physiological function for determination of

163

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth

table 1. effects of oral administration of b-adrenergic receptor agonists
to mammals and birdsa

animal
cattle
chickens
pigs
sheep

weight
gain

feed
consumption

gain/
feed

muscle

fat

+10
+2
+4
+15

−5

+15
+2
−5
+15

+10
+2
+4
+25

−30
−7
−8
−25

−5
+2

athe values are indicated as the percentage change. these approximations are adapted from moloney
et al. (1991); the original article tabulates data from numerous trials for each species, for several badrenergic receptor agonists, with multiple doses of agonist. as expected, the results are highly variable,
including some negative responses.

receptor pharmacology and receptor classification.
ligands are designated as specific for a particular
receptor subtype on the basis of high affinity for
prototypical tissue receptors; receptors in other tissues
are then classified by the binding of subtype specific
ligands. ligand binding more directly assesses the
receptors than does measurement of physiological
function; however, it does not predict physiological
function, because it does not measure coupling to the
camp- xxxg1836xxx  pathway, and it does not
distinguish between agonists and antagonists. thus, a
physiological approach is also needed to understand
the function of a ligand; in many cases, activation of
adenylyl cyclase is measured as an expression of
physiological function (hoffman and lefkowitz, 1990;
landsberg and young, 1992; mersmann, 1995).
ligand-binding experiments that use a wide range
of ligand concentrations with sufficient intermediate
concentrations can generate evidence for multiple
binding sites. these methods indicate prototypical
tissues have a large number of the particular b-ar
subtype suggested by physiological approaches (e.g.,
rat heart has > 90% b1-ar, whereas guinea pig
tracheal musculature has > 85% b2-ar). however,
most tissues, including prototypical tissues, have more
than one b-ar subtype (minneman et al., 1979). in a
given species, the proportion of b1-ar and b2-ar is
different in individual cell types or tissues (e.g.,
human tissues in table 2). in the example (table 2),
the proportion of the two b-ar subtypes in a given
tissue is the same whether determined using a b1-ar
specific antagonist (cgp 20,712a) or a b2-ar specific
antagonist (ici 118,551) in competitive ligand-binding experiments. the affinity of the b1-ar antagonist
for the high-affinity site ( k h) is similar for all tissues;
the affinity of this ligand for the low-affinity site ( k l)
also is similar for all tissues. because this antagonist
has been designated as specific for b1-ar based on
previous experiments with prototypical tissues, the
high-affinity site is designated as the b1-ar. when the
b2-ar antagonist is used, it detects two binding sites
and the kh and kl for all tissues are similar; in this
case the high-affinity site ( k h) is designated the  xxxg92xxx . these data are unusually clear (table 2). in
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

other species or when other ligands are used, the data
from such experiments may not be so definitive
because the agonists or antagonists may not have such
ideal binding properties with the b1-ar or b2-ar
present in that species or tissue (mersmann, 1995).
 xxxg838xxx -adrenergic receptor. beginning in the mid-1970s
and extending into the 1980s, evidence continually
accumulated from pharmacological studies of rat
adipocyte function and ligand binding indicating the
b-ar in this tissue was different from the b1-ar and
the b2-ar (arch and kaumann, 1993). this atypical
b-ar became the focus of considerable effort because it
was also present in rat brown adipose tissue; brown
adipose tissue was being intensely investigated as the
source of thermogenesis and thus as a major factor in
obesity. although interest in brown adipose tissue as
providing a mechanism for obesity in humans has
waned, this research led to the discovery of the b3-ar,

figure 2. projected structure of a b-adrenergic receptor. seven transmembrane domains (cylinders), ligand
binding ( xxxd2750xxx ), extracellular portions (thick
lines at top of cylinders) and intracellular portions (thin
lines at bottom of cylinders) are indicated. from
ostrowski et al. (1992). reproduced, with permission,
from the annual review of pharmacology and toxicology, volume 32, 1992, by annual reviews inc.

164

mersmann

table 2. relative concentration of b1- and b2-adrenergic receptors (ar)
in human tissuesa

item

right
atrium

fat

kidney

lung

liver

competition by cgp 20712a ( a b1-ar antagonist)
b1-ar, %
b2-ar, %
kh, nm
kl, nm

50
50
1.3
1,017

35
65
2.7
700

32
68
4.4
1,042

27
73
2.0
1,797

18
82
3.8
1,546

competition by ici 118,551 ( a b2-ar antagonist)
b1-ar, %
b2-ar, %
kh, nm
kl, nm

50
50
7.1
1,032

40
60
0.7
1,222

36
64
2.3
1,122

27
73
1.9
1,013

21
79
1.9
2,142

aadapted from sano et al. (1993). the percentage of b -ar, b -ar, and the affinity of each subtype
1
2
were obtained by competitive ligand binding. the kd for each receptor site is indicated as a high affinity
site ( k h) or a low affinity site ( k l) .

the predominant b-ar in brown and white adipose
tissue in rats. it is also present in some regions of the
gut, and perhaps in skeletal and cardiac muscle. the
b3-ar is pharmacologically distinct from the other two
subtypes, and its structure in the fourth intracellular
loop provides few sites for inactivation by phosphorylation (strosberg, 1992; arch and kaumann, 1993;
emorine et al., 1994; giacobino, 1995; langin et al.,
1995).
there are specific agonists for the b3-ar (arch and
kaumann, 1993; howe, 1993), and recently the first
antagonist has been identified (nisoli et al., 1996).
an interesting characteristic of the b3-ar is that
several antagonists for b1-ar and b2-ar are partial or
in some cases full agonists for the b3-ar. lafontan
and berlan (1993) classified a number of mammalian
species regarding their white adipocyte lipolytic
response to  xxxd2401xxx , a universal b-ar agonist,
brl 37,344, a designated b3-ar agonist, and cgp
12,177, a b1-ar and b2-ar antagonist but b3-ar
agonist. some species respond to all three compounds
equally, whereas some have a graded response with
 xxxd2401xxx  > brl > cgp, and other species
essentially only respond to  xxxd2401xxx . the data
suggest that either the b3-ar in the adipocytes of
various species has pharmacological properties distinct from the prototypical rat receptor or that the  xxxg93xxx  may not be the predominant receptor subtype in
adipocytes in some species (lafontan, 1994; langin et
al., 1995).
classification from molecular biology. beginning in
the mid-1980s, molecular biology techniques verified
the existence of individual b-ar subtypes with distinctly different-sized rna transcripts, distinct protein sizes, and unique amino acid sequences. although
b-ar subtypes have been sequenced from only a few
species, the results indicate the three b-ar subtypes
have approximately 50% homology in amino acid
sequence within a single species, whereas an individual b-ar subtype has 75% or more homology
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

across species (strosberg, 1992; hall et al., 1993;
pietri-rouxel and strosberg, 1995). as more b-ar
subtypes are sequenced in diverse mammalian and
non-mammalian species, the homology relationships
will undoubtedly be modified.
the membrane-bound b-ar are difficult to isolate
and rather unstable when removed from the membrane. as a result, and because there is so much
similarity in structure between b-ar subtypes, the
study of protein structure has been of limited use to
elucidate structure and function of b-ar. most of what
is known about structural features involved in the
function of these receptors has been obtained from
molecular biology approaches to detect transcripts, to
compare sequences, and to discover functional groups
by sequence analysis and by selective site-directed
mutation. a summary of the properties of the three bar subtypes is presented in table 3.
modulation of subtypes. there are numerous examples of differential desensitization of the three b-ar
subtypes by various mechanisms; the b3-ar are
generally less responsive to desensitization than the
other two subtypes, and there is some evidence for the
b2-ar being somewhat more readily desensitized than
the b1-ar (lafontan, 1994; langin et al., 1995;
marullo et al., 1995).
the b-ar subtype population may change with the
stage of differentiation of a cell or with the hormonal
milieu provided to the cell. a dramatic example of
both these phenomena is observed in the clonal
3t3-f442a cell line maintained in culture. these
fibroblast-like cells multiply in culture and after
confluence differentiate into adipocytes when
presented with appropriate medium components.
there are approximately 90% b1-ar, some b2-ar, and
no b3-ar on the undifferentiated cells, whereas after
differentiation into adipocytes there are approximately 90% b3-ar, some b1-ar, and very few b2-ar. if
the differentiation medium contains dexamethasone,
the cells have > 80% b2-ar (feve et al., 1991;
strosberg, 1992).

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth

165

table 3. properties of b-adrenergic receptors (ar)
item

b1-ar

b2-ar

b3-ar

prototypical tissue
selective agonist
selective antagonist
glycosylated molecular weight
no. of amino acids (human)
mrna, approx. kb
introns
phosphorylation sites

rat heart
—
cgp 20, 712a
65,000
477
2.8
no
yes

hamster trachea
 xxxd2098xxx 
ici 118,551
65,000
413
2.0
no
yes

rat adipocyte
cgp 12,177
sr 59,230a
65,000
408
2.2
yes
few or none

skeletal muscle and adipocyte beta-adrenergic receptor
subtypes. knowledge of the proportion of b-ar subtypes present on a particular cell type in a particular
species may suggest the response of that cell to a
particular b-ar agonist. in regard to the major species
raised for meat production in the developed countries,
there is only limited knowledge of the b-ar subtypes
on skeletal muscles or on adipocytes, the primary
tissues responding to oral b-ar agonists (mersmann,
1995). in cattle, competitive ligand-binding studies
suggest there are predominantly b2-ar on skeletal
muscle and adipocytes (sillence and matthews,
1994), whereas other investigators suggest there are
approximately 75% b2-ar and 25% b1-ar on adipocytes (van liefde et al., 1994). saturation analysis
indicates only b1-ar + b2-ar sites, but it does not
distinguish between them (sillence and matthews,
1994; houseknecht et al., 1995). at this time, there is
no evidence for b3-ar on bovine adipocytes using
binding analyses or the measurement of lipolysis (van
liefde et al., 1994). in sheep, competitive ligandbinding studies indicate predominantly b2-ar on
adipocytes (bowen et al., 1992). in the bovine and
ovine studies, the data are clear, but limited, because
each study uses only one b1-ar ligand (cgp 20,712a)
and one b2-ar ligand (ici 118,551). thus, the data
do not exclude the possibility that the results
represent the affinity of these two compounds for the
species-specific receptor present in bovine or ovine
adipocytes rather than the detection of b1-ar and  xxxg92xxx .
there are transcripts for b1-ar, b2-ar, and b3-ar
on bovine adipocytes (casteilla et al., 1994); the  xxxg93xxx  transcripts may reside in the few brown adipocytes
remaining scattered in the white adipose tissue of the
adult after the neonatal period. the b3-ar is the
predominant transcript in the brown adipose tissue of
the bovine fetus; this receptor has been cloned and
sequenced (pietri-rouxel et al., 1995).
in pigs, saturation ligand binding indicates only one
site (apparently b1-ar + b2-ar) for skeletal muscle;
the ligand used probably would not detect b3-ar
(spurlock et al., 1993a). for porcine adipose tissue,
measurement of lipolysis has never clearly indicated
the b-ar subtypes, even though a large number of
agonists and antagonists has been tested. saturation
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

ligand binding and competitive ligand binding also
with numerous ligands have not clearly indicated the
receptor subtypes (mersmann, 1989c, 1995; mills and
mersmann, 1995). in some studies using competitive
ligand binding with a large number of ligand concentrations, multiple binding sites are evident (coutinho
et al., 1992; mills and mersmann, 1995). however,
when several b1-ar specific and several b2-ar specific
ligands are used, there are no clear conclusions
regarding which subtype is being detected or the
proportion of b1-ar and b2-ar present (mersmann et
al., 1993). ligand-binding studies aimed specifically
at detection of the b3-ar in porcine adipocyte membranes provide little evidence for functional receptors
of this subtype; if present, the porcine adipocyte b3-ar
has binding properties quite different from the prototypical rat b3-ar (mersmann, 1996).
the mrna transcripts for b1-ar, b2-ar, and b3-ar
are all present in porcine adipocytes (mcneel and
mersmann, 1995); the data are qualitative only and
thus do not suggest the proportion of each receptor
subtype expressed. the lack of distinctive pharmacology for the b-ar subtypes in porcine adipocytes (both
from measurement of lipolysis and ligand binding)
and the lack of antibodies for the receptor subtypes
preclude any conclusions regarding expression of
functional b-ar subtypes on these cells.

mechanisms
any predicated mechanism for the effects of b-ar
agonists must begin with activation of the b-ar and
proceed through the gs proteins to activation of
adenylyl cyclase to produce camp. only after mechanisms mediated by b-ar are thoroughly exhausted can
speculation about other mechanisms be entertained.
the almost universal distribution of b-ar on all
mammalian cell types provides the milieu for complex
mechanisms of action depending on the population of
b-ar subtypes expressed on various cells and the
distribution of the agonist to various tissues. the
mechanism of a b-ar agonist in vivo may be
extremely entangled with some or even most of the
ultimate effects resulting from secondary events
caused by hormonal or physiological responses of
numerous tissues to the b-ar agonist administered.

166

mersmann

regardless, the effect of the b-ar agonist almost
certainly results from activation of b-ar and not by
some “magical” function. because of the similarity in
the structure of a-ar and b-ar, it is possible there
may be some activation (or inactivation) of a-ar by a
particular b-ar agonist. this possibility cannot be
totally excluded when exploring mechanisms in vivo
but could be indicated as less probable, if testing of the
b-ar agonist for a-ar activity in vitro is negative. it is
also possible for a b-ar agonist in one species to act as
an antagonist for a b-ar in another species and tissue
(i.e., it would bind to the receptor, but would not
activate adenylyl cyclase; mills and mersmann, 1995).
finally, it may be difficult to measure a small
perturbation in the rate of a metabolic function over
the minutes or hours of an experiment, but a very
small change in vivo over the weeks or months of drug
administration could easily bring about major changes
in the size of a muscle, or a fat depot, or the overall
metabolic activity of an organ.
skeletal muscle. one of the most obvious effects of
orally administrated b-ar agonists in cattle, pigs, and
sheep is an increase in muscle mass. because the
postnatal growth of skeletal muscle is primarily a
result of hypertrophy, it is expected that an increase
in muscle protein synthesis, a decrease in muscle
protein degradation, or a combination of both will
produce the b-ar agonist-stimulated increase in
muscle mass. (some of the data on skeletal muscle
have been reviewed: yang and mcelligott, 1989;
moloney et al., 1991; kim and sainz, 1992; mersmann, 1995.) in individual experiments with various
b-ar agonists fed to several species, an increase in
protein synthesis and a decrease in protein degradation have been demonstrated. there are also reports
that do not indicate changes in rates of protein
synthesis or degradation, perhaps because these are
difficult measurements and the changes are small
(selected references are bergen et al., 1989; claeys et
al., 1989; adeola et al., 1992a). protein degradation is
seldom directly measured; instead, protease activities
often are measured in muscle from treated animals.
several protease activities often are reduced, or
concentration of protease inhibitors is increased, by bar agonist treatment (e.g., wang and beermann,
1988; kretchmar et al., 1990; koohmaraie et al., 1991;
bardsley et al., 1992; sainz et al., 1993). in pigs
infused with epinephrine, data suggest a positive
relationship between plasma epinephrine and skeletal
muscle  xxxg344xxx  (the inhibitor of the calciumactivated proteases, the calpains) concentrations
(sensky et al., 1996).
experiments with muscle in vitro are as troublesome as those in vivo; there are negative and positive
results. muscle preparations in vitro are almost
universally not in a physiological state, but a catabolic
condition (mersmann, 1995). finally, the status of
other endocrine systems may influence the observed
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

effects (e.g., some of the variability in experiments
attempting to demonstrate skeletal muscle responses
to b-ar agonists may depend on the glucocorticoid
status of the animal; liu et al., 1994b).
treatment of mammals with b-ar agonists causes
an increase in the amount of rna transcript for
several skeletal muscle proteins. thus, the mrna for
myosin light chain (smith et al., 1989), a-actin
(helferich et al., 1990; koohmaraie et al., 1991; grant
et al., 1993), and the calpain protease inhibitor
 xxxg344xxx  (higgins et al., 1988; bardsley et al.,
1992; killefer and koohmaraie, 1994) are increased
after b-ar agonist treatment.
the density of b-ar present in bovine longissimus
and semitendinosus muscles is not correlated with any
growth trait (hoey et al., 1995). although the
response of a cell type or tissue to a b-ar agonist
should depend on the receptor number, receptors move
on and off the membrane, are inactivated by phosphorylation, and the physiological response usually
represents activation of only a few of the receptors
(i.e., there are many spare b-ar).
adipose tissue. the other obvious effect of oral b-ar
agonists is a decrease in carcass fat mass. these
agonists clearly stimulate adipocyte triacylglycerol
degradation and inhibit fatty acid and triacylglycerol
synthesis in vitro in cells or tissue explants from
several species. however, with specific agonists and
adipocytes from a particular species, negative experiments are sometimes reported. even agonists that
cause a decrease in fat when fed and that bind to the
b-ar may have minimal effects on lipid metabolism
measured in vitro in adipocytes from that same
species (spurlock et al., 1993b, 1994; mills and
mersmann, 1995). in some, but not all, cases, after
chronic administration of an agonist, adipose tissue
from that animal will have increased lipolytic or
decreased lipogenic rates measured in vitro. (many of
these studies have been summarized in mersmann,
1989c, 1990, 1995; mills and mersmann, 1995). there
has been little investigation of lipid anabolic and
catabolic processes in vivo. the elevation of plasma
nonesterified fatty acid concentration after administration of a b-ar agonist suggests activation of the
adipocyte lipolytic system. several b-ar agonists
acutely elevate plasma nonesterified fatty acid concentration in pigs (mersmann, 1987; hu et al., 1988;
adeola et al., 1992b) and in cattle (blum and
flueckiger, 1988; eisemann et al., 1988) the response
is blunted with chronic administration of the b-ar
agonist in cattle (eisemann et al., 1988) and in sheep
(beermann et al., 1987).
the adipose tissue effects may not be as persistent
as the skeletal muscle effects. in multiple studies with
pigs fed ractopamine, carcass fat is reduced (e.g.,
watkins et al., 1990; crome et al., 1996). however,
one recent investigation indicated that ractopamine,
when fed to pigs, had little or no effect on carcass fat

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth

deposition or on adipocyte lipogenic rates measured in
vitro (liu et al., 1994a). another investigator
reported ractopamine caused a decrease in carcass fat
content but little or no decrease in the daily rate of
lipid deposition (dunshea et al., 1993a,b). other
recent investigations indicate a decreased rate of lipid
deposition in pigs fed ractopamine (mitchell et al.,
1991) or salbutamol (oksbjerg et al., 1996). it is not
possible to decipher the differences between these
more recent studies on lipid deposition rates in pigs
fed b-ar agonists. in bovine males fed l644,969,
protein deposition rates are increased and fat deposition rates are decreased (chwalibog et al., 1996).
as indicated later in this review, subtleties of
experimental design, including genetic background of
the animals, might be expected to produce divergent
quantitative results and occasionally negative results.
the multiple mechanisms to lower the responsiveness
of the cells to chronic agonist administration should
cause inactivation or removal from the cell surface of
b1-ar and b2-ar, but perhaps to a lesser extent  xxxg93xxx . skeletal muscle b-ar are decreased in rats fed
cimaterol (kim et al., 1992) and tend to decrease in
pigs fed ractopamine (sainz et al., 1993; spurlock et
al., 1994). however, the adipose tissue b-ar decrease
to a greater extent than skeletal muscle b-ar in pigs
(spurlock et al., 1994). this differential desensitization of porcine adipose tissue and skeletal muscle bar may be a mechanism to yield the lesser response of
adipose tissue than skeletal muscle observed in some
studies.
other mechanisms. a number of less direct mechanisms of b-ar agonist activity in vivo readily could
contribute to the mechanism of action of an orally
administered b-ar agonist. because of the multiple
cell types with b-ar on their surface, it is probable
there are multiple effects of a particular b-ar agonist
in the recipient animal. most of these possibilities and
the evidence for them were previously discussed and
will only be summarized (buttery and dawson, 1987;
mersmann, 1989a, 1995; zimmerli and blum, 1990;
moloney et al., 1991).
certainly, b-ar agonists can increase blood flow to
certain regions of the body. an increase in blood flow
to the skeletal muscle may enhance the process of
hypertrophy by delivery of increased amounts of
substrates and energy sources for protein synthesis.
likewise, increased blood flow to adipose tissue might
be envisioned to carry nonesterified  xxxd2154xxx  away
from the tissue to enhance the lipid degradation
process. these mechanisms could readily augment the
more direct effects of b-ar agonists on the muscle cell
and the adipocyte. there is increased blood flow in
mammals administered b-ar agonists; to the hindlimb of cattle with acute and chronic agonist administration (eisemann et al., 1988), to the hindlimb of
sheep with chronic agonist administration (beermann
et al., 1987), and to skeletal muscle and adipose tissue
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

167

with acute administration in pigs (mersmann,
1989a). blood flow (not measured) is probably
increased to many organs because of the increase in
heart rate observed with a number of b-ar agonists
(e.g., mersmann, 1987).
another possible mechanism is modulation of the
circulating concentration of numerous endocrine substances; for example, an acute increase in plasma
insulin, but no change after chronic b-ar agonist
administration in cattle (blum and flueckiger, 1988;
zimmerli and blum, 1990) or even a decrease in
insulin in sheep after chronic b-ar agonist administration (beermann et al., 1987). chronic b-ar agonist
administration increases plasma thyroid hormones in
sheep (beermann et al., 1987), but not in cattle
(zimmerli and blum, 1990). acutely administered
exogenous b-ar agonist elevates endogenous plasma
catecholamines in pigs; the endogenous catecholamines could then mediate effects in various tissues
(mersmann, 1989b). a similar experiment in cattle
(blum and flueckiger, 1988) did not modify plasma
epinephrine or  xxxd2750xxx  concentrations.
there is little or no evidence that b-ar agonists
increase muscle mass and decrease fat mass by way of
somatotropin. first, the b-ar and somatotropin receptors have no structural relationship to each other.
second, there is no evidence the intracellular signaling systems for the two receptors are related. third,
somatotropin produces considerable hypertrophy of
many organs, whereas the b-ar agonist-produced
hypertrophic effects are restricted to skeletal and
probably cardiac muscle and salivary glands (reeds
and mersmann, 1991). somatotropin also has profound effects on feed intake, causing a major reduction, whereas the b-ar agonist effects on feed intake
generally are small or do not exist. oral or i.v.
administration of b-ar agonists does not seem to
increase the secretion of plasma somatotropin, and the
agonists actually suppress plasma somatotropin concentrations in sheep (beermann et al., 1987; zimmerli
and blum, 1990; thomas et al., 1994).
the rates of b-ar controlled metabolic pathways in
various tissues may be altered by exogenous b-ar
agonists; this could result in modified plasma concentrations of metabolites such as glucose or lactate.
there is little evidence that chronically administered
b-ar agonists increase basal metabolic rate (e.g.,
rikhardsson et al., 1991; yen et al., 1991). the real
possibility exists that a systemic b-ar agonist can
traverse the blood-brain barrier to produce central
nervous system effects as demonstrated for clenbuterol
in rats (ordway et al., 1987). this mechanism could
account for the reduced feed intake with some b-ar
agonists in some species and in some trials.
each of the individual mechanisms, or more likely
some combination of them (as well as others not
mentioned), could be operative in a given species
administered a given b-ar agonist, at a particular

168

mersmann

age, with a specific genetic background, under a
designated husbandry condition, and fed a particular
diet. if the agonist is delivered to target tissues at an
appropriate concentration and those target tissues
have b-ar responsive to the agonist, then a b-ar
mediated function of that tissue will contribute to the
overall mechanism in that species, with that specific
agonist, under the prescribed conditions.

restrictions on interpretation and extrapolation
of experimental observations
experiments in vitro. many observations are obtained with tissue, cell, or subcellular preparations in
vitro. although little progress would be made in
biological research without experimentation in vitro,
such results may be misleading when extrapolated to
the organism in vivo. first, most tissue or cell
preparations are in a catabolic state when studied in
vitro. this is true of adipocyte and muscle cells in
almost all cases and is clearly demonstrated by the
greater rates of catabolic processes such as lipolysis in
adipocytes compared to anabolic processes such as
triacylglycerol biosynthesis (e.g., mersmann, 1986).
thus, although the physiology and pharmacology of an
enzymatic step or of a pathway may be accurately
described by the results, the quantitative use of the
rates is not appropriate. second, the observed results
may stem from a particular addition or deletion to the
incubation medium; for example, insulin usually will
potently inhibit lipolytic rates (mersmann and hu,
1987) or the endogenous generation of adenosine will
stimulate the adipocyte  xxxg81xxx  to
inhibit adenylyl cyclase (carey, 1995). third, the
concentration of hormones or drugs (agonists and
antagonists) may be pharmacological, and thus the
effects may not represent the physiological response in
vivo. the concentrations in experiments in vivo may
also exceed those attained with the indicated use of
the compound. a good example of this is the exceptionally high concentrations of compounds used in toxicology studies, wherein, in some cases, the concentration
far exceeds the capacity of the detoxification systems.
the results represent a totally artificial situation in
which the compound is studied at concentrations that
exceed the organism’s ability to detoxify and eliminate
the compound in the usual manner.
experimental design in vivo. the minute details of
the design of an experiment in vivo may greatly
influence the outcome. most of us carefully examine
the more obvious aspects of design when dissecting the
results of an experiment or designing a new experiment. however, many of the subtle components are
often overlooked or not reported. manuscripts written
today do not expound the details of methodology as in
the middle decades of this century; we pay a price for
the expansion of science in that there must be a
conservation of space in the literature. thus, the
literature contains diverse results that seem to come
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

from the same experimental design; many factors such
as animal age, feed composition, feeder design, feeding
pattern, temperature, humidity, air flow in a building
(influencing temperature, humidity, dust, toxic
gasses, etc.), waste disposal system, season, breed/
line/source, cage design, animal density in cages or
pens, and randomization or placement of cages or pens
in a room or building may influence the results. these
multiple design variables mandate experiments in
vivo or in vitro must be duplicated in another
laboratory to be accepted by the scientific community,
including the regulatory organizations. even so, with
so many intangibles, it may be difficult to duplicate
experiments, particularly to quantitatively replicate
results. it is well established in the commercial drug
business that a large number of trials with a single
drug will produce highly variable quantitative results,
including some negative (no effect ) results. some
investigators are a bit too quick to judge the work of
others as poorly executed when the results differ from
the expected or from their own.
ligand delivery. the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic characteristics of a drug may vary with
species, breed/line, diet, and climatic conditions (could
modify metabolic pathways in the animal). many
factors influence the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of an agonist, including 1 ) drug formulation, route of administration, and dose; 2 ) drug
stability in the feed, the gut, the adipose tissue or
muscle if injected, and the blood stream; 3 ) drug
absorption including transport in the venous or
lymphatic system; 4 ) drug metabolism including
activation, degradation, and protein/binding; 5 ) drug
delivery to the active site(s) including blood flow and
cell permeability of capillaries and target cells; 6 )
receptor subtypes, concentration and extent of inactivation; and 7 ) drug excretion. given the extensive
number of qualifying factors, it should be apparent
that extrapolation of results for a given drug across
species is not appropriate. given the many potential
modifiers of the drug effect, it is not surprising that
the quantitative effects observed in different drug
trials, even when using the same design, in the same
species, are widely divergent. qualitative support of
the results of others is more common than quantitative replication.
species variation in receptor structure. results from
comparative biology clearly indicate the primary
amino acid sequence of a protein differs across species.
if the amino acid substitutions are in areas of the
protein not critical for function, there will be little
modification of function. also, amino acid substitutions may be by a similar amino acid (e.g., two acidic
amino acids, such as  xxxd233xxx  for  xxxd2431xxx )
so that function is not greatly altered. however, in
other cases, the amino acid substitution may markedly
modify function because the location is critical to
function, and there are major differences between the

169

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth

original and substituted amino acid (e.g., an acidic for
a basic amino acid, such as  xxxd2431xxx  for lysine).
there may also be extensive modification of the
primary structure by regions of deletion, repetition, or
insertion; if the modifications are exceptionally great
the function of the protein may be lost.
although not many species have been analyzed for
b-ar amino acid sequence (or more likely the
nucleotide sequence extrapolated to the amino acid
sequence), there are enough data available for the
sequences of each of the three b-ar subtypes to
establish sequence variability. first, in a given
species, the b1-ar, b2-ar, and b3-ar have approximately 40 to 50% homology with each other; the
greatest conservation of sequence is in the transmembrane domains, several of which contribute to form the
active site of these receptors. a given b-ar subtype
has approximately 75% (or greater) homology across
species. for example, the bovine b3-ar has approximately 85% amino acid sequence homology with
human b3-ar and 75% homology with rat and mouse
b3-ar (pietri-rouxel et al., 1995).
despite the retained similarity in structure, the
pharmacological properties of the b3-ar from these
species are quite different (table 4). cloned bovine,
human, and mouse b3-ar individually transfected into
chinese hamster ovary cells have strikingly different
pharmacological properties. propranolol is an antagonist for mouse receptors, but a partial agonist for
human and bovine receptors, whereas  xxxd384xxx  is an
antagonist for mouse and human receptors but a
partial agonist for bovine receptors. many other
pharmacological differences between these closely
related receptors are documented (pietri-rouxel et al.,
1995). given this concrete demonstration of modification of receptor-ligand interaction (even to the extent
that a given compound is an agonist for a receptor
subtype in one species but an antagonist for the same
receptor subtype in another species), it is not surprising different effects are observed in different species
with the oral administration of the same b-ar agonist.
although there is no experimental observation as
yet, there could be isoforms of a single b-ar subtype in
different tissues in a single species; for example, the
primary amino acid sequence (two different genes) for
the predominant b-ar in two different tissues in the
same species could differ, leading to diverse pharmacological properties in the two tissues, even though both
receptors would be classified as the same b-ar
subtype.

cellular distribution of beta-adrenergic receptor subtypes. the exact proportion of each b-ar subtype

present on the surface of a specific cell type may vary
across species. this would modify the response of that
tissue to stimulation by an agonist even if the
receptors had an identical sequence with the same
receptors in another species. for example, rat adipocytes have predominantly b3-ar, but this is not true
for human adipocytes (langin et al., 1995). as
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

table 4. species variation in pharmacology of
b3-adrenergic receptors (ar)a
ligand and species of b3-ar

effectb

propranolol
mouse
human
bovine

antagonist
partial agonist
partial agonist

 xxxd384xxx 
mouse
human
bovine

antagonist
antagonist
partial agonist

aadapted
badenylyl

from pietri-rouxel et al. (1995).
cyclase activity measured in cloned b3-ar transfected
into chinese hamster ovary cells.

already mentioned, individual b-ar subtypes may be
transcriptionally regulated or regulated through
desensitization to produce variation in the cell surface
population of subtypes. it has recently been demonstrated that individual adipocytes from a single depot
have different distributions of the three b-ar subtypes; if this observation is supported, it adds another
layer of complexity to the regulation of b-ar subtypes
(seydoux et al., 1996).
further complexities involve modulation of the
coupling of the receptors to the intracellular signaling
system. ligand-binding to the receptor is only the
initiating event; detailed studies of the modification of
receptor coupling as a mechanism for control of
cellular function are few.

implications
some compounds that stimulate b-adrenergic receptors ( b-ar), i.e., b-adrenergic agonists increase muscle mass and decrease fat mass when fed to growing
cattle, pigs, poultry, and sheep. because the b-ar are
present on almost every mammalian cell type, the
mechanism by which modification of growth occurs is
probably complex. it may include modulation of blood
flow and secondary effects of other hormones, the
release of which is controlled by b-ar. regardless of
complexity, the mechanism for a given b-ar agonist,
in a given species, probably involves the direct
mechanism of binding to b-ar present on the surface
of skeletal muscle and adipocytes. there are species
differences in the structure and pharmacology of the bar, in the b-ar subtypes present in individual
tissues, and in the metabolism and distribution of
individual b-ar agonists.

literature cited
adeola, o., r. o. ball, and l. g. young. 1992a. porcine skeletal
muscle myofibrillar protein synthesis is stimulated by ractopamine. j. nutr. 122:488−495.

170

mersmann

adeola, o., b. w. mcbride, and l. g. young. 1992b. metabolic
responses induced by  xxxd2401xxx  in ractopamine-fed pigs. j.
nutr. 122:1280−1286.
anderson, d. b., e. l. veenhuizen, d. j. jones, a. l. schroeder, and
d.l. hancock. 1991. the use of phenethanolamines to reduce
fat and increase carcass leanness in meat animals. in: c.
haberstroh and c. e. morris ( e d ) fat and cholesterol
reduced foods: technologies and strategies. adv. appl. biotechnol. ser. (vol. 12). pp 43−73. the portfolio publishing
company, the woodlands, tx.
arch, j.r.s., and a. j. kaumann. 1993. b3 and atypical b-adrenoceptors. med. res. rev. 13:663−729.
bardsley, r. g., s.m.j. allcock, j. m. dawson, n. w. dumelow, j. a.
higgins, y. v. lasslett, a. k. lockley, t. parr, and p. j.
buttery. 1992. effect of b-agonists on expression of calpain and
 xxxg344xxx  activity in skeletal muscle. biochimie 74:267−273.
beermann, d. h. 1989. status of current strategies for growth
regulation. in: d. r. campion, g. j. hausman, and r. j. martin
(ed.) animal growth regulation. pp 377−400. plenum publishing corp., new york.
beermann, d. h. 1994. carcass composition of animals given partitioning agents. in: h. d. hafs and r. g. zimbelman (ed.) lowfat meats. pp 203−232. academic press, san diego, ca.
beermann, d. h., w. r. butler, d. e. hogue, v. k. fishell, r. h.
dalrymple, c. a. ricks, and c. g. scanes. 1987. cimaterolinduced muscle hypertrophy and altered endocrine status in
lambs. j. anim. sci. 65:1514−1524.
bergen, w. g., s. e. johnson, d. m. skjaerlund, a. s. babiker, n. k.
ames, r. a. merkel, and d. b. anderson. 1989. muscle protein
metabolism in finishing pigs fed ractopamine. j. anim. sci. 67:
2255−2262.
bergen, w. g., and r. a. merkel. 1991. body composition of animals
treated with partitioning agents: implications for human
health. faseb j. 5:2951−2957.
blum, j. w., and n. flueckiger. 1988. early metabolic and endocrine
effects of perorally administered b-adrenoceptor agonists in
calves. eur. j. pharmacol. 151:177−187.
bowen, w. p., d. j. flint, and r. g. vernon. 1992. regional and
interspecific differences in the ligand binding properties of badrenergic receptors of individual white adipose tissue depots
in the sheep and rat. biochem. pharmacol. 44:681−686.
buttery, p. j., and j. m. dawson. 1987. the mode of action of betaagonists as manipulators of carcass composition. in: j. p. hanrahan (ed.) beta-agonists and their effects on animal
growth and carcass quality. pp 29−43. elsevier applied
science, new york.
carey, g. b. 1995. adenosine regulation of adipose tissue
metabolism. in: s. b. smith and d. r. smith (ed.) the biology
of fat in meat animals: current advances. pp 35−52. american
society of animal science, champaign, il.
casteilla, l., p. muzzin, j.-p. revelli, d. ricquier, and j.-p. giacobino. 1994. expression of b1- and b3-adrenergic-receptor messages and adenylate cyclase b-adrenergic response in bovine
perirenal adipose tissue during its transformation from brown
into white fat. biochem. j. 297:93−97.
chwalibog, a., k. jensen, and g. thorbek. 1996. quantitative protein and fat metabolism in bull calves treated with b-adrenergic
agonist. arch. anim. nutr. 49:159−167.
claeys, m. c., d. r. mulvaney, f. d. mccarthy, m. t. gore, d. n.
marple, and j. l. sartin. 1989. skeletal muscle protein synthesis and  xxxd2864xxx   xxxd3223xxx  secretion in lambs treated with clenbuterol. j. anim. sci. 67:2245−2254.
coutinho, l. l., w. g. bergen, r. a. merkel, and c. k. smith, ii.
1992. quantitative characterization of beta-adrenergic receptor
subtypes in porcine adipocytes. comp. biochem. physiol. 101c:
481−485.
crome, p. k., f. k. mckeith, t. r. carr, d. j. jones, d. h. mowrey,
and j. e. cannon. 1996. effect of ractopamine on growth
performance, carcass composition, and cutting yields of pigs
slaughtered at 107 and 125 kilograms. j. anim. sci. 74:
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

709−716.
cunningham, h. m. 1965. effect of epinephrine and nicotine on
protein and fat metabolism of pigs. in: k. l. blaxter (ed.)
energy metabolism. pp 29−36. academic press, new york.
dunshea, f. r., r. h. king, and r. g. campbell. 1993a. interrelationships between dietary protein and ractopamine on protein
and lipid deposition in finishing gilts. j. anim. sci. 71:
2931−2941.
dunshea, f. r., r. h. king, r. g. campbell, r. d. sainz, and y. s.
kim. 1993b. interrelationships between sex and ractopamine
on protein and lipid deposition in rapidly growing pigs. j.
anim. sci. 71:2919−2930.
eisemann, j. h., g. b. huntington, and c. l. ferrell. 1988. effects
of dietary clenbuterol on metabolism of the hindquarters in
steers. j. anim. sci. 66:342−353.
emorine, l., n. blin, and a. d. strosberg. 1994. the human beta3adrenoceptor: the search for a physiological function. trends
pharmacol. sci. 15:3−7.
feve, b., l. j. emorine, f. lasnier, n. blin, b. baude, c. nahmias,
a. d. strosberg, and j. pairault. 1991. atypical b-adrenergic
receptor in 3t3-f442a adipocytes. j. biol. chem. 266:
20329−20336.
giacobino, j.-p. 1995. b3-adrenoceptor: an update. eur. j. endocrinol. 132:377.
grant, a. l., d. m. skjaerlund, w. g. helferich, w. g. bergen, and
r. a. merkel. 1993. skeletal muscle growth and expression of
skeletal muscle a-actin mrna and  xxxg1144xxx 
mrna in pigs during feeding and withdrawal of ractopamine.
j. anim. sci. 71:3319−3326.
hall, j. m., m. p. caulfield, s. p. watson, and s. guard. 1993.
receptor subtypes or species homologues: relevance to drug
discovery. trends pharmacol. sci. 14:376.
hanrahan, j. p. (ed.). 1987. beta-agonists and their effects on
animal growth and carcass quality. elsevier applied science,
london.
helferich, w. g., d. b. jump, d. b. anderson, d. m. skjaerlund, r.
a. merkel, and w. g. bergen. 1990. skeletal muscle a-actin
synthesis is increased pretranslationally in pigs fed the
phenethanolamine ractopamine. endocrinology 126:3096−3100.
higgins, j. a., y. v. lasslett, r. g. bardsley, and p. j. buttery.
1988. the relation between dietary restriction or clenbuterol ( a
selective b2-agonist) treatment on muscle growth and calpain
proteinase ( xxxg340xxx   xxxg341xxx   xxxg548xxx   xxxg551xxx   xxxg553xxx   xxxg554xxx   xxxg555xxx   xxxg556xxx .17) and  xxxg344xxx  activities in lambs.
br. j. nutr. 60:645−652.
hoey, a. j., m. m. reich, g. davis, r. shorthose, and m. n. sillence.
1995. b2-adrenoceptor densities do not correlate with growth,
carcass quality, or meat quality in cattle. j. anim. sci. 73:
3281−3286.
hoffman, b. b., and r. j. lefkowitz. 1990. catecholamines and
sympathomimetic drugs. in: a. g. gilman, t. w. rall, a. s.
nies, and p. taylor (ed.) goodman and gilman’s: the pharmacological basis of therapeutics. pp 187−220. pergamon
press, new york.
houseknecht, k. l., d. e. bauman, g. b. carey, and h. j. mersmann. 1995. effect of bovine somatotropin and food deprivation
on b-adrenergic and a1 adenosine receptor binding in adipose
tissue of lactating cows. domest. anim. endocrinol. 12:325−336.
howe, r. 1993. b3-adrenergic agonists. drugs future 18:529−549.
hu, c. y., j. novakofski, and h. j. mersmann. 1988. clenbuterol
stimulated increase of plasma free  xxxd2154xxx  in reserpinized
pigs. comp. biochem. physiol. 91c:619−622.
killefer, j., and m. koohmaraie. 1994. bovine skeletal muscle  xxxg344xxx : cloning, sequence analysis, and steady-state mrna
expression. j. anim. sci. 72:606−614.
kim, y. s., and r. d. sainz. 1992. b-adrenergic agonists and hypertrophy of skeletal muscles. life sci. 50:397−407.
kim, y. s., r. d. sainz, r. j. summers, and p. molenaar. 1992.
cimaterol reduces b-adrenergic receptor density in rat skeletal
muscles. j. anim. sci. 70:115−122.
kobilka, b., and b. b. hoffman. 1995. molecular characterization

b-adrenergic receptor agonists and growth
and regulation of adrenergic receptors. in: j. h. laragh, and b.
m. brenner (ed.) hypertension: pathophysiology, diagnosis,
and management (2nd ed.) pp 841−851. raven press, new
york.
koohmaraie, m., s. d. shackelford, n. e. muggli-cockett, and r. t.
stone. 1991. effect of the b-adrenergic agonist l644,969 on muscle growth, endogenous proteinase activities, and postmortem
proteolysis in wether lambs. j. anim. sci. 69:4823−4835.
kretchmar, d. h., m. r. hathaway, r. j. epley, and w. r. dayton.
1990. alterations in postmortem degradation of myofibrillar
proteins in muscle of lambs fed a b-adrenergic agonist. j. anim.
sci. 68:1760−1772.
lafontan, m. 1994. differential recruitment and differential regulation by physiological amines of fat cell b-1, b-2 and b-3 adrenergic receptors expressed in native fat cells and in transfected cell
lines. cell. signalling 6:363−392.
lafontan, m., and m. berlan. 1993. fat cell adrenergic receptors and
the control of white and brown fat cell function. j. lipid res.
34:1057−1091.
landsberg, l., and j. b. young. 1992. catecholamines and the
adrenal medulla. in: j. d. wilson and d. w. foster (ed.)
williams textbook of endocrinology. pp 621−705. w. b. saunders company, philadelphia, pa.
langin, d., g. tavernier, and m. lafontan. 1995. regulation of
 xxxg838xxx -adrenoceptor expression in white fat cells. fundam. clin.
pharmacol. 9:97−106.
liggett, s. b., and j. r. raymond. 1993. pharmacology and molecular biology of adrenergic receptors. baillieres clin. endocrinol.
metab. 7:279−305.
liu, c. y., a. l. grant, k.-h. kim, s. q. ji, d. l. hancock, d. b.
anderson, and s. e. mills. 1994a. limitations of ractopamine to
affect adipose tissue metabolism in swine. j. anim. sci. 72:
62−67.
liu, c.-c., j.-y. yen, b.-r. ou, and n. e. forsberg. 1994b. actions of
a beta-adrenergic agonist on muscle protein metabolism in
intact, adrenalectomized, and dexamethasone-supplemented
adrenalectomized rats. j. nutr. biochem. 5:43−49.
marullo, s., f. nantel, a. d. strosberg, and m. bouvier. 1995.
variability in the regulation of b-adrenoceptor subtypes. biochem. soc. trans. 23:126−129.
mckeith, f. k., y. h. lan, and d. h. beermann. 1994. in: h. d.
hafs, and r. g. zimbelman (ed.) low-fat meats: design
strategies and human implications. pp 233−252. academic
press, san diego, ca.
mcneel, r. l., and h. j. mersmann. 1995. b-adrenergic receptor
subtype transcripts in porcine adipose tissue. j. anim. sci. 73:
1962−1971.
mersmann, h. j. 1986. postnatal expression of adipose tissue metabolic activity associated with a porcine genetic obesity. j. anim.
sci. 63:741−746.
mersmann, h. j. 1987. acute metabolic effects of adrenergic agents
in swine. am. j. physiol. 252:e85−e95.
mersmann, h. j. 1989a. acute changes in blood flow in pigs infused
with b-adrenergic agonists. j. anim. sci. 67:2913−2920.
mersmann, h. j. 1989b. influence of infused b-adrenergic agonists
on porcine blood metabolites and catecholamines. j. anim. sci.
67:2633−2645.
mersmann, h. j. 1989c. potential mechanisms for repartitioning of
growth by b-adrenergic agonists. in: d. r. campion, g. h.
hausman, and r. j. martin (ed.) animal growth regulation.
pp 337−357. plenum publishing corp., new york.
mersmann, h. j. 1990. metabolic and endocrine control of adipose
tissue accretion. in: j. d. wood and a. v. fisher (ed.) reducing fat in meat animals. pp 101−144. elsevier applied science,
new york.
mersmann, h. j. 1995. species variation in mechanisms for modulation of growth by beta-adrenergic receptors. j. nutr. 125:
1777s−1782s.
mersmann, h. j. 1996. evidence of classic b3-adrenergic receptors in
porcine adipocytes. j. anim. sci. 74:984−992.
downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

171

mersmann, h. j., k. akanbi, a. shparber, and r. l. mcneel. 1993.
binding of agonists and antagonists to the porcine adipose
tissue b-adrenergic receptor(s). comp. biochem. physiol. 106c:
725−732.
mersmann, h. j., and c. y. hu. 1987. factors affecting measurements of glucose metabolism and lipolytic rates in porcine
adipose tissue slices in vitro. j. anim. sci. 64:148−164.
mills, s., and h. j. mersmann. 1995. beta-adrenergic agonists, their
receptors, and growth: special reference to the peculiarities in
pigs. in: s. b. smith and d. r. smith (ed.) the biology of fat
in meat animals: current advances.  xxxd1100xxx −34. american society of animal science, champaign, il.
minneman, k. p., a. hedberg, and p. b. molinoff. 1979. comparison
of beta-adrenergic receptor subtypes in mammalian tissues. j.
pharmacol. exp. ther. 211:502−508.
mitchell, a. d., m. b. solomon, and n. c. steele. 1991. influence of
level of dietary protein or energy on effects of ractopamine in
finishing swine. j. anim. sci. 69:4487−4495.
moloney, a., p. allen, r. joseph, and v. tarrant. 1991. influence of
beta-adrenergic agonists and similar compounds on growth. in:
a. m. pearson, and t. r. dutson (ed.) growth regulation in
farm animals. advances in meat research (vol. 7). pp
455−513. elsevier applied science, new york.
nisoli, e., c. tonello, m. landi, and m. o. carruba. 1996. functional studies of the first selective b3-adrenergic receptor antagonist sr 59230a in rat brown adipocytes. mol. pharmacol.
49:7−14.
nrc. 1994. effect of metabolic modifiers on nutrient requirements
of growing ruminants. in: metabolic modifiers: effects on the
nutrient requirements of food-producing animals. pp 30−37.
national academy press, washington, dc.
oksbjerg, n., j. a. fernandez, h. jorgensen, o. h. olsen, t. rolph,
and n. agergaard. 1996. effects of salbutamol on protein and
fat deposition in pigs fed two levels of protein. j. anim. physiol.
anim. nutr. 75:1−12.
ordway, g. a., j. m. o’donnell, and a. frazer. 1987. effects of
clenbuterol on central beta-1 and beta-2 adrenergic receptors of
the rat. j. pharmacol. exp. ther. 241:187−195.
ostrowski, j. m., a. kjelsberg, m. g. caron, and r. j. lefkowitz.
1992. mutagenesis of the b2-adrenergic receptor: how structure
elucidates function. annu. rev. pharmacol. toxicol. 32:
167−183.
pietri-rouxel, f., g. lenzen, a. kapoor, m.-f. drumare, p. archimbault, a. d. strosberg, and b. st. j. manning. 1995. molecular
cloning and pharmacological characterization of the bovine b3adrenergic receptor. eur. j. biochem. 230:350−358.
pietri-rouxel, f., and a. d. strosberg. 1995. pharmacological
characteristics and species-related variations of b3-adrenergic
receptors. fundam. clin. pharmacol. 9:211−218.
reeds, p. j., and h. j. mersmann. 1991. protein and energy requirements of animals treated with b-adrenergic agonists: a discussion. j. anim. sci. 69:1532−1550.
ricks, c. a., p. k. baker, and r. h. dalrymple. 1984. use of
repartitioning agents to improve performance and body composition of meat animals. reciprocal meat conf. proc. 37:5−11.
rikhardsson, g., k. a. johnson, and d. e. johnson. 1991. effects of
cimaterol on energetics and carcass characteristics of suffolk
ewe lambs. j. anim. sci. 69:396−404.
sainz, r. d., y. s. kim, f. r. dunshea, and r. g. campbell. 1993.
effects of ractopamine in pig muscles: histology, calpains and
b-adrenergic receptors. aust. j. agric. res. 44:1441−1448.
sano, m., t. yoshimasa, t. yagura, and i. yamamoto. 1993. nonhomogeneous distribution of b1- and b2-adrenoceptors in various human tissues. life sci. 52:1063−1070.
schwinn, d. a., m. g. caron, and r. j. lefkowitz. 1992. the betaadrenergic receptor as a model for molecular structure-function
relationships in g-protein-coupled receptors. in: h. a. fozzard,
e. haber, r. b. jennings, a. m. katz, and h. e. morgan (ed.)
the heart and cardiovascular system (2nd ed.). pp
1657−1684. raven press, new york.

172

mersmann

sensky, p. l., t. parr, r. g. bardsley, and p. j. buttery. 1996. the
relationship between plasma epinephrine concentration and
the activity of the calpain enzyme system in porcine longissimus muscle. j. anim. sci. 74:380−387.
seydoux, j., p. muzzin, m. moinat, w. pralong, l. girardier, and j.p. giacobino. 1996. adrenoceptor heterogeneity in human
white adipocytes differentiated in culture as assessed by cytosolic free calcium measurements. cell. signalling 8:117−122.
sillence, m. n., and m. l. matthews. 1994. classical and atypical
binding sites for b-adrenoceptor ligands and activation of
adenylyl cyclase in bovine skeletal muscle and adipose tissue
membranes. br. j. pharmacol. 111:866−872.
smith, s. b., d. k. garcia, and d. b. anderson. 1989. elevation of a
specific mrna in longissimus muscle of steers fed ractopamine.
j. anim. sci. 67:3495−3502.
spurlock, m. e., j. c. cusumano, s. q. ji, d. b. anderson, c. k.
smith ii, d. l. hancock, and s. e. mills. 1994. the effect of
ractopamine on b-adrenoceptor density and affinity in porcine
adipose and skeletal muscle tissue. j. anim. sci. 72:75−80.
spurlock, m. e., j. c. cusumano, and s. e. mills. 1993a. ( −)-[ 3h]dihydroalprenolol binding to b-adrenergic receptors in porcine
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle membrane preparations. j.
anim. sci. 71:1778−1785.
spurlock, m. e., j. c. cusumano, and s. e. mills. 1993b. the affinity
of ractopamine, clenbuterol, and l-644,969 for the b-adrenergic
receptor population in porcine adipose tissue and skeletal muscle membrane. j. anim. sci. 71:2061−2065.
steele, n. c., r. d. boyd, and r. g. campbell. 1994. growth,
metabolic modifiers, and nutrient considerations. in: h. d. hafs
and r. g. zimbelman (ed.) low-fat meats: design strategies
and human implications. pp 167−189. academic press, san
diego, ca.

downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jas/article-abstract/76/1/160/4625179
by guest
on 21 march 2018

strosberg, a. d. 1992. biotechnology of b-adrenergic receptors. mol.
neurobiol. 4:211−250.
thomas, g. b., c. j. scott, j. t. cummins, and i. j. clarke. 1994.
adrenergic regulation of  xxxd2864xxx   xxxd3223xxx  secretion in the ewe.
domest. anim. endocrinol. 11:187−195.
van liefde, i., a. van ermen, a. van witzenburg, n. fraeyman, and
g. vauquelin. 1994. species and strain-related differences in
the expression and functionality of b-adrenoceptor subtypes in
adipose tissue. arch. int. pharmacodyn. 327:69−86.
wang, s.-y., and d. h. beermann. 1988. reduced calcium-dependent proteinase activity in cimaterol-induced muscle hypertrophy in lambs. j. anim. sci. 66:2545−2550.
watkins, l. e., d. j. jones, d. h. mowrey, d. b. anderson, and e. l.
veenhuizen. 1990. the effect of various levels of ractopamine
hydrochloride on the performance and carcass characteristics of
finishing swine. j. anim. sci. 68:3588−3595.
wellenreiter, r. h. 1991. b-adrenergic agonists for poultry. crit.
rev. poult. biol. 3:229−237.
williams, l. t., and r. j. lefkowitz. 1978. receptor binding studies
in adrenergic pharmacology. raven press, new york.
yang, y. t., and m. a. mcelligott. 1989. multiple actions of badrenergic agonists on skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.
biochem. j. 261:1−10.
yen, j. t., j. a. nienaber, j. klindt, and j. d. crouse. 1991. effect of
ractopamine on growth, carcass traits, and fasting heat production of u.s. contemporary crossbred and chinese meishan
pure- and crossbred pigs. j. anim. sci. 69:4810−4822.
zimmerli, u. v., and j. w. blum. 1990. acute and longterm metabolic, endocrine, respiratory, cardiac and skeletal muscle activity changes in response to perorally administered badrenoceptor agonists in calves. j. anim. physiol. anim. nutr.
63:157−172.

