44

anesthesiology

1998; 88:744-50

© 1998 american society of anesthesiologists, inc
lippincott-raven publishers

 

neuromuscular relaxants as antagonists for m,

and m; muscarinic receptors

vivian y. hou, m.d.,* carol a. hirshman, m.d.,+ charles w. emala, m.d.£

background: neuromuscular relaxants such as pancuro-
nium bind to m, and m, muscarinic receptors as antagonists.
blockade of muscarinic receptors in atria of the m, subtype
mediates tachycardia. in the lung, blockade of m, receptors
on parasympathetic nerves potentiates vagally induced bron-
chospasm, whereas blockade of m, receptors on bronchial
smooth muscle inhibits bronchospasm. the current study was
designed to quantify the affinity of a series of neuromuscular
relaxants for the m, and m, muscarinic receptors, which were
individually stably transfected in chinese hamster ovary cell
lines.

methods: competitive radioligand binding assays deter-
mined the relative binding affinities of the neuromuscular re-
laxants pancuronium, succinylcholine,  xxxd2658xxx , doxacu-
rium, atracurium, rocuronium,  xxxd2174xxx , and  xxxd2959xxx 
for the muscarinic receptor in the presence of a muscarinic
receptor antagonist ((h-qnb) in membranes prepared from
cells individually expressing either the m, or m, muscarinic
receptor.

results: all muscle relaxants evaluated displaced *h-qnb
from muscarinic receptors. the relative order of potency for
the m, muscarinic receptor (highest to lowest) was pancuro-
nium,  xxxd2174xxx , rocuronium, atracurium,  xxxd2959xxx ,
doxacurium,  xxxd2658xxx , and succinylcholine. the relative
order of potency for the m, muscarinic receptor (highest to
lowest) was pancuronium, atracurium,  xxxd2959xxx , rocuro-
nium,  xxxd2658xxx ,  xxxd2174xxx , succinylcholine, and doxacu-
rium.

conclusions: all neuromuscular relaxants studied had affin-
ities for the m, and m, muscarinic receptor, but only pancuro-
nium and  xxxd2174xxx  had affinities within the range of concen-

 

* fellow, department of anesthesiology and critical care medicine.

t professor, departments of anesthesiology, environmental health
sciences, and medicine.

+ associate professor, department of anesthesiology and critical
care medicine.

received from the departments of anesthesiology and critical care
medicine, and environmental health sciences, the johns hopkins
university school of medicine, baltimore, maryland. submitted for
publication february 12, 1997. accepted for publication october 28,
1997:

address reprint requests to dr. emala: the johns hopkins school
of hygiene & public health, division of physiology/room 7006, 615
north wolfe street, baltimore, maryland 21205. address electronic
mail to: cemala@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

trations achieved with clinical use. the high affinities of galla-
mine and pancuronium for the m, muscarinic receptor are
consistent with a mechanism of m, receptor blockade in relax-
ant-induced tachycardia. (key words: chinese hamster ovary
cells; radioligand binding; stable transfection; tachycardia.)

muscarinic cholinergic receptors found on postgan-
glionic neurons, cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and
glands mediate important physiologic functions such
as heart rate, airway caliber, and salivation. molecular
cloning studies have identified five different subtypes
of muscarinic receptors encoded by five distinct genes
(m,, mm, m;, m,, and ms), although pharmacologic
techniques only distinguish between the m,, m>, m,,
and m, muscarinic receptors. !

neuromuscular blockers commonly used in anesthe-
tic practice interact with muscarinic and nicotinic re-
ceptors.~° agents that are antagonists for the m, musca-
rinic receptor should increase heart rate because the
heart expresses a relatively pure population of m, recep-
tors." tachycardia results from blockade of m, musca-
rinic receptors on both cardiac myocytes and vagal
efferent fibers. similarly, m, selective muscarinic
antagonists should potentiate vagally induced broncho-
constriction,” because m, receptor activation also in-
hibits the release of acetylcholine from postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers in the airway. conversely, neu-
romuscular blockers that selectively inhibit the m; mus-
carinic receptor on the smooth muscle in the airway
should inhibit vagally induced bronchoconstriction, be-
cause m, receptor activation mediates smooth muscle
contraction in the airway.° therefore, m,-selective mus-
carinic antagonist activity that occurs at doses of neuro-
muscular relaxants in the clinical range is undesirable
because of the side effects of tachycardia and broncho-
spasm, whereas m,-selective muscarinic receptor antag-
onist activity that occurs in the dose of the neuromuscu-
lar relaxant used clinically is desirable as it results in
decreases in airway tone and salivary secretions. galla-
mine, a neuromuscular blocker no longer used because

 
*/ neuromuscular relaxants block muscarinic receptors

isl
of

'q

of a high prevalence of undesirable side effects, was
later discovered to be a highly selective m, muscarinic
receptor antagonist.’

because lung and most other tissues express a mixed
population of muscarinic receptors, and because the
differences in affinity for even subtype-selective musca-
rinic antagonists are often minimal, the estimation of
the affinity of the neuromuscular blockers for m, and
m; receptors cannot be calculated with any degree of
precision in tissues coexpressing multiple muscarinic
receptor subtypes. pure populations of muscarinic re-
ceptors in a tissue provide a unique way of obtaining
pharmacologic profiles of each receptor subtype. until
recently, heart tissue was thought to express a pure
population of m, muscarinic receptors, but molecular
and functional evidence exists for the expression of
m, muscarinic receptors also.” many peripheral tissues,
such as smooth muscle of airway and gut, that express
m,; muscarinic receptors also express m, muscarinic
receptors; therefore, we used two separate cell lines,
one expressing the m, and the other expressing the m,
muscarinic receptor, to characterize a series of com-
monly used neuromuscular blocking drugs regarding
their affinities at the m, and m, muscarinic receptor.

materials and methods

drugs and reagents

 xxxd2959xxx  and rocuronium were gifts from or-
ganon (west orange, nj); doxacurium,  xxxd2658xxx ,
and atracurium were gifts from glaxo-wellcome (re-
search triangle park, nc). pancuronium and galla-
mine were purchased from sigma (st. louis, mo).
the muscarinic receptor antagonist *h-qnb was pur-
chased from amersham life science (arlington
heights, il). all drugs were dissolved in dh,o. chi-
nese hamster ovary (cho) cells stably transfected
with complementary deoxyribonucleic acid encoding
the rat m, muscarinic receptor were purchased from
the american type culture collection (rockville,
md). chinese hamster ovary cells stably transfected
with complementary deoxyribonucleic acid encoding
the human m, muscarinic receptor were provided by
norman lee, ph.d. (the institute for genome re-
search, rockville, md).

cell culture
chinese hamster ovary cells stably transfected with
either the m, or m; muscarinic receptor were grown in

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

dulbecco’s modified essential medium (dmem) media
containing 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotic agents
(100 u/ml  xxxd2871xxx  sodium, 100 pg/ml streptomycin
sulfate, 0.25 g/ml  xxxd164xxx , and 100 u/ml nys-
tatin). cells were cultured in t500 flasks (500 cm”) at
37°c in a humidified atmosphere of 5% co,/95% air
and harvested at confluence.

preparation of chinese hamster ovary cell

membranes

at confluence, culture media were removed from
flasks. cells were incubated in lysis buffer (10 mm
hepes, 2 mm ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 100 [im
pmsf, ph 8.0) at 37°c in a carbon dioxide incubator
until detached (20-40 min). lysed cells were centri-
fuged at 48,000 x g (sorvall rc-5b with ss-34 rotor,
newton, ct) for 20 min at 4°c. cold hepes buffer (100
mm, ph 7.4) was used to resuspend the pellet after the
removal of the supernatant. the lysates were washed
two additional times, and the final pellet was resus-
pended in 6 ml of hepes buffer at 2-5 mg/ml and
stored at —70°c until used for radioligand binding
assays.

saturation radioligand binding

forty micrograms of cho cell membrane proteins
was incubated with increasing concentrations of the
radioligand *h-qnb (47 ci/mmol; 0.05 -3.00 nm) in the
presence or absence of atropine (2 um) in binding
buffer (40 mm kh,po4, 160 mm k,hpo, in 50 mm nacl,
ph 7.4). all radioligand experiments were incubated
for 2 h at room temperature in a final volume of 1 ml.
preliminary experiments confirmed that the 2-h incuba-
tion period was adequate to achieve equilibrium bind-
ing. all binding experiments were terminated by filtra-
tion through gf/b glass fiber filters and washed three
times with 5 ml of cold 0.9% nacl using a cell harvester
(brandell, gaithersburg, md). filters were immersed in
5 ml of econo scintillation fluid, stored overnight, and
counted in a scintillation counter (beckman ls 5000
td; beckman, fullerton, ca) with an efficiency of 45 -
50%. specifically bound counts were analyzed by linear
regression after scatchard transformation using the
ebda computer program’ to obtain the line of best fit.

competitive radioligand binding assays

forty micrograms of cho cell membrane protein was
incubated with *h-qnb (0.18 nm) and muscle relaxants
of increasing concentrations (10 '°- 10 * m), under con-

 
~

46

hou et al.

ditions described previously for saturation experiments.
the chosen radioligand concentration (0.18 nm) for the
competition experiments was 3.6 times the equilibrium
constant (ky) of the m, muscarinic receptor and 1 x
k, of the m, muscarinic receptor. the competitive dis-
placement of *h-qnb by increasing concentrations of
muscle relaxants was analyzed by nonlinear regression.
a reiterative curve-fitting program, inplot 4.0 (graph
pad, san diego, ca) was used to calculate the relative
binding affinity (ic5)) values using a four-parameter
logistic equation (log scale) with the slope factor set
tonal

statistical analysis

the ky of “h-qnb and the receptor numbers of the
m, or m,; muscarinic receptor in cho cell membranes
were calculated from radioligand saturation binding
assays after scatchard transformation. the k, was deter-
mined from the negative reciprocal of the slope of the
line and the maximum number of binding sites (byax),
were determined from the x-intercept. ic; values were
obtained by nonlinear regression analysis of competi-
tive radioligand displacement curves using the values
from the reiterative curve-fitting program inplot using
a four-parameter logistic equation (log scale) with the
slope factor set to —1.

results

all data are presented as mean + se unless otherwise
indicated. the cho m, and cho m, cells were first
characterized for the level of expression of muscarinic
receptors and for receptor affinity for the antagonist °h-
qnb and the agonist carbachol. saturation of specific
binding was achieved in the membranes of the cho
m, or cho m, cells over the range of *>h-qnb used
(0.01 -3.00 mm; n = 3; figs. 1a and 1b). hill coefficients
were 1.03 + 0.14 and 0.92 + 0.04 for m, and m, musca-
rinic receptors, respectively, which was indicative of a
single class of binding sites in both cho m, and cho
m, cells (n = 3). scatchard transformation of saturation
binding showed that the cho m, membranes contained
681 + 7 fmol/mg protein of receptor (bmax) with an
affinity (—log ky) of 10.3 + 0.1 and that cho m, mem-
branes contained 580 + 67 fmol/mg protein of receptor
with affinity (—log kg) of 9.7 + 0.007 ( = 3; figs. 1a
and 1b). forty micrograms of membrane proteins and
0.18 nm °h-qnb yielded specific binding rates of 92%

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

 

   
  

m2 muscarinic receptor

 
 
 

 

  

 

a
100 °
o
£
a 50 > ©
s &
3 g :
° 9-00 30050 —*"750
"7 ~ bound ( fmol/mg membrane protein )
4 4 4 j
az 5 5 1 2 3 4
se 3h-qnb (nm)
w<
oo =
[x] 3 mz muscarinic receptor
ow
b yn
0 100
s :
|
ec
ly) ©
®
=
50 &
vo
€
3 .
ae
a
° 9 0 300 500700
bound ( fmol/mg membrane protein )
0 l 1 l h
0 1 2 3 4
sh-qnb (nm)

fig. 1. saturation radioligand binding of *h-qnb to m, (a)
or m, (b) muscarinic receptors stably transfected in chinese
hamster ovary cells. *h-qnb (0.05—3 nm) was incubated for 2
h at room temperature with 40 4g of membranes prepared
from chinese hamster ovary cells overexpressing the m, (a)
or m; (b) muscarinic receptor in the presence or absence of
2 pm atropine. saturation of specific binding was achieved
over the range of *h-qnb concentrations used (n = 3). values
are mean + sem. the insets show that representative scatch-
ard transformations of saturation binding allowed determina-
tion of receptor affinity for *h-qnb and quantity of total recep-
tors.

for the m, muscarinic receptor and 89% for the m,
muscarinic receptor.

in membranes prepared from cells expressing either
the m, or the m,; muscarinic receptor, carbachol dis-
placed *h-qnb with two affinity sites, which is ex-
pected for agonists that bind to g protein-coupled re-
ceptors (data not shown). these two affinity sites repre-
sent the receptor associated with the g protein (high
affinity) and receptor disassociated from the g protein
(low affinity). chinese hamster ovary cells expressing
either the m, or the m; muscarinic receptor showed a
biphasic displacement curve for the competitive bind-

 
l=

=

=

747

neuromuscular relaxants block muscarinic receptors

 

table 1. binding affinity (ic,.) of neuromuscular relaxants
for m, and m, muscarinic receptors

rm

 

muscle relaxants mo ms [peak serum]*
pancuronium 0.28 1.2 ais
succinylcholine 174 123

 xxxd2658xxx  ae 23 pane
doxacurium 39 145 o31
atracurium 5.0 1.4 (ele
rocuronium 3.0 19 anas
 xxxd2174xxx  0.59 28 8172
pipercuronium 5.8 13 355

 

“values are expressed as um and are the mean values measured in at least
three experiments for each neuromuscular relaxant.

ing of carbachol and *h-qnb, with —log k, affinities of
4.77 and 6.68 for cho m, and 4.23 and 6.66 for cho
m,, respectively (n = 3).

in competitive binding experiments using the muscle
relaxants and *h-qnb, the ic;5 values of each muscle
relaxant at the m, and m; muscarinic receptors were
determined by nonlinear regression analysis (table 1).
at least three separate competitive displacements were
performed for each muscle relaxant. all muscle relax-
ants tested (pancuronium,  xxxd2174xxx , succinylcholine,
atracurium,  xxxd2658xxx ,  xxxd2959xxx , doxacurium,
and rocuronium) displaced >h-qnb from m, and m,
muscarinic receptors in a dose-dependent manner (figs.
2 and 3). there was a wide variation, however, in the
affinity of muscle relaxants for both the m, and m,
muscarinic receptors. among the muscle relaxants eval-
uated, pancuronium had the highest affinity for the m,
receptor, with an ic;, of 0.28 um. newer-generation
muscle relaxants ( xxxd2658xxx , doxacurium, rocuro-
nium, and  xxxd2959xxx ) had lower affinities for the
m, muscarinic receptor (table 1). the relative order
of potency for the m, muscarinic receptor (highest to
lowest) was pancuronium,  xxxd2174xxx , rocuronium, atra-
curium,  xxxd2959xxx , doxacurium,  xxxd2658xxx , and
succinylcholine.

in general, the affinity of the muscle relaxants for the
m; muscarinic receptor was lower than the affinity for
the m, muscarinic receptor (table 1). pancuronium had
the highest affinity for the m, muscarinic receptor (ics,
= 1.2 um) among the relaxants evaluated. the newer-
generation muscle relaxants ( xxxd2658xxx , doxacurium,
rocuronium, and  xxxd2959xxx ) had much lower affin-
ities for the m; muscarinic receptor than pancuronium,
with ic;) values ranging from 1.4- 145.0 pu. the rela-

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

tive order of potency for the m, muscarinic receptor
(highest to lowest) was pancuronium, atracurium, pi
pecuronium, rocuronium,  xxxd2658xxx ,  xxxd2174xxx , suc-
cinylcholine, and doxacurium.

discussion

the affinities of neuromuscular blocking agents for
the m, and m, muscarinic receptors were characterized
in an effort to relate the affinities of the neuromuscular
relaxants for muscarinic receptors with their known
clinical side effects. this study performed in cells with
pure populations of either the m, or m, muscarinic
receptor allowed affinity measurements without the

ms muscarinic receptor

® pancuronium
o rocuronium
4  xxxd2658xxx 
4  xxxd2959xxx 
@ doxacurium

  
 
  
 

100

ul
oo

  

°
i

1 t

6 -5 -4 -3

ah
°
\
0
\
oo
!
n

@ pancuronium

o succinylcholine
@ atracurium

©  xxxd2174xxx 

 
 
 
  
 

(% maximum)

1005

sh-qnb specifically bound
ul
°

 

 

o

aie ae tan ous sui acs
log muscle relaxant concentration

fig. 2. representative competitive displacement of *h-qnb by
neuromuscular relaxants in membranes prepared from chi-
nese hamster ovary cells expressing the m, muscarinic recep-
tor. *h-qnb (0.18 nm; 3.6 < ky of  xxxg448xxx ) was incubated
with increasing concentrations of neuromuscular relaxants.
pancuronium had the highest affinity for the m, muscarinic
receptor compared with rocuronium,  xxxd2658xxx , pipecuro-
nium, and doxacurium (top), and succinylcholine, atracu-
rium, and  xxxd2174xxx  (bottom).
748

hou et al.

 

 

 

 xxxg449xxx 

@ pancuronium

 
 
 

100 © rocuronium
4  xxxd2658xxx 
4  xxxd2959xxx 
@® doxacurium
50

  
    

 

 

 

 

 

od
100 e e235 pancuronium

e
o succinylcholine
e
°

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

atracurium
 xxxd2174xxx 

 

 

 

sh-qnb specifically bound
(% maximum)

50

 

0 1 1 l n 1 hd “is
oom si. omm s43)
log muscle relaxant concentration
fig. 3. representative competitive displacement of *h-qnb by
neuromuscular relaxants in membranes prepared from chi-
nese hamster cells expressing the m, muscarinic receptor. *h-
qnb (0.18 nm; 1 < ky of m, receptor) was incubated with in-
creasing concentrations of neuromuscular relaxants. pancuro-
nium had the highest affinity for the m, muscarinic receptor
compared with rocuronium,  xxxd2658xxx ,  xxxd2959xxx , and
doxacurium (top) and succinylcholine, atracurium, and galla-
mine (bottom).

competing effect of additional muscarinic receptor sub-
types in the same cell. this eliminated a potential diffi-
culty, seen in previous studies of native tissues in which
multiple muscarinic receptor subtypes were present,
confounding individual subtype affinity measurements.”

all neuromuscular blocking agents evaluated in the
current study had measurable affinities for both the m,
and m, muscarinic receptors, but there was a wide varia-
tion in their affinities for both receptors. in general, the
affinity measurements determined in the cho m, cells
were similar to those reported in cardiac membranes,
which are thought to predominantly express m, musca-
rinic receptors. less similarity was found between the

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

affinities of muscle relaxants measured in the cho m,
cells and those reported in the literature for tissues
such as ileum. although ileum was originally thought
to contain a relatively pure m, muscarinic population,
a mixture of m, and m, muscarinic receptors is now
known to exist, with a predominance of the m, sub-
type.'° in several studies, no differences were found
in the affinities of muscle relaxants for the muscarinic
receptor in heart or ileum, which is likely due to the
predominance of the m, subtype in both tissues.*"’

the clinical side effects induced by neuromuscular
blocking agents are thought to be caused by their inter-
action with muscarinic receptors in the heart and air-
way. muscle relaxants can interact with the muscarinic
receptor in two ways. they can bind directly to the
ligand binding site with agonist or antagonist proper-
ties, or, alternatively, muscle relaxants can interact with
another region of the receptor, which causes a change
in the characteristics of the binding site thus causing a
decrease in ligand binding (a negative allosteric effect,
e.g.,  xxxd2174xxx )'” or an increase in ligand binding (a
positive allosteric effect, e.g., alcuronium).'* in the cur-
rent study, no attempt was made to distinguish between
competitive antagonism versus negative allosteric ef-
fects of the muscle relaxants, as the clinical effect of
either interaction is the same; the muscle relaxant
would decrease the binding of acetylcholine to the mus-
carinic receptor.

in the current study, pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx  had
the highest affinities for the m, muscarinic receptor,
whereas pancuronium and atracurium had the highest
affinities for the m, muscarinic receptor. the affinities
of pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx  for the m, receptor mea-
sured in the current study in a stably transfected cell
line are in accordance with previous studies performed
using rat heart membranes that predominantly express
m, muscarinic receptors.*'* rocuronium, atracurium,
and  xxxd2959xxx  had lower affinities for the m, musca-
rinic receptor than did pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx .
data from the current study are also consistent with a
study in rat atria in which rocuronium had a higher
affinity for muscarinic receptors than  xxxd2959xxx  (k,
= 13.6 and 27 pm, respectively).’* atracurium in this
study had an affinity for the m, receptor similar to the
affinity reported in rat atria.'' one expected clinical
consequence of blockade of the cardiac m, muscarinic
receptor is tachycardia, which occurs clinically with
 xxxd2174xxx  and pancuronium but is not reported with
the newer-generation muscle relaxants. the results of

 
wy) neuromuscular relaxants block muscarinic receptors

 

our study are consistent with this mechanism of muscle
relaxant-induced tachycardia in that  xxxd2174xxx  and
pancuronium were found to have the highest affinities
for the m, muscarinic receptor, with affinity values
within the range of serum concentrations achieved with
clinical use. pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx  had ic;, affin-
ity values for the m, muscarinic receptor of 0.28 and
0.59 um, respectively, which are 14- and 137-fold lower,
respectively, than the concentrations of these muscle
relaxants achieved with routine clinical use, suggesting
high m, muscarinic receptor blockade with these
agents. the muscle relaxant with the next highest affin-
ity for m, muscarinic receptors was rocuronium, which
had an affinity ic;, value of 3.0 wm—a value only 1.6-
fold lower than the concentration achieved with clinical
use of rocuronium. the other muscle relaxants evalu-
ated had affinities substantially lower than the serum
concentrations achieved with normal clinical use.
okanlami et al.” from our laboratory previously evalu-
ated the interaction of the nondepolarizing muscle re-
laxants pancuronium,  xxxd2658xxx ,  xxxd2959xxx , and
doxacurium at m, and m, receptors in guinea pig heart
and lung im vivo and found that the rank order of po-
tency of the affinities (highest to lowest) for the m,
muscarinic receptor was similar to that seen in the cur-
rent study — pancuronium,  xxxd2959xxx ,  xxxd2658xxx ,
and doxacurium — but they were unable to establish a
rank order of potency for the m, muscarinic receptor.
the affinities of pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx  for the
m; muscarinic receptor measured in the current study
in cells that express only m, muscarinic receptors were
lower than that reported for the rat ileum.* this discrep-
ancy is likely explained by the measurement of affinity
values in a tissue with a mixed population of muscarinic
receptor subtypes (rat ileum),'° as opposed to the cur-
rent study in which affinity was measured in cells ex-
pressing only the m; muscarinic receptor subtype.
muscarinic receptor control of airway tone is compli-
cated. airway smooth muscle expresses both m, and
m,; muscarinic receptors, whereas parasympathetic
postganglionic nerves express m, muscarinic receptors.
the net effect of neuromuscular relaxant - induced ef-
fects on airways depends on the relative blockade of
m, and m,; muscarinic receptors. because m, muscarinic
receptor activation is associated with initiation of air-
way smooth muscle contraction, agents that are potent
antagonists at the m; muscarinic receptor should inhibit
bronchoconstriction despite the m, muscarinic recep-
tor blockade and the increased release of acetylcholine

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

from parasympathetic postganglionic nerves. there-
fore, pancuronium, which is more potent than galla-
mine as an m; antagonist, should not and clinically does
not appear to be associated with bronchoconstriction
because pancuronium is a potent m, muscarinic recep-
tor antagonist at doses in the clinical range.

the current study of relative affinities of neuromuscu-
lar relaxants for muscarinic receptors is not a direct
analysis of the clinical side effects of these drugs; how-
ever, the results suggest a possible role of muscarinic
receptors in the mechanism of muscle relaxant -in-
duced tachycardia by drugs such as  xxxd2174xxx  and panc-
uronium due to m, muscarinic receptor blockade. more-
over, the simultaneous blockade of m, and m, musca-
rinic receptors in the airway by relaxants would also
explain a relative lack of clinical effect on airway tone,
because blockade of the m, receptor on the airway
muscle prevents constriction by the increased release
of acetylcholine by blockade of m, muscarinic receptors
on parasympathetic nerves.

references

1. caulfield mp: muscarinic receptors: coupling and function.
pharmacol ther 1993; 58:319-79

2. nedoma j, dorofeeva na, tucek s, shelkovnikoy sa, danilov
af: interaction of the neuromuscular blocking drugs alcuronium,
 xxxd1820xxx ,  xxxd2174xxx , pancuronium, ritebronium, tercuronium
and  xxxd3456xxx  with muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the
heart and ileum. naunyn-schmiedebergs arch pharmacol 1985:
329:176-81

3. fryer ad, maclagan j: pancuronium and  xxxd2174xxx  are antago-
nists for pre- and post-junctional muscarinic receptors in the guinea
pig lung. naunyn-schmiedebergs arch pharmacol 1987; 335:367-71

4. difrancesco d, ducouret p, robinson rb: muscarinic modula-
tion of cardiac rate at low acetylcholine concentrations. science
1989; 243:669-71

5. vettermann j, beck kc, lindahl sg, brichant jf, rehder k:
actions of  xxxd1993xxx , isoflurane, vecuronium, atracurium and pancur-
onium on pulmonary resistance in dogs. anesthesiology 1988;
69:688 -95

6. roffel af, meurs h, elzinger crs, zaagsma j: characterization
of the muscarinic receptor subtype involved in phosphoinositide
metabolism in bovine tracheal smooth muscle. br j pharmacol 1990:
99:293 -6

7. mitchell rw, kelly e, leff ar: reduced activity of acetylcholin-
esterase in canine tracheal smooth muscle homogenates after active
immune-sensitization. am j respir cell mol biol 1991; 5:56-62

8. munson pj, rodbard d: ligand: a versatile computerized ap-
proach for characterization of ligand-binding systems. anal biochem
1980; 107:220-39

9. okanlami oa, fryer ad, hirshman ca: interaction of nondepo-
larizing muscle relaxants with m, and m, muscarinic receptors in
guinea pig lung and heart. anesthesiology 1996; 84:155-61
70

hou et al.

10. giraldo e, vigano m, hammer r, ladinsky h: characterization
of muscarinic receptors in guinea pig ileum longitudinal smooth mus-
cle. mol pharmacol 1988; 33:617-25

11. musilkova j, starshinova la, shelkovnikov s, tucek s: interac-
tion of the neuromuscular blocking drug atracurium with muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors. physiol res 1991; 40:293 -304

12. spina d, minshall e, goldie rg, page cp: the effect of allosteric
antagonists in modulating muscarinic m,-receptor function in guinea-
pig isolated trachea. br j pharmacol 1994; 112:901-5

13. hejnova l, tucek s, el-fakahany e: positive and negative allo-
steric interactions on muscarinic receptors. eur j pharmacol 1995;
291:427-30

14. appadu bl, lambert dg: studies on the interaction of steroidal

anesthesiology, v 88, no 3, mar 1998

 

neuromuscular blocking drugs with cardiac muscarinic receptors. br

j anaesth 1994; 72:80-8

15. basta sj: clinical pharmacology of  xxxd2658xxx  chloride: a re-
view. j clin anesth 1992; 4:153-63

16. gariepy l, varin f, donati f, salib y, bevan d: influence of
aging on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of doxacu-
rium. clin pharmacol ther 1993; 53:340-7

17. parker cj, hunter jm: the relationship between volume of
distribution of atracurium and body weight. br j anaesth 1993;
70:443-5

18. shanks ca, funk di, avram mj, henthorn tk:  xxxd2174xxx  ad-
ministered by combined bolus and infusion. anesth analg 1982;
61:847 -52

 
