perspectives in diabetes
ppar- : adipogenic regulator and
thiazolidinedione receptor
b.m. spiegelman

the past several years have seen an explosive increase
in our understanding of the transcriptional basis of
adipose cell differentiation. in particular, a key role
has been illustrated for ppar- , a member of the
 xxxg1594xxx  superfamily. ppar- has also
been recently identified as the major functional receptor for the thiazolidinedione class of insulin-sensitizing
drugs. this review examines the evidence that has
implicated this transcription factor in the processes of
adipogenesis and systemic insulin action. in addition,
several models are discussed that may explain how a single protein can be involved in these related but distinct physiological actions. i also point out several
important areas where our knowledge is incomplete
and more research is needed. finally, i discuss how
advances in our understanding of nuclear receptor
function, particularly the docking of cofactors in a
ligand-dependent fashion, should lead to improved
drugs that utilize the ppar- system for the treatment
of insulin resistance. diabetes 47:507–514, 1998

a

dipose tissue has been viewed historically as a
passive player in the regulation of energy homeostasis, storing energy in times of nutritional
excess and releasing that energy when needed in
times of nutritional deprivation. however, the last decade or
so has seen a rather startling revision of this view. it is now
appreciated that adipose cells secrete a large number of
bioactive molecules, including  xxxg434xxx ,  xxxg99xxx ,
 xxxg2296xxx - (tnf- ), leptin,  xxxg78xxx / xxxg78xxx ,
and  xxxg2058xxx  (1). although the roles
of these molecules (and probably more to come) remain to
be fully elucidated, it is clear that tnf- and leptin are bona
fide signaling molecules, involved in insulin resistance and the
control of food intake, respectively. this new appreciation of
the interactive role of the adipose cell in energy metabolism
from the department of cancer biology, dana-farber cancer institute,
and the department of cell biology, harvard medical school, boston,
massachusetts.
address correspondence and reprint requests to dr. bruce m. spiegelman, dana-farber cancer institute, 44 binney st., boston, ma 02115. e-mail:
bruce_spiegelman@dfci.harvard.edu.
received for publication 30 december 1997 and accepted in revised
form 5 january 1998.
b.m.s. has received honoraria from parke davis-warner lambert.
add1/srebp1, adipocyte determination and differentiation factor
1/sterol response element binding protein 1; c/ebp, caat/enhancer binding protein; etya, 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraynoic acid; k d, dissociation constant;
p pa r - , peroxisome proliferator activated receptor- ; rxr, retinoid x
receptor; tnf- ,  xxxg2296xxx - ; tzd, thiazolidinedione.
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

and insulin sensitivity has added a further dimension to our
understanding of this cell type. it has also added urgency to
our need to understand adipose cell differentiation and gene
expression.
this review will describe the identification and role of
ppar- as a central regulator of fat cell differentiation. it will
also review the discovery and function of this protein as the
major receptor for the thiazolidinedione (tzd) class of
insulin-sensitizing drugs. with the introduction of troglitazone (under brand-names such as rezulin,  xxxd3448xxx ), the
first ppar- ligand of the tzd class, into clinical practice in
1997 for the treatment of niddm, it is especially important
to point out where the major gaps in our understanding of this
receptor-ligand system lie. finally, i will describe some
potential new therapeutic opportunities that have been
opened up by the recent progress.
ppar- and adipogenesis

the cloning of mammalian ppar- and its link with adipogenesis came from our analysis of the adipose-specific
enhancer from the ap2 gene, an abundant adipocyte-specific
fatty-acid binding protein. mutational analysis and study of
protein binding to this 500–base-pair piece of dna identified
a key nuclear factor, termed  xxxg187xxx , that bound to two sites
(are6 and are7) in this enhancer (2). this dna binding
activity was observed only in extracts of fat cells. cloning of
this factor (3) revealed it to be a member of the peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor (ppar) subfamily of nuclear
hormone receptors and, in particular, the mammalian
homolog of xenopus ppar- , which had been cloned earlier
(4). several other labs also cloned mammalian ppar- independently, through homology screens that sought new members of the ppar family (5,6). it is now accepted that there
are three related but quite distinct ppar proteins, ppar- ,
ppar- (also called ppar- , nuc-1, or  xxxg1806xxx ), and ppar- .
ppar- is expressed in an adipose-selective fashion in both
rodents and humans, being 10- to 30-fold higher in fat than in
most other tissues (3). interestingly, two forms of the protein,
1 and 2, exist as products of alternative promoter usage.
the two forms differ in that ppar- 2 has an nh2-terminal
extension of 30 amino acids. in addition, ppar- 2 is found
selectively in fat tissue, whereas 1 is expressed at low levels in many tissues (7,8). the functional meaning of these
splice variants is not yet clear.
our early work indicated that ppar- , like other ppar-s,
heterodimerizes with the retinoid x receptor (rxr) and
activates the ap2 enhancer in fibroblasts, a cell type in which
this enhancer ordinarily has little or no activity (3). the
507

ppar- : adipogenic regulator and thiazolidinedione receptor

ppar- /rxr heterodimer binds to direct repeats of hormone response elements separated by one base, so-called
dr-1 sites. while no bona fide ligands for ppar- were
known at this time, a diverse group of activators, mainly
fatty-acid derivatives such as 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraynoic acid
(etya), were known to activate ppar- (4); high levels of
this compound will also activate ppar- . strong activation
of the ap2 enhancer by ppar- and rxr requires the application of a ppar activator, an rxr ligand, or both. pparand rxr also transactivated another bona fide fat enhancer,
that from the pepck gene (9). this led to the most ambitious
question: were ppar- expression and activation sufficient
to give a full adipocyte differentiation response in fibroblasts? in fact, retroviral expression of ppar- in many
fibroblast cell lines, followed by application of an activator
such as etya, gave abundant differentiation that included
lipid accumulation, changes in cell morphology, and expression of most if not all of the genes that characterize the
adipocyte phenotype (10). with the identification of relatively high-affinity ligands (see below) it is now clear that
ppar- , expressed at or below the levels seen in fat tissue,
can convert nearly every fibroblastic cell in a given culture
into a fully differentiated adipocyte.
ppar- interacts with other transcription factors in potentially important ways (11), as illustrated in fig. 1.
caat/enhancer binding protein (c/ebp)- , though
expressed in many tissues, is induced in adipogenesis and
itself has adipogenic action when expressed at high levels
(12). when expressed at levels equivalent to those seen in fat,
it can cooperate powerfully with ppar- , even allowing a
significant adipogenic response in the absence of added
ppar- ligands. precisely how these two transcription factors
interact remains an important mechanistic problem. this
ability of ppar- and c/ebp- to promote differentiation is
not limited to fibroblasts, as simultaneous expression of both
of these factors and activation of ppar- can cause “transdifferentiation” of cultured myoblasts to adipocytes (13).
another factor that can cooperate with ppar- is
adipocyte determination and differentiation factor 1/sterol
response element binding protein 1 (add1/srebp1). this
transcription factor, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix
family, was independently identified as a potential regulator
of adipogenesis and fatty-acid metabolism (14), and as a key
factor in cholesterol homeostasis (15). coexpression of
add1/srebp1 with ppar- increases the transcriptional
activity of ppar- , even without adding a ppar- ligand
(16). because add1/srebp1 can increase the expression of
several key genes of fatty-acid metabolism, such as fatty acid
synthetase and  xxxg1337xxx , it seems plausible that this
cooperation is through the generation of endogenous
ligands for ppar- . other key players in the transcriptional
control of adipogenesis are c/ebp- and - . these factors
appear to be very important in the induction of ppar- in
adipogenic differentiation. indeed, conditional expression
of c/ebp- and - has been shown to yield expression levels of ppar- equivalent to normal fat cells; a very strong
differentiation response can be seen in these cells upon
application of ppar- ligands (17). this data has led to a
model of a transcriptional cascade that is dependent on the
expression of c/ebp- and - to turn on ppar- . the binding of ligands, perhaps generated by the action of
add1/srebp1, triggers the full differentiation response.
508

fig. 1. transcriptional cascade in adipogenesis. ppa r - and the
c/ebp family interact to control adipose-cell diff e r e n t i a t i o n .
c/ebp- and - are involved in the transcriptional control of ppar. adipogenesis is stimulated upon ppar- activation by ligands.
c/ebp- is activated later in the differentiation process but can
functionally synergize with ppa r - and may also be involved in
maintaining high levels of ppar- expression. add1/srebp1 has
been implicated in the control of several key genes of fatty-acid
metabolism and can promote the transcriptional activity of ppar- ,
probably through the formation of endogenous ligands.

c/ebp- both cooperates with ppar- to yield a more powerful differentiation and may be needed to maintain pparexpression at high levels. it may be noteworthy that a
binding site for c/ebp family members has been noted in
both the ppar- 1 and - 2 promoters (18).
tzds as ligands for ppar-

a key report that led to identification of tzds as ligands for
ppar- came from harris and kletzien (19), who showed
that  xxxd2958xxx  increased transcriptional activity from the
ap2 enhancer and apparently did so through the differentiation-linked dna site (are6) described above. when we
cloned and identified the are6 binding factor as the ppar/rxr heterodimer, two groups independently asked
whether the tzd drugs were acting as direct agonists for
ppar- . these studies identified  xxxd3147xxx  and  xxxd2958xxx  as direct ligands of ppar- with positive activity on
gene transcription (20,21). importantly, the tzds were also
shown to be highly selective for ppar- , as they had very
minimal activity toward ppar- or ppar- . as expected
from the data cited above, the tzds were potent and effective at stimulating adipogenesis in cells containing endogenous or ectopically expressed ppar- (20,21). this data
also made sense of earlier reports in which the tzds had
been shown to stimulate adipogenesis in preadipocyte cell
lines, though the mechanism of action of the drugs in these
early studies was not known.
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

b.m. spiegelman

the evidence that ppar- is the major receptor mediating
the antidiabetic activity of the tzds is now very strong, based
on the following multiple lines of pharmacological evidence.
1. each of the tzd drugs binds to and activates ppar- in the
same concentration range that has antidiabetic activity (22).
2. among many tzds surveyed, the rank order of potency of
their antidiabetic activities closely matches the rank order
of their affinities for ppar- (22).
3. potent and selective ligands for ppar- outside of the
tzd class have now been developed on the basis of their
activation of ppar- . these have antidiabetic actions in
preclinical models of insulin resistance and diabetes (t.
willson, personal communication).
4. ligand stimulation of rxr, the heterodimeric partner of
ppar- , also improves insulin sensitivity in vivo (23).
5. no other receptor for the tzd drugs has been identified.
taken together, these data make a compelling case that
ppar- is the major functioning receptor for the common
tzd actions in diabetes. however, it is possible that individual drugs of this class may have additional targets that contribute to their therapeutic actions or to their side effects.
one concern surrounding the clinical use of tzds is that
their adipogenesis-promoting effects could be detrimental
to patients with niddm, who all too often are overweight
to begin with. in therapeutic doses, it is clear that the tzds
do promote weight gain and increase fat deposition in
rodent models (e.g., 24). whether this is primarily due to
increased insulin sensitivity, more fat cell differentiation, or
a combination of the two is not clear. however, clinical use
in humans has not shown these drugs to induce significant
weight gain. this may reflect the fact that increased adipogenesis per se would not necessarily cause obesity; recent
evidence indicates that tzds may increase fat cell number
while simultaneously decreasing fat cell size (24). alternatively, it may indicate that preadipocytes in adult humans are
relatively resistant to the differentiative effects of the tzds.
three other side effects observed with the tzds deserve
mention. a small increase in plasma volume is consistently
observed in patients undergoing treatment with troglitazone (25). if and how this relates to ppar- activation is not
clear, but this phenomenon does not seem to limit clinical
utility. of more concern is an increased adipose cell formation observed in the bone marrow of rodents treated
with certain tzds. fatty transformation of bone marrow is
thought to be a very serious condition, and the considerable
published data linking ppar- and adipogenesis, including
stromal cells of the bone marrow (26), suggest that this
may well be a consequence of ppar- activation. on the
other hand, this is only observed at high doses of tzds, so
it is likely that a reasonable therapeutic window is available
between beneficial effects in niddm and the potentially
deleterious effects on stromal elements in the bone marrow.
most recently, liver toxicity has been observed in a small percentage of patients taking troglitazone (27), leading to a
withdrawal of this drug from the market in england. it is
unclear whether the hepatatoxic effect is mediated by activation of ppar- or whether it represents a nonspecific
effect of troglitazone. in the u.s., the drug is now given
with recommendations that liver enzyme levels be periodically monitored.
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

natural ligands. radiolabeled tzd ligands have enabled
development of a displacement assay that allowed a search for
natural ligands of ppar- . this question is interesting in two
ways. first, the identity of natural ligands may provide
insights into new therapeutic approaches. second, knowledge of the endogenous ligand will allow investigation of
whether some insulin-resistant states are due to a deficiency
in the endogenous ligand for ppar- . this seems plausible
when one considers that much endocrine pathology—such as
hypothyroidism and adrenal insufficiency (addison’s disease)
or excess (cushing’s syndrome)—results from dysregulation
of the endogenous ligands for other nuclear receptors.
the initial screening for natural ligands examined many
 xxxd2154xxx  and fatty-acid derivatives for binding activity. the
first natural ligand described was an unusual prostanoid 15deoxy 12,14pg j2 (21,28). more recently, several polyunsaturated  xxxd2154xxx , such as linoleic acid, have also been found
to bind directly to ppar- (29). although all of these molecules must be considered as potentially important ligands in
vivo, it should be emphasized that their affinities are relatively
low, in the range of 2–50 µmol/l. this contrasts with the
higher affinities that most nuclear receptors have for their
endogenous ligands (dissociation constants [kd s] in the low
nmol/l range). although 2–50 µmol/l is not necessarily out of
the concentration range at which  xxxd2154xxx  such as polyunsaturated  xxxd2154xxx  circulate in vivo, it is not clear that these
molecules can reach the nucleus of relevant tissues (fat, muscle, liver) at these concentrations. fatty-acid levels inside
cells are usually tightly regulated through the actions of binding proteins in the cell membrane and cytoplasms, as well as
by the fatty-acid acylation machinery. still, the notion of
whether ppar- is a “promiscuous” receptor for many fatty
acids with low affinity or has a more limited number of specific, high-affinity ligands has been the subject of much speculation and interesting debate. more research is required.
insulin sensitization by tzds: tissue targets and
mechanisms

the work described above identifying ppar- as the primary target for the antidiabetic action of the tzds has also
presented two paradoxes. how can a receptor expressed predominantly in fat tissue improve insulin sensitivity in all of
the major insulin-sensitive tissues? additionally, given the
well-established connection between obesity and insulin
resistance, how can we reconcile the enhancement of
insulin sensitivity by a receptor known to promote adipogenesis? there are no clear answers to these questions yet,
but it is important to recognize that adipose cell differentiation is not identical to obesity. obesity is primarily a disorder of energy balance, where energy intake exceeds energy
expenditure. although an increase in fat cell number may
accompany great obesity, an increased fat cell number per
se without an increase in total energy stored would not necessarily lead to insulin resistance. there are several possible
cellular and/or molecular explanations for how the tzds
might work in vivo (fig. 2).
direct effects on fat, muscle, and liver. although pparlevels are 10–30 times higher in fat than in muscle or liver,
this receptor is expressed in these latter tissues. pharmacological doses of tzds may be sufficient to stimulate pparat all of these sites and hence achieve alterations in gene
expression that can reduce insulin resistance. in addition,
509

ppar- : adipogenic regulator and thiazolidinedione receptor

a

b

fig. 2. tissue targets for tzd drugs. in a, the
primary tissue target for the tzds is ppar- in
fat. effects on insulin action in other tissues
would then occur as a consequence of alterations in signaling molecules produced by fat,
such as free  xxxd2154xxx , tnf- , leptin, or others. alternatively (b), tzds may have direct
actions on ppar- in fat, muscle, and liver and
control the expression of genes that influence
insulin action in these tissues.

there is evidence from experiments in cell culture that activation of ppar- by ligands can increase the expression of
this receptor in a positive-feedback loop. it is entirely possible that ppar- levels are initially low in insulin-resistant
patients but become significantly elevated in muscle and
liver during tzd treatment. most recently, troglitazone has
been shown to improve insulin sensitivity in an experimental model of lipodystrophy in mice, suggesting that important
regulation of ppar- can occur in the absence or near
absence of fat (30).
effects on fat cell differentiation. as described above,
activation of ppar- by tzds promotes adipose-cell differentiation. in the absence of increased energy storage, this
would be expected to produce more fat cells of a smaller average size. because smaller adipose cells are usually more sensitive to insulin, such a differentiative response would be
expected to produce greater insulin-dependent glucose
uptake (24). in addition, because insulin is a powerful
antilipolytic agent, smaller fat cells with increased insulin
510

sensitivity would be expected to have lower relative rates of
lipolysis. because high levels of free  xxxd2154xxx  may be
causally involved in the induction of insulin resistance, this
could affect insulin sensitivity at distant sites such as muscle
and liver (e.g., 31,32). this mechanism would also be compatible with the so-called randle effect, where the tendency
of muscle to utilize glucose as an energy source is inversely
correlated with the use of  xxxd2154xxx  as an energy source.
there are also reports that tzd administration to rodents
greatly increases the amounts of brown adipose tissue
(33,34). considering that this tissue functions to dissipate
energy through the oxidation of  xxxd2154xxx , it could also
reduce circulating lipid levels and have a beneficial effect on
insulin sensitivity, as discussed above.
control of adipose-cell signaling. since it is now appreciated that adipose cells send molecular signals to other tissues participating in energy metabolism, it is possible that
ppar- activation controls one or more genes that regulate
systemic insulin sensitivity. two interesting candidate genes
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

b.m. spiegelman

in this regard are tnf- and leptin. a large and increasing
body of data suggests that tnf- is produced by adipose
cells and is overexpressed in obesity and insulin resistance
(1). in experimental obese animals, neutralization of tnfwith a soluble receptor-igg fusion protein showed a significant improvement in systemic insulin sensitivity (35). most
recently, experiments using genetic “knockouts” of the tnfligand or the  xxxd924xxx  tnf receptor definitively demonstrate a
crucial role for this cytokine in insulin resistance in vivo
(36). the role of tnf- in  xxxd2364xxx  resistance remains
to be determined, though a small study using an anti–tnfantibody in established niddm did not ameliorate hyperglycemia or hyperinsulinemia (37). tzds apparently have
significant effects on two branches of the tnf- system.
treatment of obese mice with  xxxd2958xxx  for 2 weeks
decreased adipose tnf- mrna by 50% (38). most recently,
tzds have been shown to block the ability of tnf- to interfere with the most proximal events of insulin signaling (39).
although tnf- treatment of cultured adipocytes blocks
insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin
receptor and  xxxg1198xxx , these tyrosine
phosphorylations occur normally in the presence of tnf- if
cells are pretreated for several hours with tzds. this effect
of the tzds has an apparent specificity for the insulin-signaling cascades because tnf- is able to induce the transcription factor nf b whether or not tzds are added. in an
independent series of experiments, similar effects of tzds
have also been observed in vivo, as application of troglitazone
to rats prevented the induction of insulin resistance caused
by an infusion of tnf- (40). tzds have also been implicated in the regulation of leptin expression. application of
tzds in vivo or to cultured adipose cells can cause a reduction in the expression of leptin mrna and protein (41,42).
although the role of leptin in insulin resistance is a controversial one, some reports indicate that leptin might interfere
with insulin signaling in certain cell types (e.g., 43). hence, a
role of the tzds through leptin must be considered possible.
finally, as mentioned above, the release of  xxxd2154xxx  during lipolysis has taken on potentially great significance, with
the recognition that these substrates may be important signaling molecules themselves. improvement of insulin signaling in fat by the tzds would be expected to reduce lipolysis and diminish whatever impact elevated circulating fatty
acids have in systemic insulin resistance. taken together,
these and other secreted fat-derived signaling molecules are
good candidates to play some considerable role in systemic
insulin resistance. regulation of these processes by tzds
through ppar- seems likely to contribute to their actions.
the quantitative nature of this contribution in different animal models and patient subsets remains to be determined.
ultimately, the contribution of ppar- in individual tissues to
the overall antidiabetic effects of the tzds will be determined through tissue-specific genetic ablation in mice. this
is well under way in several laboratories.
target genes for ppar- . of course, it is not possible to
determine which potential target genes for ppar- are most
relevant for the antidiabetic action of the tzds until the tissue(s) directly affected by these drugs are clarified. most of
the work done to date has been on adipose cells; and even
here, the target genes relevant for amelioration of insulin
resistance have not been clearly determined. similarly, the
downstream targets that trigger adipogenesis per se are not
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

known. in differentiated cells and tissues, tnf- and leptin
expression are reduced by ppar- activation. in addition, two
genes of fatty-acid metabolism,  xxxg1337xxx  and the
fatty-acid binding protein ap2, appear to be direct targets of
ppar- activation. increased levels of  xxxg1337xxx  in fat
have been shown to occur as a consequence of tzd treatment
in vivo (44). this would be expected to increase uptake of
triglycerides by fat and thereby improve insulin signaling in
muscle and liver. increased ap2 could affect many aspects of
fatty-acid metabolism, though a “knock-out” of ap2 function
in mice has shown a decreased tendency to develop insulin
resistance (45). the resolution of this potential paradox
awaits further studies on the exact function of ap2. another
potentially important target gene for ppar- is glut4. the
expression of this gene is increased in cultured adipocytes and
fat tissue through ppar- activation by tzds (46,47); presumably, this could contribute to reduced hyperglycemia. of
course, because muscle is the major sink for insulin-dependent glucose disposal, it will be important to determine if
glut4 is induced under these conditions in muscle.
future developments: better ppar-

ligands?

the tzds hold enormous promise for the treatment of
patients with niddm. because these drugs were originally
developed without any knowledge of their molecular targets, there is hope that the research described above will
lead to the development of new and better ppar- ligands.
this development is important because for all the promise of
these drugs, they do not normalize the glucose levels of most
diabetic patients when used alone, and many patients do not
respond well clinically even when tzds are used in combination with insulin.
the word “better” can be thought of in at least two ways:
potency and efficacy. given that the potency of a particular
ligand will ultimately depend on its affinity for ppar- , there
is probably much room for improvement. most of the antidiabetic tzds have affinities for ppar- between 30 nmol/l
( xxxd3147xxx ) and 700 nmol/l (troglitazone). with the use of
modern drug-screening procedures, large chemical libraries,
and combinatorial chemistry methods, it is very likely that
agents with higher affinity for ppar- can be found. presumably, this will include many agents from outside the tzd class.
efficacy may be a trickier issue. although the affinity of
troglitazone for ppar- is relatively low, normal therapeutic
doses of this drug result in blood levels that exceed its kd for
the receptor. hence, further increases in receptor occupancy may not be possible. indeed, clinical studies suggest
that efficacy of troglitazone is maximal in the 400–600
mg/day range, with little or no benefit resulting from further
dose escalation (25).
improvements in efficacy may reside in two areas: ligands
that have more full agonist activity on ppar- or agents that
stimulate the ppar- /rxr heterodimer in ways that troglitazone or the other tzds do not. in this regard, a recent
report that rxr agonists could have antidiabetic action in
obese/diabetic rodents carries exciting promise (23). these
drugs working together with a ppar- ligand could theoretically lower glucose more than either one alone. however, it
is not clear from the studies done to date whether maximal
costimulation of this heterodimeric receptor pair gives a
larger glucose-lowering effect than does maximal stimulation
of ppar- alone. another key issue will be whether stimula511

ppar- : adipogenic regulator and thiazolidinedione receptor

fig. 3. docking of cofactors for ppar- through ligand binding. the ppar- /rxr heterodimer binds to distinct dna sequence elements called
dr-1 sites. the binding of ligands to nuclear receptors is now understood to stimulate release of negative factors (corepressors) and trigger
binding of positive cofactors (coactivators). many of these proteins modulate the acetylation state of histones and serve to open chromatin
for more efficient transcription.

tion of rxr, a heterodimeric partner of many other nuclear
receptors—such as the other ppar-s, the thyroid hormone
receptor,  xxxg2412xxx , and  xxxd3417xxx  receptors—will
result in unacceptable side effects. although none have been
observed in the early studies in rodents, the chronic nature
of diabetes suggests that careful long-term studies will be
required to assess the issue of side effects.
several recent studies show that the transcriptional activity of ppar- stimulated by tzds can be sharply reduced as
a result of phosphorylation by the enzyme mitogen-activated
protein kinase (48,49). studies to date also suggest that under
most common culture conditions, some significant portion of
ppar- is in the less active, phosphorylated state. the biochemical basis for this decreased activity is not yet known,
but it could theoretically involve a decreased affinity for
ligand by the phosphorylated receptor. alternatively, phosphorylation could alter interactions with important (and as yet
undefined) protein factors of ppar- , such as corepressors
or coactivators. in fact, it is now known that nuclear receptors function as ligand-gated platforms for the assembly of
these cofactors into large protein complexes on specific dna
sequences (50–52) (fig. 3). some of these coactivator proteins
(cbp/p300, src1,  xxxg1227xxx ) have histone acetyltransferase
activity that functions to “open” the configuration of chro512

matin, allowing more efficient transcription. one theoretical
problem is that essentially none of the nuclear receptor coactivators or corepressors identified to date are selective for particular receptors. hence, it is not clear which cofactors are
more important for the function of any particular receptor. it
is also not obvious how the tremendous specificity of biological actions of the individual nuclear receptors are generated. it is extremely likely that many more cofactors will be
identified, including some that function selectively for individual receptors, including ppar- . once this issue is clarified, the appropriate cofactor molecules may then serve in the
development of assays that could yield greater efficacy in the
improvement of insulin sensitivity.
of course, learning more about the components of the
ppar- signaling system—endogenous ligands and the
enzymes that produce them, receptor levels and modifications, coactivators and corepressors, downstream transcriptional targets—may also lead to a better understanding of the
pathogenesis of niddm. a genetic defect in any of these
aspects of this receptor system could result in reduced
insulin action, and further progress identifying these components will allow scrutiny in diabetic patients.
in summary, the last several years have seen a remarkable
improvement in our understanding of the role of ppar- as
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

b.m. spiegelman

a receptor for the tzd drugs and as a key regulator of
adipocyte differentiation. considerable gaps in our knowledge
still exist, particularly with regard to ppar- cofactors and
the direct tissue targets and downstream-effector genes of
these drugs. however, our knowledge has advanced sufficiently to make it likely that the full therapeutic potential of
ppar- ligands will be revealed by the combination of modern cell and molecular biology, coupled with the newest techniques of drug development. that improvements beyond the
current generation of tzd drugs can be made in potency
and/or safety is, in my view, a virtual certainty. it is also highly
likely that more efficacious drug regimens that target pparand a better understanding of the role of this system in the
pathogenesis of niddm will also be developed.
acknowledgments

i am grateful to several colleagues for critical comments and
suggestions on this manuscript, including drs. evan rosen,
stephen farmer, timothy willson, juergen lehmann, and
alan saltiel.
references
1. spiegelman bm, flier js: adipogenesis and obesity: rounding out the big picture. cell 87:377–389, 1996
2. graves ra, tontonoz p, spiegelman bm: analysis of a tissue-specific
enhancer:  xxxg187xxx  regulates adipogenic gene expression. mol cell biol
12:1202–1208, 1992
3. tontonoz p, hu e, graves ra, budavari ab, spiegelman bm: mppar- 2: tissue-specific regulator of an adipocyte enhancer. genes dev 8:1224–1234, 1994
4. dreyer c, krey g, keller h, givel f, helftenbein g, wahli w: control of the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway by a novel family of nuclear hormone
receptors. cell 68:879–887, 1992
5. zhu y, alvares k, huang q, rao ms, reddy jk: cloning of a new member of
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene family from mouse liver.
j biol chem 268:26817–26820, 1993
6. kliewer sa, forman bm, blumberg b, ong es, borgmeyer u, mangelsdorf dj,
umesono k, evans rm: differential expression and activation of a family of
murine peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. proc natl acad sci usa
91:7355–7359, 1994
7. tontonoz p, graves ra, budavari ab, erdjument-bromage h, lui m, hu e,
tempst p, spiegelman bm: adipocyte-specific transcription factor  xxxg187xxx  is a
heterodimeric complex of two nuclear hormone receptors, ppar 2 and
rxr . nucleic acids res 22:5628–5634, 1994
8. vidal-puig aj, considine rv, jimenez-linan m, werman a, pories wj, caro jf,
flier js: peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene expression in
human tissues: effects of obesity, weight loss, and regulation by insulin and
glucocorticoids. j clin invest 99:2416–2422, 1997
9. tontonoz p, hu e, devine j, beale eg, spiegelman bm: ppar 2 regulates adipose expression of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene. mol cell
biol 15:351–357, 1995
10. tontonoz p, hu e, spiegelman bm: stimulation of adipogenesis in fibroblasts
by ppar 2, a lipid-activated transcription factor. cell 79:1147–1156, 1994
11. brun rp, kim jb, hu e, spiegelman bm: peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma and the control of adipogenesis. curr opin lipidol
8:212–218, 1997
12. macdougald oa, lane md: transcriptional regulation of gene expression
during adipocyte differentiation. ann rev biochem 64:345–373, 1995
13. hu e, tontonoz p, spiegelman bm: transdifferentiation of myoblasts by the
adipogenic transcription factors ppar and c/ebp . proc natl acad sci
usa 92:9856–9860, 1995
14. tontonoz p, kim jb, graves ra, spiegelman bm: add1: a novel helix-loophelix protein associated with adipocyte determination and differentiation. mol
cell biol 13:4753–4759, 1993
15. yokoyama c, wang x, briggs mr,  xxxd2728xxx  a, wu j, hua x, goldstein jl,
brown ms: srebp-1, a basic helix-loop-helix, loop-helix-leucine zipper protein that controls transcription of the  xxxg1318xxx  gene.
cell 75:187–197, 1993
16. kim jb, spiegelman bm: add1/srebp1 promotes adipocyte differentiation
and gene expression linked to fatty acid metabolism. genes dev
10:1096–1107, 1996
17. wu z, xie y, bucher nlr, farmer sr: conditional ectopic expression of
diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

c/ebp- in nih-3t3 cells induces ppar and stimulates adipogenesis. genes
dev 9:2350–2356, 1995
18. zhu y, qi c, korenberg jr, chen xn, noya d, rao ms, reddy jk: structural
organization of mouse  xxxg1807xxx 
(mppar gamma) gene: alternative promoter use and different splicing yield
two ppar gamma isoforms. proc natl acad sci usa 92:7921–7925, 1995
19. harris pk, kletzien rf: localization of a  xxxd2958xxx  response element in the
adipocyte  xxxg934xxx  gene. mol pharmacol 45:439–445, 1994
20. lehmann jm, morre lb, smith-oliver ta, wilkison wo, willson tm, kliewer
sa: an antidiabetic thiazolidinedione is a high affinity ligand for peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor . j biol chem 270:12953–12956, 1995
21. forman bm, tontonoz p, chen j, brun rp, spiegelman bm, evans rm: 15deoxy- 12,14-prostagalandin j2 is a ligand for the adipocyte determination
factor ppar . cell 83:803–812, 1995
22. willson tm, cobb je, cowan dj, wiethe rw, correa id, prakash sr, beck kd,
moore lb, kliewer sa, lehmann jm: the structure-activity relationship
between  xxxg1807xxx  agonism and the
antihyperglycemic activity of thiazolidinediones. j med chem 39:665–668, 1996
23. mukherjee r, davies pj, crombi dl, bischoff ed, cesario rm, jow l, boehm
mf, modon ce, nadzan am, paterniti jr jr, heyman ra: sensitization of diabetic and obese mice to insulin by retinoid x receptor agonists. nature
386:407–410, 1997
24. hallakou s, doare l, foufelle f, kergoat m, guerre-millo m, berthault mf,
dugail i, morin j, auwerx j, ferre p:  xxxd2958xxx  induces in vivo adipocyte
differentiation in the obese zucker fa/fa rat. diabetes 46:1393–1399, 1997
25. henry rr: thiazolidinediones. endocrinol metab clin north am
26:9553–9573, 1997
26. gimble jm, robinson ce, wu x, kelly ka, rodriguez br, kliewer sa,
lehmann jm, morris dc:  xxxg1807xxx 
activation by thiazolidinediones induces adipogenesis in bone marrow stromal cells. mol pharmacol 50:1087–1094, 1996
27. food and drug administration: fda talk paper. washington, dc, u.s.
department of health and human services, december 1, 1997
28. kliewer sa, lenhard jm, willson tm, patel i, morris dc, lehmann jm: a
prostaglandin j2 metabolite binds peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma and promotes adipocyte differentiation. cell 83:813–819, 1995
29. kliewer sa, sundseth ss, jones sa, brown pj, wisely gb, koble cs, devchand p, wahli w, willson tm, lenhard jm, lehmann jm:  xxxd2154xxx  and
eicosanoids regulate gene expression through direct interactions with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors alpha and gamma. proc natl acad
sci usa 94:4318–4323, 1997
30. burant cf, sreenan s, hirano k, tai t-ac, lohmiller j, lukens j, davidson no,
ross s, graves ra: troglitazone action is independent of adipose tissue. j clin
invest 100:2900–2908, 1997
31. rebrin k, steil gm, getty l, bergman rn: free fatty acid as a link in the regulation of hepatic glucose output by peripheral insulin. diabetes
44:1038–1045, 1995
32. rebrin k, steil gm, mittelman sd, bergman rn: causal linkage between
insulin suppression of lipolysis and suppression of liver glucose output in dogs.
j clin invest 98:741–749, 1996
33. tai tac, jennermann c, brown kk, oliver bb, macginnitie ma, wilkison wo,
brown hr, lehmann jm, kliewer sa, morris dc, graves ra: activation of the
nuclear receptor  xxxg1807xxx  promotes brown adipocyte differentiation. j biol chem 271:29909–29914, 1996
34. foellmi-adams la, wyse bm, herron d, nedergaard j, kletzien rf: induction
of uncoupling protein in brown adipose tissue: synergy between norepinephrine and  xxxd2958xxx , an insulin-sensitizing agent. biochem pharm
52:693–701, 1996
35. hotamisligil g, shargill n, spiegelman bm: adipose expression of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. science
259:87–91, 1993
36. uysal kt, wiesbrock sm, marino mw, hotamisligil gs: protection from obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking tnf-alpha function. nature
389:610–614, 1997
37. ofei f, hurel s, newkirk j, sopwith m, taylor p: effects of an engineered
human anti-tnf- antibody (cd571) on insulin sensitivity and glycemic control in patients with niddm. diabetes 45:881–885, 1996
38. hofman c, lorenz k, braithwaite ss, colca jr, palazuk bj, hotamisligil gs,
spiegelman bm: altered gene expression for  xxxg2296xxx -a and its
receptors during drug and dietary modulation of insulin resistance.
endocrinology 134:264–270, 1994
39. peraldi p, xu m, spiegelman bm: thiazolidinediones block tnf- -induced inhibition of insulin signaling. j clin invest 100:1863–1869, 1997
40. miles pdg, romeo om, higo k, cohen a, rafaat k, olefsky jm: tnf- induced insulin resistance in vivo and its prevention by troglitazone. diabetes
513

ppar- : adipogenic regulator and thiazolidinedione receptor

46:1678–1683, 1997
41. kallen cb, lazar ma: antidiabetic thiazolidinediones inhibit leptin (ob) gene
expression in 3t3-l1 adipocytes. proc natl acad sci usa 93:5793–5796, 1996
42. de vos p, lefebvre am, miller sg, guerre-millo m, wong k, saladin r,
hamann lg, staels b, briggs mr, auwerx j: thiazolidinediones repress ob
gene expression in rodents via activation of  xxxg1807xxx . j clin invest 98:1004–1009, 1996
43. muller g, ertl j, gerl m, preibisch g: leptin impairs metabolic actions of insulin
in isolated rat adipocytes. j biol chem 272:10585–10593, 1997
44. lefebvre am, peinado-onsurbe j, leitersdorf i, briggs mr, paterniti jr,
fruchart jc, fievet c, auwerx j, staels b: regulation of lipoprotein metabolism by thiazolidinediones occurs through a distinct but complementary
mechanism relative to fibrates. arterioscler thromb vasc biol 17:1756–1764,
1997
45. hotamisligil gs, distel rj, johnson rs, papaioannou v, spiegelman bm:
uncoupling of obesity from insulin resistance through a targeted mutation in
the fatty acid binding protein ap2. science, 274:1377–1379, 1996
46. young pw, cawthorne ma, coyle pj, holder jc, holman gd, kozka ij,
kirkham dm, lister ca, smith sa: repeat treatment of obese mice with brl
49653, a new potent insulin sensitizer, enhances insulin action in white

514

adipocytes: association with increased insulin binding and cell-surface
glut4 as measured by photoaffinity labeling. diabetes 44:1087–1092, 1995
47. wu z, xie y, bucher nlr, farmer sr: ppar(gamma) induces the insulin-dependent glucose transporter, glut4, in the absence of c/ebp(alpha) during the
conversion of 3t3 fibroblasts into adipocytes. j clin invest 101:22–32, 1998
48. hu e, kim jb, sarraf p, spiegelman bm: inhibition of adipogenesis through
map kinase-mediated phosphorylation of ppar . science 274:2100–2103,
1996
49. adams m, reginato mj, shao d, lazar ma, chatterjee vk: transcriptional activation by  xxxg1807xxx  is inhibited by
phosphorylation at a consensus mitogen-activated protein kinase site. j biol
chem 272:5128–5132, 1997
50. shibata h, spencer te, onate sa, jenster g, tsai sy, tsai mj, o’malley bw:
role of co-activators and co-repressors in the mechanism of steroid thyroid
receptor action. recent prog horm res 52:141–164, 1997
51. torchia j, rose dw, inostroza j, kamei y, westin s, glass ck, rosenfeld mg:
the transcriptional co-activator p/cip binds cbp and mediates nuclear-receptor function. nature 387:677–684, 1997
52. pazin mj, kadonaga jt: what’s up and down with histone deacetylation and
transcription? cell 89:325–328, 1997

diabetes, vol. 47, april 1998

author queries (please see q in margin and underlined text)
q1: please spell out etya.>
q2: please spell out c/ebp.>
q3: please spell out add1/srebp1, if possible.>
q4: do you mean kilodaltons or kd? please specify what kd
stands for.>
q4a: should this read “expected to result” not “expected
in result” as it is now?
q5: please clarify what kd stands for.>
ref 27: please add more information for ref. 27. can the fda
be considered the author of the paper?
what is the title of the paper?
>
ref 30: can you update ref. 30 now?>
ref 40: please add the journal title to ref. 40.>
ref 47: can you update ref. 47 now?>

