i

,

neurochemistry
international

}

elsevier

neurochem. int. 32 (1998) 227-246

the  xxxg2099xxx : from chromaffin granule to
brain
jean-pierre henry,* corinne sagn6, c6cile bedet and bruno gasnier
centre national de la recherche scientifique, ( ers 575), institut de biologic physico-chimique, 75005 paris, france
accepted 21 september 1997

abstract
all characterized monoaminergic cells utilize the same transport system for the vesicular accumulation of monoamines prior to
their release. this system operates in neuronal (catecholaminergic, serotoninergic or histaminergic) as well as in endocrine or
neuroendocrine cells. for several decades, chromaffin granules from bovine adrenal medulla have been used as a model system,
allowing progress in the understanding of the biophysics, the biochemistry and the pharmacology of the monoamine vesicular
transporter. the transporters from rat, bovine and man have been cloned. surprisingly, two genes encode different isoforms of the
protein which are differentially expressed in monoaminergic systems. the conjunction of recombinant dna techniques and expression
m secretory or non-secretory cells with the large body of data obtained on the chromaffin granule transporter has allowed rapid
progress in the study of the protein. but interestingly enough, this progress has open new possibilities in the study of biological
problems, especially in the brain. the transporter is useful for the determination of the relationship between small and large dense
core vesicles, for the understanding of the mechanism of drugs such as 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (mpp+),  xxxd3330xxx  or
amphetamines, and as a marker in brain development. the possibility of regulations at the vesicular transporter level and of their
effect on the quantum size has to be investigated. the  xxxg2099xxx  is also an important target for brain imaging.
© 1998 elsevier science ltd. all rights reserved

introduction
neurons and endocrine cells release monoamines by
exocytosis. this process requires that the secretory products, or their precursor, be transported and accumulated
into secretory vesicles. to gain information on the vesicular monoamine transport system, it has been implicitly
hypothesized that the  xxxg2099xxx  from the
chromaffin granules of adrenal medulla can be used as a
model. adrenal medulla is an endocrine gland releasing
adrenaline and noradrenaline, but it can also be compared to a giant nerve terminal releasing its content not
in a limited space, but directly into the bloodstream.
according to this view, the chromaffin granules are easier
to work with than brain synaptic vesicles since they can
be obtained in large amounts and they are more homogeneous with respect to their content. in fact, most of the
biophysical, biochemical, pharmacological and cloning
studies have been initiated on chromaffin granules and
chromatiin cells. the first part of this review will deal

* to whom correspondence should be addressed: institut de biologie
physico-chimique 13, rue p. et m. curie, 75005 paris, france. tel.:
33 01 46341057; fax: 33 01 40468331 e-mail: jphenry@ibpc.fr.
0197 0186/98 $19.00+0.00 © 1998 elsevier science ltd. all rights reserved
pii:s0197 0 1 8 6 ( 9 7 ) 0 0 0 9 2 2

with results obtained on this type of material, specially
from bovine origin. the  xxxg2099xxx  ( xxxg2099xxx ) has been cloned and expressed in a functional way in different cell types, thus opening new
possibilities of investigation which will be presented in
the second part of this review.
it has now been recognized that the secretory granules
of endocrine cells differ from the neuronal synaptic
vesicles, and it is important to characterize the monoamine transporters in the two types of vesicles. moreover,
in a more prospective way, it might be interesting to see if
the data obtained on the chromaffin granule monoamine
transporter and on the recombinant proteins help the
understanding of the biology of the neuron. these aspects
will be discussed in the third part of this review.

i. the  xxxg2099xxx  from bovine
chromaffin granule membranes
the first description of atp-dependent catecholamine
uptake by isolated bovine chromaffin granules was given
by kirshner (1962), and, independently, by carlsson et
al. (1963). in these reports, the transport was shown to

.i.-p. henr)ct al.

228

be inhibited by reserpine and to have a low specificity.
however, this model was not extremely convenient for
kinetic studies because granule lysis hindered the control
of external catecholamine concentration. moreover,
biophysical studies required also the control of the intragranular medium. phillips (1974a, 1974b) introduced the
preparation of chromaffin granule "ghosts" and was the
first to demonstrate that the transport system was a property of the chromaffin granule membrane. the "'ghosts"
were obtained by osmotic lysis and several variations of
the initial technique have been described. though very
useful for uptake studies, these preparations contain generally, only a limited fraction of right-side out sealed
vesicles (hunter et al., 1982). from pharmacological
studies (see below), it was concluded that only 10% of
the membranes obtained by an osmotic shock resealed
correctly (gasnier et al., 1987).

1. bioenergetic aspects o[the transport

a breakthrough in the understanding of the bioenergetics
of the transport was the proposition that monoamine
uptake was indirectly coupled to atp hydrolysis (johnson and scarpa, 1976; njus and radda, 1978). atp is
hydrolysed by a  xxxg215xxx  located in the granule
membrane, which generates a h + electrochemical gradient (a/~h+), the granule matrix being acidic and polarized
positively with respect to the external (cytosolic) medium.
the a#h + is, in turn, utilized by the vesicular monoamine
transporter to accumulate its substrates inside of the
vesicle. the transporter thus catalyses a monoamine/h antiport, according to the terminology proposed by mitchell (1961). consistent with this contention, atp-dependent monoamine uptake is inhibited by protons
ionophores, such as carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl
hydrazone (cccp), which collapse the proton gradient
(njus et al., 1986; kanner and schuldiner, 1987; johnson,
1988).
the  xxxg215xxx  of chromaffin granule membrane
has been described by nelson and his group as a novel
type atpase (cidon and nelson, 1983). this atpase
was shown to equip the membrane of other acidic compartments (trans-golgi, lysosomes, endosomes, clathrincoated vesicles, vacuoles . . . . ) and it is now designated
as the vacuolar type (v-type) h+-pump (nelson, 1989,
1992). it is an inefficient atp synthetase (roisin et al.,
1980) and it works mainly as a h+-pump. however,
sequence homologies indicate that this multisubunit complex is related to the mitochondrial atp synthetase. the
activity of the h +-pump is characterized by the h ÷ electrochemical gradient that it generates:
a/~h+(my) = a~(mv) + zaph

(1)

where a~, is the transmembrane potential (~b~- q*0), aph

the ph gradient ( p h 0 - p h j and, z = 2.3rt/f a constant (60 mv at room temperature).
the transmembrane potential a~ is prevailing when
the granules are suspended in a medium without permeant anions (scn . ci ); the presence of such anions,
the influx of which collapses the a~0, leads essentially to
a aph.
in the absence of the transporter, weak amines will be
accumulated in response to such a ai~h+ because the
uncharged form of the amine is soluble in the membrane
and it will accept a proton from the acidic matrix.
however, the resulting amine gradient will reflect only
the ph gradient and the a~ will have a repulsive effect
on the translocation of the positively charged amines.
that the  xxxg2099xxx  is active in
a different way is shown by the fact that monoamine
translocation by chromaffin granule membrane vesicles
is accelerated by a positive a~, (njus and radda, 1979:
apps et al., 1980; kanner et al., 1980; scherman and
henry, 1980a). the coupling of the monoamine gradient
to the a/th + has been analyzed in detail (johnson et al.,
1981: knoth et al., 1981). in the absence of permeant
anions, i.e. in the presence of a a~b of variable size, the
log of the observed monoamine gradient was linearly
related to a~,/z, with a slope of one. in the presence of
chloride ions, i.e. in the presence of a aph of variable
size, the log of the observed monoamine gradient was
linearly related to the ph gradient with a slope of 2.
from a theoretical point of view, the equilibrium
between the h + and the monoamine electrochemical
gradients is described by the following equation:
[monoamine]~
ahu
log ~o~no'ami~ne~ - naph + (n - 1) ~ -

(2)

where n is the number of h ~ required for the translocation of a cationic monoamine. the experimental data
then suggest a stoechiometry of 2, corresponding to an
electrogenic antiport, exchanging one cationic monoamine for 2 protons.
this result is important and it seems to be consistent
with physiological observations, as far as in vivo data can
be obtained (phillips, 1982). the intragranular catecholamine concentration is estimated to be 550 mm whereas
the cytoplasmic concentration has been proposed to be
10 llm, thus indicating a concentration gradient of
50,000. a large part of this gradient can be accounted for
by equation 2, using a ph gradient of 1.7 (corresponding
to an internal ph of 5.5) and a ao of 60 mv (unknown,
but consistent with the impermeant glutamate being the
major cytosolic anion).
in view of the high catecholamine concentration
observed in chromaffin granules, the reversibility of the
transport reaction is an important issue. experimentally,
isolated granules maintain large catecholamine concentration gradients when suspended in atp-free media

the  xxxg2099xxx 

and this property is, at least partially, conserved in
"ghosts" (maron et al., 1983). these results indicate some
lack of reversibility of the transporter which is out of
equilibrium. this characteristic has been attributed to a
kinetic barrier, dependent upon the intravesicular ph.
rapid effiux was observed after alkalinization of the
granule matrix by various techniques. such an alkalinization is important to consider to describe the mechanism of action of lipophilic drugs which leave the
granule by crossing the membrane in their cationic form
and which thus dissipate the ph gradient. amphetamines
have been proposed to act on chromaffin granules in this
way (sulzer and rayport, 1990; rudnick and wall, 1992).
they would be taken up by diffusion of their neutral form
through the membrane and protonation in the granule
matrix; efflux of the cationic form through the membrane
would alkalinize the matrix and induce in turn a massive
efflux of the stored catacholamines. a similar mechanism
could operate for lipophilic substrates such as tyramine
(scherman and henry, 1980b; knoth et al., 1984).
surprisingly, the alkalinization-induced efflux is not
sensitive to drugs inhibiting the transporter,  xxxd3330xxx  ( xxxd3330xxx ) or reserpine (res); the mechanism of
the efflux and the role of the transporter in this phenomenon are still unclear. the efflux is also stimulated by 1
mm serotonin (5-ht), suggesting an exchange reaction
(maron et al., 1983). however, this reaction is also insensitive to res, and 5-ht might induce effiux by an alkalinization mechanism. for physiological reasons, the
existence of an exchange reaction is an important issue:
in adrenergic cells, noradrenaline has to diffuse out of the
granule to be methylated in the cytoplasm and a transport
mechanism exchanging noradrenaline and adrenaline
would save energy. these repeated movements between
the granules and the cytoplasm appear to be surprising.
however, an elegant approach, using cyclic voltammetry,
has confirmed that, in adrenergic cells, noradrenergic
granules were extremely rare and that the efficiency of
noradrenaline methylation and adrenaline uptake was
high since most of these cells (75%) contain granules with
only adrenaline (ciolkowski et al., 1992).
2. substrate specificity

in chromaffin cells, chromaffin granules store adrenaline
and noradrenaline, and, since dopamine is hydroxylated
by dopamine /~-hydroxylase inside of chromaffin granules, the catecholamine uptake system of these vesicles
should transport these 3 catecholamines. it is also able to
accumulate 5-ht, and with a lower efficiency, histamine
though only limited data are available on chromaffin
granules (oskan et al., 1993) and on other systems
(fukami et al., 1984; ludowyke and lagunoff, 1986).
competition experiments have shown that the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  has a low specificity and that it
transports all monoamines.

229

for some time, the form of the transported monoamine
has been a matter of debate. the log of km for atpdependent monoamine uptake was shown to decrease
linearly when the ph increased, an observation consistent
with the transport of the neutral form of the amine, the
log of the concentration of which increased linearly with
the ph in the physiological ph range (scherman and
henry, 1981). this observation was also consistent with
the ph-dependency of the inhibition constant ki of the
inhibitors  xxxd3330xxx  and dihydrotetrabenazine (tbzoh)
(scherman and henry, 1982, 1983a). these tertiary
amines (fig. 1) have a rather low pka (6.0 for  xxxd3330xxx 
and 7.5 for tbzoh) and their activity was shown to be
correlated with the concentration of their neutral form.
in addition, the dissociation constant kd of the transporter for tbzoh decreased logarithmically with
increasing ph, but levelled off at values higher than the
p k a of t b z o h .

however, this hypothesis is untenable since it has been
shown that m-iodobenzylguanidine (mibg) (gasnier et
al., 1986) and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (mpp ÷)
(daniels and reinhard, 1988; darchen et al., 1988a),
two compounds which are not monoamines, are also
substrates of the transporter which have km with the same
ph profile. the former, mibg, is a guanidine and as
such, its pka is higher than that of monoamines; the
concentration of its neutral form at ph 7 is thus considerably lower than that of substrate monoamines. the
latter, mpp ÷, is a quaternary ammonium, which exists
only in a charged form, thus showing convincingly that
the transported form of the monoamine is the cationic
one.
3. pharmacology of the  xxxg2099xxx 

among the inhibitors which block atp-dependent
monoamine uptake by chromaffin granules, some interfere with the generation of the a#h either at the level of
the v-atpase (for instance,  xxxd279xxx ) or by changing
the h ÷ conductance of the membrane (for instance,
cccp) and only three compounds are specific of the
transporter: res,  xxxd3330xxx  and  xxxd2419xxx  (ket) (scherman
and henry, 1980b). these compounds (fig. 1) proved to
be extremely useful for the study of the transporter, its
specific labelling, its purification and they provided also
informations on the mechanism of the transport.
 xxxd3330xxx  (fig. 1), which can be considered as an analog of
dopamine, was originally developed by hoffmann-la
roche (pletscher et al., 1962). up to 20 #m, it inhibits
atp-dependent noradrenaline uptake by acting specifically at the level of the transporter (scherman and henry,
1980b). it is not only specific, but also potent (ki =
3 nm). various ligands were derived from this molecule:
~-dihydrotetrabenazine (tbzoh, fig. 1) (scherman et
al., 1983) and, more recently, 2-methoxytetrabenazine
(vander borght et al., 1995a). c~-dihydrotetrabenazine

j.-p. henry el al.

230

hzco~~a/

h3co~
h3co- v

h3co-

v

~

~t~

oh

tbzoh

 xxxd3330xxx 

o
/och3
i

/-,,oco

h

4[
h3coco

~

l

och3

och3

"~ch3
res

h

i
o

ket
i

h

°

o

azik
fig. 1. chemical structures of inhibitors and ligands of  xxxg2099xxx .  xxxd3330xxx ,  xxxd3330xxx : tbzoh, (+) :~-dihydrotetrabenazine; res, reserpine: ket,
 xxxd2419xxx ; azik, 7-azido-8-iodoketanserin. it has been shown recently that the ( + ) :t-dihydrotetrabenazine enantiomer is the active one and that it
has the absolute configuration 2r, 3r, 11 br (kilbourn eta/.. 1995 and 1997).

([3h]tbzoh) binds to one class of sites on purified chromaffin granules membranes, with an equilibrium dissociation constant of 3 nm (scherman et al., 1983).
recently, it has been shown that the transporter discriminates between the two enantiomers and that the
(+)-isomer has an affinity which is higher by 3 orders of
magnitude than the (-)-isomer (kilbourn et al., 1995:
1997). this observation might be important to modelize

the binding site and to define the conformation of the
bound monoamine. the number of sites on chromaffin
granule membrane is high (60 pmol/mg of protein)
(scherman et al., 1983). however, from this figure, the
transporter was calculated to be a minor component
of the membrane (0.3% of the membrane protein,
assuming a m.w. of 50 kda), each granule containing
about 20 transporter molecules.

the  xxxg2099xxx 

two characteristics of [3h]tbzoh binding were
noted. firstly, substrates displaced very poorly
[3h]tbzoh from its binding site. theoretically, a substrate displaces 50% of a ligand (ecs0) at a concentration
equivalent to its km. for noradrenaline, the ecs0 is larger
than the km by two orders of magnitude. secondly, the
binding of [3h]tbzoh to chromaffin granule membranes is unaffected by the atp-induced a/th ÷. these
characteristics make  xxxd3330xxx  and its derivatives valuable
radioligands of the  xxxg2099xxx , which can
be used on various types of preparations, irrespective
of their energization (henry and scherman, 1989). for
instance, it can be used on detergent solubilized extracts
(scherman and henry, 1983b).
 xxxd2419xxx  (ket, fig. 1), which was originally
described as an antagonist of 5-ht2a receptors (leysen
et al., 1981), is also a good ligand of the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  (darchen et al., 1988b). pharmacologically, it is easy to discriminate binding to the
transporter and to the receptor. on purified chromaffin
granule membranes, ket binding is temperature-dependent with kd values of 45 nm and 6 nm, at 30°c and
0°c, respectively. at 0°c, the half-lifetime of dissociation
is 40 s and it is not measurable at 30°c. this rapid dissociation accounts certainly for the lack of brain monoamine
depletion after in vivo administration to rats.
ket binding has the characteristics reported for
tbzoh binding: (1) [3h]ket is only inefficiently displaced by substrates; (2) the binding is insensitive to the
h ÷ electrochemical gradient. indeed, displacement
experiments using both [3h]ket or [3h]tbzoh, indicated that the two drugs competed for the same site.
extracted from an indian shrub, reserpine (res, fig.
1) is the most potent inhibitor of the  xxxg2099xxx  (carlsson, 1965; stitzel, 1977). administered to
rats, it induces a depletion of brain monoamines which
lasts for days. however, the development of the molecular pharmacology of this compound, which can be considered as an analog of 5-ht, has been difficult for several
reasons, the main of which being that it had to be recognized that the kinetics of the binding were greatly accelerated by the a/th + (deupree and weaver, 1984;
scherman and henry, 1984). in the presence of atp and
under suitable conditions, i.e. when the concentration of
binding sites is low enough, an equilibrium dissociation
constant of 30 pm was measured (darchen et al., 1989),
consistent with an inhibition constant ki for atp-dependent noradrenaline uptake in the subnanomolar concentration range. thus, res has an affinity which is
about 2 orders of magnitude higher than  xxxd3330xxx . this high
affinity implies a low dissociation rate. for [3h]tbzoh,
the half-lifetime of dissociation is about 15 min whereas
that of [3h]res cannot be measured.
the bioenergetics of [ah]res binding have been investigated (rudnick et al., 1990). the ph gradient as well
as the transmembrane potential were effective, but res

231

binding was less sensitive to the former than monoamine
translocation and it was concluded that res binding
required only one h r. on chromaffin granule membrane
vesicles, the density of high affinity res binding sites was
10-20% of that of [3h]tbzoh binding sites (scherman
and henry, 1984). this result has been related to the fact
that in the membrane preparation used, only a limited
fraction forms vesicles capable of generating the a/~h+
required for [3hires binding (gasnier et al., 1987). thus,
the binding of tbzoh can be used to estimate the total
amount of transporter, whereas that of res allows an
estimate of the transporter molecules present in energetizable vesicles (henry and scherman, 1989). for
instance, the molecular turn-over has been obtained by
dividing the vmax for atp-dependent noradrenaline
uptake by the bmaxfor [3h]res binding. a figure of 140
molecules/min was thus obtained (gasnier et al., 1987;
scherman and boschi, 1988).
at variance with tbzoh, res can be displaced from
its binding site by micromolar concentrations of noradrenaline. this result and the fact that res binding
is sensitive to aph + suggested that the two drugs had
different binding sites on the transporter: a res binding
site, sensitive to the a/~h+ and having a high affinity for
the substrates and a  xxxd3330xxx /ket binding site, insensitive
to the a/th + and with a low affinity for the substrates.
this hypothesis is supported by competition experiments
(darchen et al., 1989). the presence of two different
drug binding sites is intriguing since in vivo experiments
suggested that  xxxd3330xxx  and res competed for the same
site:  xxxd3330xxx  when administered to rats shortly before res
protected against the long lasting depletion observed with
that drug (carlsson and lindqvist, 1966). a model has
been proposed to account for these two sets of data
(darchen et al., 1989). the transporter was proposed to
exist in two conformations, each of them having one
binding site, either the  xxxd3330xxx  or the res binding site
(fig. 2). in addition, the equilibrium between the two
conformations would be driven by the a#h +, which
would favour the res binding conformation.
according to this model (fig. 2), in the presence of
 xxxd3330xxx , the equilibrium should be driven towards the corresponding conformation and res binding should be
inhibited, a prediction which was verified experimentally.
the symmetrical experiment, inhibition of  xxxd3330xxx  binding
by pulling the equilibrium with low res concentrations
is difficult to perform, since only a small fraction of  xxxd3330xxx 
sites are present on energetizable vesicles. however, a
fraction of [3h]tbzoh binding sites are more sensitive
to res after addition of atp (gasnier, unpublished
experiment). experiments with synaptic vesicles gave
similar results (near, 1986).
an interesting aspect of this model is that it can be
easily extended to describe monoamine translocation
(fig. 2) (henry et al., 1994). in the presence of the a#h ÷,
the protein would be in the res binding conformation.

j.-p. henry et al.

232
h +

res

r-nh~

cytoplasm

/j

h÷

cytoplasm

®

m~atrxi
t

h+

fig. 2. model of monoaminc translocation by  xxxg2099xxx . the model is
based on the hypothesis that the transporter exists in two different
conformations which can be discriminated by the two ligands,  xxxd3330xxx 
( xxxd3330xxx ) and res (reserpine), each conformation possessing only
one binding site. in the resting state (1), the protein would be in the
 xxxd3330xxx  binding conformation, a first proton, coming from the matrix.
would convert the protein to the res binding conformation (2), the
res binding site, which is directed towards the cytoplasm (chaplin el
al., 1985) and which has a high affinity for the substrates would act as
a charge site. after binding of the substrate (3), a second proton would
induce a conformational change to the  xxxd3330xxx  binding conformation. the
 xxxd3330xxx  binding site has a low affinity for the substrates and it is postulated
to be directed towards the granule matrix: this site would thus act as a
discharge site (4). finally, substrate dissociation would allow the protein
to turn-over.

since this site has a high affinity for the substrates and
since it is directed towards the cytosol (chaplin et al.,
1985), it can be considered as a charge site. after the
binding of the protonated substrate to this site, a second
proton would induce a conformational change to the
 xxxd3330xxx -binding conformation. the  xxxd3330xxx  binding site is proposed to be directed towards the granule matrix and
because it has a low affinity for the substrate, it might be
a discharge site, allowing dissociation of the translocated
monoamine and recycling of the protein to the res binding conformation.
this model accounts for the 2h +/monoamine antiport,
the first proton being required to generate the res binding conformation, and the second one for the substrate
translocation. a similar model has been proposed by
schuldiner et al. (1995).
4. biochemical characterization

the development of good ligands has facilitated the biochemical characterization of the transporter from chromaffin granule membranes. various derivatives have been

used to label covalently the transporter by the technique
of photoaffinity (isambert and henry, 1985; isambert et
al., 1989). the most useful has been 7-azido-8-iodoketanserin (azik, fig. 1) (isambert et al., 1989). this
compound which has a high affinity (kd = 6 nm, at 0 c )
binds to the  xxxd3330xxx  binding site and it labels specifically the
 xxxg2099xxx . it has also been used on various
more or less purified preparations (rat striatum, rabbit
blood platelets, human pheochromocytoma). after 2dgel electrophoresis, the labelled protein appeared as a
broad diffuse spot, characterized by an apparent m.w. of
70 kda and a pl ranging from 3.8~4.6. these characteristics (diffuse appearance, acidic pl) reflect the glycoproteic nature of the protein.
from the pharmacological data, the transporter from
chromaffin granule membranes had to be purified about
300-fold to obtain a pure material. the iodinated photolabelled protein has been purified by two different techniques, following the radioactivity and irrespective of the
protein activity (isambert et al., 1992; sagn6 et al., 1996).
the first purification was based on the properties of the
protein, an acidic glycoprotein, whereas the second one
was an original procedure, based on the high tendency of
the protein to aggregate even in sds-containing buffers.
because this property is shared by a limited fraction of
the intrinsic membrane proteins (for instance, cytochrome b56~ and the 16 kda subunit, ductin, of the v~
sector of the h+-pump), it can be used as an efficient
purification step, the thermal aggregation of the transporter being followed by the dissociation of the aggregate
in anhydrous triftuoroacetic acid (tfa). the behaviour
of the transporter was explained by the existence of structures surviving in sds, the denaturation of which lead to
aggregation. these sds-resistant structures might originate in the polytopic nature of the transporter, and this
technique might be of general use for the purification of
these proteins.
the transporter has been purified in an active form by
the group of schuldiner (stern-bach et al., 1990) and by
that of near (vincent and near, 1991). in both cases,
ligand binding was used to monitor the purification of
the protein. in the first one, res was bound to the initial
membrane preparation in the presence of atp and the
stability of the binding allowed membrane solubilization
and testing of various purification steps without dissociation of the label. in the second purification, the
solubilized protein was assayed by measuring directly
[~h]tbzoh binding. in both cases, proteins with a similar m.w. were obtained and the purification revealed some
heterogeneity at the level of the isoelectric point. the
protein purified by stern-bach et al. (1990) has been
reconstituted into liposomes. the reconstituted proteoliposomes catalysed  xxxd3330xxx - and res-sensitive 5-ht
uptake driven by an imposed ph gradient. they showed
also energy-dependent res binding. this result showed
conclusively that the transporter activity requires a

the  xxxg2099xxx 

unique polypeptidic chain, the apparent m.w. of which is
in the 70-85 kda range.

ii. cloning of  xxxg2099xxx  and properties of the recombinant
protein
1. cloning o f v m a t

the rat  xxxg2099xxx  has been cloned by expression in mammalian cells by the group of edwards (liu et al., 1992a,
1992b) and, independently, by erickson et al. (1992). in
a very elegant approach, the first group obtained  xxxg2099xxx 
as a resistance gene for 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium
(mpp +). mpp + is the active metabolite of the neurotoxin
1-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6 tetrahydropyridine (mptp),
that produces a model of parkinson's disease. the target
of mpp ÷ is mitochondrial, but this compound is also a
substrate of  xxxg2099xxx . vesicular uptake of mpp- protects
the cell by decreasing the cytoplasmic concentration of
the drug, as shown by the fact that  xxxd3330xxx  increases the
toxicity of mpp ÷ (reinhardt et al., 1987). cho cells,
which were originally sensitive to mpp ÷ were stably
transfected by a cdna library from pc-12 cells. by
culturing the cells on a medium containing mpp ÷, a
clone resistant to the drug was isolated and the cdna
conferring this resistance was rescued. that this clone
encoded  xxxg2099xxx  was shown by the fact that the transformed cells accumulated dopamine in a res-sensitive
manner. atp-dependent dopamine uptake could also be
demonstrated in vesicles derived from cell homogenate.
this uptake was sensitive to res, but quite insensitive
to  xxxd3330xxx  (ic50 = 4 #m).
interestingly enough, cho cells are not secretory ones
and these results indicated that the protein was addressed,
at least partially, to an intracellular compartment
equipped with an atp-dependent h+-pump. immunofluorescence studies (liu et al., 1994) indicated that the
protein co-localized with recycling endocytotic vesicles
and with markers for the golgi complex, a result which
is consistent with the presence of v-type atpase in the
endocytotic pathway and in the intermediate and distal
parts of the golgi. the corresponding mrna was expressed in rat adrenals, but surprisingly, it was not found in
the brain where a distinct but highly related gene was
expressed (liu et al., 1992b). the adrenal medulla and
the brain genes are now named vmatx and vmat2,
respectively.
erickson and his colleagues (erickson et al., 1992) used
a rat basophilic leukemia cell line cdna library and
isolated  xxxg2099xxx  cdna by expression cloning in monkey
kidney cells (cv-1). atp-dependent 5-ht uptake was
demonstrated after permeabilization of the plasma
membrane by digitonin, thus demonstrating expression
on intracellular membranes. this clone differed from
 xxxg2099xxx ~ in two different ways: (1) it was more sensitive

233

to  xxxd3330xxx ; (2) the corresponding message was expressed in
brain, but not in adrenal glands (or at a low level, mahata
et al., 1993a). sequence comparison indicated that this
clone was identical to vmat2.
therefore, these studies revealed the existence in rats
of two distinct proteins,  xxxg2098xxx  and vmat2, with an
overall identity of 62%. the properties of the two recombinant proteins expressed in non secretory cho fibroblasts have been compared (peter et al., 1994). vmat2
has a 3-5-fold higher apparent affinity for monoamines
than  xxxg2099xxx ~. the difference is larger for histamine, ranging from 100-20 (peter et al., 1994, 1996). several differences have also been noted in the pharmacological
profiles. the affinity of vmat2 for metamphetamine is
20-fold higher than that of vmati. similarly,  xxxd3330xxx  has
a 10-fold higher affinity for vmat2, whereas ket, which
has been shown to bind the same site on chromaffin
granule membrane, has the same affinity for the two
isoforms.
the  xxxg2099xxx  isoforms have also been described in bovine (krejci et al., 1993; howell et al., 1994) and human
(erickson and eiden, 1993; lesch et al., 1993; surratt et
al., 1993) tissues. in bovine adrenal medulla, at variance
with rat, the major isoform is vmat2 (fig. 3) and by
protein sequencing, it was shown to be identical to the
 xxxg2099xxx  purified from chromaffin granules (stern-bach et
al., 1992; krejci et al., 1993). the substrate affinities and
the pharmacology of vmat2 expressed in cos ceils
agree reasonably well with the data obtained on chromarlin granules (gasnier et al., 1994). the differences
observed between the two bovine isoforms,  xxxg2099xxx ~ and
vmatz are similar to those observed for the rat proteins,
though differences appear less marked; for instance, histamine affinities differ by less than one order of magnitude
(botton et al., unpublished result).
the properties of the two human isoforms have also
been compared after expression in cv-1 fibroblasts
(erickson et al., 1996). again the same type of differences
was noted for histamine (30-fold), amphetamine (20-fold)
and  xxxd3330xxx , but, in this case,  xxxd3330xxx  has ~a very low affinity
for vmati (ki > 20 #m). vmati and vmat2 genes
were localized on chromosomes 8 (8 p 21.3) and 10 (10 q
25), respectively (peter et al., 1993; surratt et al., 1993).
it has to be noted that the vesicular ach transporter,
vacht, belongs to the same family of transporters
(erickson et al., 1994; roghani et al., 1994; varoqui et
al., 1994). for instance, the aminoacid identity of rat
vacht with rvmati and rvmat2 is 40% and 38%
respectively. on the other hand, there is no homology
between  xxxg2099xxx  and the corresponding plasma membrane transporters, the dopamine (dat), noradrenaline
(net) and 5-ht (sert) transporters (amara and
kuhar, 1993). this observation suggests that the evolution of the transporters is conditioned more by the
mechanism of uptake than by the nature of the transported substrate. indeed, the only known transporters

234

j.-p. ttenrr el a/.

lumen

membrane

cytoplasm

fig. 3. sequenceof bvmat~.the sequence has been shown accordingto the current topologicalmodel, with 12 transmembrane segments. the nand c-terminal extremitiesare present in the cytoplasm and a large intravesicular loop bears 3 putative glycosylationsites. the 518 amino acid
sequence has been registeredas genbank accessionnumber x76380.

having some homology with  xxxg2099xxx  are a class of bacterial transporters working as h + antiporters (nguyen et
al., 1983; neal and chater, 1987: neyfakh et al., 1991).
these proteins have a broad substrate specificity and
they have been described as texan, toxin extruding
antiporters (schuldiner, 1994). because their expression
is regulated by multiple xenobiotics, they have been proposed to be involved in cell protection. the interesting
suggestion was made that  xxxg2099xxx , which is protecting
neurons against the neurotoxin m p p - , has evolved ~¥om
this family to perform a more specific role in specialized
cells, the accumulation of hormones and transmitters to
be secreted (schuldiner, 1994; schuldiner et al., 1995).
this suggestion is supported by the fact that the pharmacological profile of the  xxxg2099xxx  resembles that of the multidrug transporters (yelin
and schuldiner, 1995).
2. structural organization o j v m a t

analysis of the hydrophobicity of rat  xxxg2099xxx  sequences
suggested 12 transmembrane domains, and the absence
of a cleavable presequence suggested the orientation of

the n-terminus in the cytosol (erickson et al., 1992; liu
et al., 1992b). this model (fig. 3) was consistent with the
presence of putative glycosylation sites on a loop between
transmembrane segments 1 and 2, located in the vesicular
matrix. the same model could be applied to  xxxg2099xxx ~
and  xxxg2099xxx ~ from all origins and to vacht. the most
variable regions were the n- and c-terminal extremities
and, overall, the large glycosylated loop. for instance, in
this loop, the identity between bvmat~ and bvmat2 is
only 22%. on the other hand, several transmembrane
domains are well conserved and some charged amino
acids in those segments are constant, offering interesting
possibilities for mutagenesis (see below).
in spite of the absence of sequence homology between
 xxxg2099xxx  and the plasma membrane monoamine transporters, the two families have the same general organization, with 12 transmembrane segments, n- and ctermini located in the cytosol and the glycosylation sites
in a large extracytosolic loop, located between transmembrane segments 1 and 2 for  xxxg2099xxx  and 3 and 4
for plasma membrane transporters (amara and arriza,
1993). however, it should be noted that in both cases,
the model is only based on a theoretical sequence analysis,

the  xxxg2099xxx 

and, in the case of the plasma membrane transporters,
that experimental data have lead to changes in the proposed model (bennet and kanner, 1997; olivares et al.,
1997).
recently, structure-function analysis using point
mutagenesis showed the existence of a charge pair
between lys-139 and asp-427 in rvmat2 (merickel et
al., 1997). in the current model, this result suggests a
close proximity between transmembrane segments 2 and
11.
3. structure-function relationship

after the cloning of the  xxxg2099xxx  cdna, these studies
progressed rapidly, using recombinant cdna techniques.
point mutations. advantage was taken of two aspects
of  xxxg2099xxx  studies, developed in bovine chromaffin granules: (i) various chemical modification of  xxxg2099xxx  have
been described which affected the protein activity; (2) the
a/~h+ driven translocation reaction can be dissected in
several partial reactions with pharmacological tools
( xxxd3330xxx , res, ket).
a first instance is the study of the acidic residues present in transmembrane segments and conserved throughout the whole  xxxg2099xxx  family. chemical modification with
the carboxyl modifying agent dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(dccd) inhibited aph driven monoamine translocation
by bovine chromaffin granule membrane vesicles (gasnier et al., 1985; suchi et al., 1991). the treatment inhibited
also res binding, which is a#h+-dependent and
tbzoh binding, which is independent of the h ÷ gradient. the fact that  xxxd3330xxx  protected against dccd is an
indication that the dccd modified residue was interacting with the  xxxd3330xxx  binding site. these studies suggested
that an acidic residue in an hydrophobic environment
might participate to h + translocation, as proposed for
other h+-translocating proteins [f- and v-type proton
pump,  xxxg569xxx  oxidase, mitochondrial cytochrome
b-c1 complex, nucleotide transhydrogenase (gasnier et
al., 1985)].
four asp residues, present in transmembrane segments
1, 6, 10 and 11 are conserved in the  xxxg2099xxx  family (fig.
4). the asp in transmembrane segment 6 does not seem
to be essential (merickel et al., 1997), in contrast to the
three others, for which the non conservative mutation to
an uncharged residue, inhibited monoamine translocation. however, the mutated proteins have different
characteristics. in rvmat2, the protein with the d33n
mutation, in which the aspartate residue in the first transmembrane segment was mutated, still bound res and
this binding was accelerated by a#h + (merickel et al.,
1995). however, monoamine substrates inhibited very
inefficiently [3h]res binding. it was concluded that the
mechanism of the a/~th+-dependent conformational

235

change was functional, but that the mutation affected the
recognition of the substrate in the charge site, postulated
to be identical to the res binding site.
the same phenotype was observed after mutation of
serine 180, 181 and 182 (fig. 4), in transmembrane segment 3 of rvmat2 (merickel et al., 1995). the first one
is conserved in all  xxxg2099xxx  whereas the third one is conserved in vmat2 and is replaced by a threonine in
 xxxg2098xxx . these residues are different in vacht. these
results suggested that hydroxylated substrates, such as
catecholamines, might be recognized by an aspartate and
two serine residues, as postulated for the plasma membrane dat (kitayama et al., 1992b). however, it has
been noted that serine mutagenesis also affected histamine uptake (merickel and edwards, 1995).
the aspartate residues in transmembrane segments 10
and 11, respectively, residues 404 and 431 in rvmat1
(fig. 4), have been involved in h ÷ translocation (steinermordoch et al., 1996). mutation d431s or even the conservative d431e completely inhibited substrate translocation, had no effect on res binding with or without
aph + and did not affect inhibition of res binding by
substrates. these results suggested that the charge of the
transporter, which requires the translocation of a first
h ÷ (fig. 2), was normal and that a defect in the translocation of the second h ÷ blocked monoamine translocation. the same observations were made and the same
reasoning was applied to  xxxd404xxx  mutation in transmembrane segment 10. however, the mutation d404e
gave a partially active protein, with a marked change in
the ph profile of the transport and which was also more
sensitive to  xxxd3330xxx . this result suggested to the authors
that  xxxd404xxx  might be the dccd sensitive residue which
can be protected by  xxxd3330xxx . the importance of the aspartate
residues in transmembrane segments 10 and 11 has been
confirmed in an independent work on rvmat2 (merickel
et al., 1997). in addition, this work showed that the inactivating mutation d427n on the acidic residue in transmembrane segment 11 could be compensated for by
simultaneous mutation of lys 139 in transmembrane segment 2 to an alanine (fig. 4). this observation indicated
that the aspartate in transmembrane segment 11 is not
directly involved in h ÷ translocation, but rather participates to an important charge pair, with lys 139 in
transmembrane segment 2.
in addition to carboxylate, histidine residues have been
proposed to be involved in energy coupling on the basis
of the chemical modification of the protein by diethylpyrocarbonate (isambert and henry, 1981; suchi et al.,
1992). such a treatment inhibited the a#h+-induced
acceleration of res binding, but not binding itself.
mutation on h419, a residue present on the loop between
transmembrane segments 10 and 11 on all  xxxg2099xxx  gave
a protein with the same phenotype (fig. 4), thus implicating this conserved residue in h + transfers (shirvan et
al., 1994).

236

j.-p. henrvetal.

energy coupling
histamine

matrix
dggd ?

i
i
i
i
i
i

i
i
i

i
i
i
i
i

membrane

cytoplasm
n

i
i
i
i

depc ?
c

i

 xxxd3330xxx 
 xxxd3330xxx -ket
fig. 4. summary of the results obtained on recombinant  xxxg2099xxx .  xxxg2099xxx  has been drawn according to the current topological model, with
transmembrane domains indicated by grey boxes. the scheme summarizes the information obtained on various  xxxg2099xxx  and the residues indicated
are those of the original work. aspartate d33 and serines s180, s181 and  xxxg1857xxx  in rvmat2 are proposed to participate to the substrate recognition
site (merickel et al., 1995). the n-terminal domain extending to lysine k 55 (in bvmat2) encompasses the site covalently labelled by 7-azido-8iodoketanserin (sagn6 et al., 1997). lysine k139 and aspartate  xxxd427xxx  in rvmat2 (corresponding to k143 and  xxxd431xxx  in rvmat~) were proposed to
form a charge pair (merickel et al., 1997). aspartates  xxxd404xxx  and  xxxd431xxx  and histidine h419, in rvmat~ would be involved in the coupling between
monoamine translocation and proton flux. these results suggest that transmembrane domains x and xi are important for the dynamic of the
transport; the  xxxd3330xxx /ket binding site would associate two domains, transmembrane segments 1 and 11 on one hand and segments x to xi1 on the
other one. chimeric constructs suggest that translocation of histamine involves segments vii to x (peter et al., 1996; erickson, 1998).

chimeric' v m a t isojbrms. a n o t h e r a p p r o a c h has been

to construct chimeric transporters using the  xxxg2099xxx ~ and
vmat2 isoforms to identify domains responsible for
functional differences between the isoforms. in two such
studies, rat and h u m a n chimeric constructs have been
investigated for substrate affinities (5-ht and histamine
for the rat proteins and amphetamine and histamine for
the h u m a n ones) and for t b z sensitivity. in the rat (peter
et al., 1996), modification of domains affecting histamine
affinity affects simultaneously t b z sensitivity. the definition of the domains responsible for the high affinity of
vmat2 for its substrates and for t b z is complex: two
domains have been defined, transmembrane domains 5
8 and 9-12, but none o f them is sufficient to confer a
vmat2 profile.
a difficulty o f this a p p r o a c h is that the differences
between the two isoforms are not very large: 4-, 10- and
20-fold for 5-ht, t b z and histamine relative affinities,
respectively. in h u m a n  xxxg2098xxx  the difference in the sensitivity to  xxxd3330xxx  is larger and erickson (1998) obtained a
chimera in which t b z sensitivity and histamine affinity
were dissociated. f r o m this study, it was concluded that

high histamine affinity in vmat2 resides in putative
transmembrane segments 7 10. however again, definition of the domains responsible for high  xxxd3330xxx  sensitivity
in vmat2 was complex and several regions acted in
combination (fig. 4).
use q [ covalent rea,qents. definition o f the substrates
and inhibitor binding sites by the previous approach
appears to be difficult. the involvement of several
elements might indicate that the corresponding site
involves residues which are close one to another in the
3d structure but distant in the sequence, or that changes
in sequence induce a change in the c o n f o r m a t i o n o f the
protein at a remote site. this difficulty is circumvented
by the use of ligand derivatives which bind covalently
to their site, followed by identification of the labelled
residues. such an a p p r o a c h has been followed with a z i k
(sagn6 et al., 1997). by combining proteolysis o f the
photolabelled chromaffin granule v m a t and purification o f the iodinated peptide with similar experiments
performed on mutated recombinant vmat2, the label
was located on the first 55 residues at the n-terminal

the  xxxg2099xxx 

extremity of the protein (fig. 4), on a domain encompassing the first transmembrane segment. this result is consistent with those obtained on chimeric proteins, which
indicated that this segment is important for the high  xxxd3330xxx 
sensitivity of vmat2 (peter et al., 1996; erickson, 1998).

iii. from adrenal medulla to brain

1. expression o f the v m a t1 and v m a 1"2 genes

the discovery that two different genes are encoding
a  xxxg2099xxx  activity was not anticipated from previous
biochemical and pharmacological studies (henry and
scherman, 1989). the existence of two different proteins
might indicate a heterogeneity at the molecular, the subcellular or the cellular level. in this section, we shall
discuss the hypothesis of a cellular heterogeneity by analysing the results obtained on the localization of the two
gene products, at the rna and protein levels. in rats,
 xxxg2098xxx  was originally found to be expressed in adrenal
medulla and vmat2 in brain (liu et al., 1992b), and the
authors tentatively proposed that vmati and vmat2
were "endocrine" and "neuronal" isoforms. however,
this hypothesis became rapidly untenable since rat
vmat2 was cloned from a basophilic 'leukemia cell
library (erickson et al., 1992). the anatomical distribution of  xxxg2099xxx ~ and vmat2 has been investigated
in rat and in man using polyclonal antibodies against
the two isoforms (peter et al., 1995; weihe et al., 1995;
erickson et al., 1996).  xxxg2099xxx ~ is present in endocrine
and paracrine cells (chromaffin cells, chromogranin apositive cells of the intestine: the enterochromaffin cells,
dopaminergic sif cells in the superior cervical ganglion)
and it is excluded from the adult brain. vmat2 is present
in neurons from brain, but also in sympathetic ones.
in addition, vmat2 immunoreactivity is abundant in
chromogranin a-positive cells from the oxyntic mucosa
of the stomach, the enterochromaffin-like cells.. similar
results were obtained in humans (erickson et al., 1996).
results on adrenal medulla are more complex and
different results have been obtained in rats, bovines and
humans. in rats,  xxxg2099xxx ~ is the major isoform (liu et al.,
1992b); however, vmat2 is also expressed in ganglion
cells and perhaps in some chromaffin cells (mahata et al.,
1993a; peter et al., 1995; weihe et al., 1995). ganglion
cells differ from chromaffin cells: they can be identified
by the presence of the neuropeptide npy and they project
out of the medulla, towards cortical cells or the splanchnic nerve. on the contrary, vmat2 is the major isoform
expressed in bovines (henry et al., 1994), whereas both
isoforms are equally present in human adrenal medulla
(erickson et al., 1996). in the latter case, all cells express
 xxxg2099xxx ~ and vmat2, opening the possibility of a molecular heterogeneity, the transporter being a heteroligomer.
various circulating cells take up monoamines through

237

specific plasma membrane transporters and store them in
secretory vesicles with the help of a  xxxg2099xxx . however,
the corresponding genes have not been completely characterized. in rats, vmat2 was originally cloned from a
leukemia basophilic cell (rbl) library (erickson et al.,
1992). these cells store 5-ht. it was suggested that mastocytes, which contain histamine, were to be equipped
with vmat2 (peter et al., 1994; merickel and edwards,
1995), on the basis of the higher affinity of this isoform for
histamine. however, weihe et al. (1994) detected neither
 xxxg2099xxx ~ nor vmat2 immunoreactivity in these cells, suggesting a low level of expression or a different type of
transporter. blood platelet  xxxg2099xxx  has not been identified
in rats; however, human platelets express vmat2 (lesch
et al., 1993).
these anatomical studies indicate that the  xxxg2099xxx  isoform distribution is not correlated with that of the different monoamines. this is not surprising since the two
isoforms have very simi~lar substrate specificities. the
only exception is histamine, for which rat vmat2 has an
affinity which is larger by one order0f magnitude (peter
et al., 1994). this substrate specificity might account for
the presence of vmat2 in histaminergic gastric mucosa
cells (peter et al., 1995; weihe et al., 1995, wiedenmann,
gasnier and henry, unpublished result). for the other
monoaminergic cells, the isoform distribution is more
likely to reflect a complex sympathoadrenal lineage.
chromaffin cells represent a non-endstage neuroendocrine differentiation state and differences in the
lineage between the different species would result in the
preponderance of an isoform. in this respect,  xxxg2099xxx 
isoforms might be useful phenotypic markers. obviously,
these markers are different from phenylethanolamine nmethyl transferase ( xxxg1791xxx ) expression since in the three
mammalian species, adrenalin is the major catecholamine
of adrenal medulla.
2. v m a t subcellular distribution and secretory vesicle
biogenesis

from a general point of view, synaptic vesicles differ
from the secretory granules of neuroendocrine cells by
their morphology, their content and their biogenesis. the
latter are larger (for instance, chromaffin granules and
classical neurotransmitter synaptic vesicles have diameters of 270 nm (coupland, 1984) and 40--60 nm
(thureson-klein, 1982), respectively), and they contain
peptides and proteins in addition to catecholamines. the
presence of proteins in secretory granules implies that
they derive from the golgi apparatus and that they cannot be recycled directly after exocytosis. on the other
hand, synaptic vesicles derive from the endosomal pathway and they are recycled rapidly in the nerve terminal
(desnos et al., 1995a; takei et al., 1996; schmidt et al.,
1997). this description is only schematic and it should be
added that central and peripheral neurons, contain also

238

.l.-p. t t e n r v el al.

monoaminergic large dense core vesicles, which are homologous to the endocrine secretory granules (klein, 1982).
monoaminergic synaptic vesicles can be distinguished
from other synaptic vesicles and from large dense core
vesicles by staining techniques and they have been characterized as small dense core vesicles. both large and
small dense core vesicles accumulate catecholamines and
are equipped with  xxxg2099xxx  (klein and lagercrantz, 1982).
in addition, endocrine cells contain vesicles bearing  xxxg2236xxx , a marker of synaptic vesicles (moriyama et
al., 1996). in bovine posterior pituitary (moriyama et al.,
1995) and possibly chromaffin cells (annaert et al., 1993),
these vesicles are monoaminergic. these vesicles, which
derive from endosomes, were named synaptic-like microvesicles (slmv) (navone et al., 1986).
at the present time, the following information has been
obtained on the subcellular distribution of the  xxxg2099xxx 
isoforms. in the adult rat central nervous system,
vmat2, which is the only expressed isoform, is present
in both synaptic vesicles and large dense core vesicles. in
neurons from the solitary tract nuclei (nirenberg et al.,
1995), which represent a heterogenous monoaminergic
population with many large dense core vesicles,  xxxg2099xxx ~
is present on synaptic vesicles, on the trans golgi network
of neuronal perikarya and in tubulovesicles of smooth
endoplasmic reticulum, but it preferentially localizes to
large dense core vesicles. in the dopaminergic terminals
of the dorsolateral striatum (nirenberg et al., 1997),
vmat2 is almost exclusively localized to synaptic
vesicles, showing that the localization is specific for the
type of neuron. interestingly enough, immunoreactive
large dense core vesicles in neurons from the solitary tract
nuclei were prominently localized away from synaptic
contacts, thus suggesting a modulatory role for these
vesicles. the presence of the same isoform on the two
types of vesicles gives some support to the hypothesis of
a relationship in their biogenesis (de potter and chubb,
1977; winkler et al., 1986). recently, it has been proposed
that monoaminergic synaptic vesicles would be "'chimeric" vesicles, with a membrane containing elements
from both, secretory granules and synaptic vesicles
(bauerfeind et al., 1995). in the early endosomes of
neurons, certain components of the secretory granule
membrane necessary for catecholamine uptake (e.g.
 xxxg2099xxx ) or synthesis (e.g. dopamine fl-hydroxylase)
would associate after exocytosis and internalization with
components of synaptic vesicles, such as  xxxg2236xxx .
however, this hypothesis cannot account for the subcellular distribution of  xxxg2099xxx  in endocrine cells where
slmv and secretory granules often contain different cargoes. for instance, rat pc-12 cells contain monoamines
in their granules and ach in slmv (bauerfeind et al.,
1993) and bovine posterior pituitary cells, peptides in the
granules and noradrenaline in slmv (moriyama et al.,
1995 and 1996).
in rat pc-12 and chromaffin cells,  xxxg2099xxx ~ pref-

erentially localizes to secretory granules (liu et al., 1994).
when pc-12 cells differentiated by culture in the presence
of ngf were transfected with vmat2, this isoform was
found on large dense core vesicles and not on synaptic
vesicles (weihe et al.. 1996), suggesting that in these cells,
the mechanism proposed by huttner and colleagues does
not operate. the mechanisms governing the subcellular
traffic of  xxxg2099xxx  remain largely elusive; the addressing
information is not stored in  xxxg2099xxx  sequences and different mechanisms seem to operate in neuronal and endocrine cells.
3. in ciro cesicular m o n o a m i n e transport and its regulation

what is the time required to fill secretory granules or
synaptic vesicles with their monoamine content'? this
question has been approached from a theoretical point
of view by combining the kinetic parameters of the uptake
with the number of  xxxg2099xxx  molecules, measured pharmacologically, and the amount of monoamine to be
transported (gasnier et al., 1987; scherman and boschi,
1988). the value obtained ranged from 2.5 4.0 rain for
synaptic vesicles to 35 70 h for chromaffin granules.
these large differences might reflect mostly volume
differences. both sets of data are consistent with physiological observations. synaptic vesicle biogenesis is a rapid
process with a half-time of seconds to minutes (betz and
bewick, 1992; ryan et al., 1993) whereas pulse experiments with labelled precursors followed by density gradient analysis indicated a slow accumulation of
catecholamines and atp lasting for 2~48 h in rat chromaffin granules (winkler, 1977; ungar and phillips,
1983).
is the vesicular uptake rate limiting'? classically, the
answer is no; however, the question should be addressed
in view of the above mentioned results which indicate
that the time required for the maturation of the organelles
is comparable to that required for intravesicular
monoamine accumulation (phillips, 1982). if the uptake
process is rate-limiting, the vesicular quantal size, measured during release, will be affected. developments of
the amperometric technique to analyse secreted catecholamines have allowed measurements of these parameters (finnegan et al., 1996). the statistical size
distribution of the quantum, calculated from the released
catecholamine spike, reflects granule size distribution,
thus suggesting a control of monoamine concentration.
such a control might reflect the thermodynamic equilibrium (see bioenergetics section). however, overexpression of vmat2 by adenovirus transfection of pc12 cells increased the quantal size by 400% (sulzer et al.,
1996). this observation is interesting because it suggests
that the intragranular monoamine concentration is not
controlled thermodynamically, but kinetically.
this hypothesis raises in turn the problem of the regulation of the vesicular uptake. confusing results have

the  xxxg2099xxx 

been obtained on the regulation of  xxxg2099xxx  expression. in
rats, an insulin-induced hypoglycemia raised the steadystate mrna level of npy contained in chromaffin granules matrix, but had no significant effect on that of
 xxxg2099xxx ~ (mahata et al., 1993a), consistent with the
suggestion that only soluble components of the granules
could be up regulated (laslop et al., 1994). this hypothesis was also substantiated by similar results obtained on
the brain of rats treated with reserpine (mahata et al.,
1993b). however, in vitro experiments conducted with
bovine chromaffin cells chronically stimulated by culture
in the presence of a kc1 depolarizing concentration lead
to a different view. not only the mrna level for vmat2
(krejci et al., 1993), but also the protein (measured by
[3h]tbzoh binding) was significantly increased (desnos
et al., 1992, 1995b), thus indicating a regulation of the
expression of vmat2. the discrepancy observed in adrenal medulla might originate in species differences since,
in the cellular system,  xxxg2099xxx ~, which is the major rat
isoform was not up regulated by long term depolarization
(botton and gasnier, unpublished results). in the brain,
though vmat2 is the major isoform, the regulation
might be different, due to the rapid filling of synaptic
vesicles.
regulation of vesicular uptake could also occur at the
level of the activity of  xxxg2099xxx . several phosphorylation
sites are present in the cytosolic extremities of both
isoforms. recently, casein kinase ii was shown to phosphorylate rvmat2, but not the vmati isoform (krantz
et al., 1997). constitutive phosphorylation did not appear
to alter transport activity and it was suggested that casein
kinase ii phosphorylation might influence subcellular
localization. though no direct experiments have been
made, some indirect observations show a cyclic ampdependent modulation of vesicular monoamine transport
in pheochromocytoma cells (nakanishi, 1995b). the
atp-dependent serotonin uptake by digitonin permeabilized cells was lowered to ~ 50% of the control by
dibutyryl c-amp treatment before permeabilization. the
effect of protein kinase inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors was given as an evidence for a phosphorylation reaction (nakanishi, 1995a). however, this phosphorylation
might be direct on  xxxg2098xxx  or indirect on a regulatory
component. it might be noted that an addition of camp
to the permeabilized cells during the uptake reaction was
inefficient. for plasma membrane transporters such as
glytib, a similar inhibition by stimulation of phosphorylation conditions in cell cultures has been reported
and it might result from an indirect effect as all phosphorylation sites can be mutated without eliminating the
effect (sato et al., 1995). a decrease of the activity of the
vesicular transporter might have important physiological
consequences. in the work of nakanishi et al. (1995b),
the effect of dibutyryl camp was to decrease slightly the
dopamine content of the cells and to increase largely that
of the extracellular medium, consistent with the fact that

239

the vesicular pool is much larger than the cytosolic one.
pharmacological studies with amphetamine-like psychostimulants (see below) demonstrate that this type of
overflow has important effects.
it is important to realize that monoamine storage in
small dense core vesicles is more dynamic than in chromaffin granules. the former ones exchange their content
with a half lifetime of less than 10 min (floor et al., 1995),
confirming previous data (klein and lagercrantz, 1982),
whereas chromaffin granules are stable for hours under
suitable conditions. this difference can be accounted for
in three different ways: first, chromaffin granules (270
nm diameter) are larger than synaptic vesicles (50 nm
diameter), and the passive effiux through the membrane
will be related to the area whereas the content will be
related to the volume since the concentration will be the
same for both. accordingly, the synaptic vesicles will
release their content more rapidly. secondly, in chromaffin granules the major monoamines are noradrenaline
and adrenaline which are less permeant than dopamine.
thirdly, as pointed previously, the intravesicular ph is
an important parameter in the control of the effiux and
the internal medium of chromaffin granules is certainly
more buffered than that of synaptic vesicles because granules contain higher atp concentrations and high concentrations of acidic chromogranin (100 mg/ml) which
are not present in synaptic vesicles. the more dynamic
character of synaptic vesicles storage implies that vmat2
has a more important role: inhibition of the uptake is
likely to result rapidly in an increase of cytosolic and
extracellular monoamine concentration.
4. n e u r o p h a r m a c o l o y y o f v m a t

in recent years, the mechanism of amphetamine and
amphetamine-like drugs has been investigated in some
details (sabol and selden, 1992). these drugs act by
increasing non exocytotic release of dopamine by dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area projecting
to the nucleus accumbens (di chiara and imperato,
1988). at variance with cocaine, which has the same
effect, but which acts as an inhibitor of dopamine reuptake, these drugs are substrates of the plasma membrane
 xxxg2149xxx  and they act on the vesicular pool.
it was originally proposed that they were concentrated in
synaptic vesicles as weak bases, independently of  xxxg2099xxx 
(sulzer and rayport, 1990; rudnick and wall, 1992).
in chromaffin granules, the rate of monoamine efflux
through  xxxg2099xxx  is dependent upon the matrix ph and
an accumulation of weak base results in a rapid efflux
(maron et al., 1983). the monoamines released in the
cytosol would then leave the cell through the dopamine
plasma membrane transporter dat (sulzer and
rayport, 1990; rudnick and wall, 1992; schuldiner et
al., 1993; sulzer et al., 1993). this theory is generally
accepted and the role of the plasma membrane trans-

240

j.-p. henry et al.

porter dat has been directly demonstrated in mice lacking this transporter (giros et al., 1996). this theory is
also supported by experiments in which cos cells were
transfected by vmat2 and/or dat (pifl et al., 1995) and
loaded with [3h]dopamine. low concentrations (1 10
/~m) of amphetamine release larger amounts of dopamine
in the extracellular medium of cells transfected by both
transporters, thus showing the direct involvement of the
vesicular pool of amine.
the mechanism by which amphetamine-like drugs
release this pool has been the matter of some dispute.
according to sulzer, these drugs do not interact with
 xxxg2099xxx . others (rudnick and wall, 1992; schuldiner et
al., 1993) showed that some amphetamine derivatives
(mdma "'ecstasy", fenfluramine), but not all (p-chloroamphetamine) are substrates of the bovine chromaffin
granule vmat2 and proposed that the transporter might
be involved in the release of vesicular monoamines. the
direct interaction of amphetamine derivatives with rat
and human  xxxg2098xxx  and vmat2 has been analyzed in
transfected cells (peter et al., 1994; erickson et al., 1996).
the drugs inhibited reserpine binding and serotonin
uptake; the (+) isomers were more active than the ( - )
ones and vmat2 was generally more sensitive than
vmati. it was also observed that dissipation of the ph
gradient in wild-type cho required metamphetamine
concentrations 2 orders of magnitude higher than the
concentrations that inhibit amine transport (peter et al.,
1994). this observation supports the hypothesis that
drugs such as mdma ("ecstasy"), at low concentrations,
act as inhibitors of the vesicular uptake. in view of the
highly dynamic nature of monoamine uptake by synaptic
vesicles (floor et al., 1995), this inhibition would result
in a rapid efftux of vesicular dopamine.
another important drug in the study of  xxxg2099xxx  is
the neurotoxin mpp +, which destroys the dopaminergic
neurons of the substantia nigra and induces the symptoms of parkinson's disease. it is now well established
that the toxin precursor, mptp, can cross the brain blood
barrier and that it is oxidized to mpp + by monoamine
oxidase. the latter compound is taken up by dopaminergic cells through dat. inside of the cells, it will be
accumulated in mitochondria where it will interfere with
complex i, thereby leading to cell death (tipton and
singer, 1993). it has been shown that mpp + is a substrate
of chromaffin granule  xxxg2099xxx  (daniels and reinhard,
1988; darchen et al., 1988a) and this property has been
used to clone vmatl, as a mpp + resistance gene (liu
et al., 1992b, see above).
the hypothesis that mpp + cytotoxicity requires the
intracellular transport of the drug through plasma membrane monoamine transporters has been substantiated by
dat transfection studies. the sensitivity to the toxin
paralleled the level of dat expression (kitayama et al.,
1992a; pifl et al., 1993). from this observation, it has
been proposed that idiopathic parkinsonism might result

from the accumulation in dopaminergic neurons via
 xxxg2149xxx  function of an endogenous or
exogenous toxic agent (uhl et al., 1994). consistent with
this hypothesis, the higher vulnerability of the pigmented
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, compared
to that of the adjacent neurons of the nucleus paranigralis, is paralleled by a higher dat expression level in
the former neurons. it would be interesting to estimate
vmat2 expression in these cells, to determine if vesicular
uptake is an important parameter in cell vulnerability, as
it is in the mpp + model.
recently,  xxxd3330xxx  has gained much interest because of its
potentiality as a brain imaging probe (see below) and its
pharmacology has been investigated in some detail. a
surprising result obtained in transfected cells is the
difference of sensitivity to  xxxd3330xxx  between  xxxg2099xxx ~ and
vmat2, observed with the rat (peter et al., 1994), bovine
(botton, henry and gasnier, unpublished results) and
human proteins (erickson et al., 1996). based on this
result,  xxxd3330xxx  as an imaging agent would be limited to
vmat2. moreover, this difference has been proposed to
account for the fact that, compared to res,  xxxd3330xxx  is
less efficient in peripheral organs where  xxxg2099xxx ~ is more
largely expressed (peter et al., 1994). however, this
difference is somewhat in contrast with previous pharmacological results describing [3h]tbzoh binding in
rat adrenal medulla (sietzen et al., 1987; scherman and
boschi, 1988) or pc-12 cells (henry et al., 1997).
recently, [3h]tbzoh was shown to bind to two classes
of sites in pc-12 cells (adamson et al., 1997). the more
abundant low affinity sites were proposed to represent
 xxxg2099xxx ~ but the density of these sites is more consistent
with the identification of the high affinity sites (kd
1.5 rim) to vmatt. at the present time, the sensitivity
to  xxxd3330xxx  of monoamine uptake has been measured only
on the recombinant isoforms expressed in non secretory
cells and more work is required to estimate the difference
between the natural isoforms.
5. brain imagin 9 usin9 substrates and ligands o.1 v m a t

since the vesicular pool of monoamines is much larger
than the cytosolic one, it might represent a useful target
for imaging studies. for this type of approach, the probe
should be a substrate of  xxxg2099xxx . meta-iodobenzylguanidine (mibg) accumulates in bovine chromaffin
granules (gasnier et al., 1986), and is likely to be a substrate of both  xxxg2099xxx ~ and vmat2 (peter et al., 1994).
this probe is also a substrate of the plasma membrane
noradrenaline transporter (jacque et al., 1984) and it is
classically used as an in vivo imaging agent for scintigraphy. however, because this compound does not cross
the brain blood barrier, it has been developed mainly for
the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
though the number of  xxxg2099xxx  molecules is much lower
than that ofmonoamines [ranging from 1-300 in synaptic

the  xxxg2099xxx 

241

fig. 5.  xxxd3330xxx  as a probe for positron emissiontomography(pet). positron emissiontomographic parametric imagesof total distribution volumes
(dv) for (+)-ct-[~c]dihydrotetrabenazinein a representativeelderlynormal (left), parkinson's diseasehoenh and yahr stage ii patient (center), and
parkinson's diseasehoehnand yahr stageiii patient (right). note substantial to completereductionof binding in posteriorstriata in the parkinson's
disease patients. this figure has been given by dr michael r. kilbourn, michigan universityschoolof medicine.

vesicles, to 1-300,000 in chromaffin granules, scherman
and boschi (1988)], ligands of the transporter can be
used for imaging.  xxxd3330xxx  derivatives prove useful for these
studies. using [3h]dihydrotetrabenazine ([3h]tbzoh),
it has been shown that the corresponding binding sites
regionalization was correlated with the distribution of
brain monoamines (scherman et al., 1986). the characteristics of [3h]tbzoh binding to mouse and bovine
synaptic vesicles were similar to those described on bovine chromaffin granules (near, 1986; scherman, 1986),
though some low affinity unidentified binding sites were
also reported (meshgin-azarian et al., 1988). in vitro
autoradiographic studies using rat brain section demonstrated the potentiality of this compound (masuo et al.,
1990), which was proposed as a probe for human brain
(scherman et al., 1988). efforts to develop iodinated
ligands for spect imaging have been largely unsuccessful (aranda et al., 1990; kung et al., 1994). a compound, ~25i-iodovinyltetrabenazine, has been synthesized
which has a high affinity (kd = 0.2 nm), but which has a
low target to noise ratio, probably because of its high
lipophilicity (kung et al., 1994). however, this compound
gave interesting results in in vitro autoradiography.
 xxxd3330xxx  derivatives were also tested as radioligands for in
vivo imaging by the positron emission tomography
(pet) technique. in a first approach, ['c] xxxd3330xxx 
was used (da silva and kilbourn, 1992; da silva et al.,
1993a). good results were obtained with monkeys and
with humans (kilbourn et al., 1993), where ligand binding was observed in the basal ganglia (dopaminergic), but
also in thalamus (noradrenaline) and cerebellum (noradrenaline and serotonin). other derivatives were also
tested, such as 2-methoxytetrabenazine, a derivative of
~-dihydrotetrabenazine (vander borght et al., 1995a;
vander borght et al., 1995b), 2-alkylated dihydrotetrabenazine (lee et al., 1996) or ct-dihydrotetrabenazine

itself(jewett et al., 1997, koeppe et al., 1996). with  xxxd3330xxx ,
quantitative imaging is complicated by rapid metabolization to compounds such as dihydrotetrabenazine, which
have a high affinity for the transporter. [l~c]methoxytetrabenazine is metabolized primarily to non active polar
compounds, present in the plasma (vander borght et al.,
1995b). [1ic]dihydrotetrabenazine has also been used for
the measurement of vmat2 density in the human brain
by dynamic pet and analysis of the data by two- or
three-compartment models (koeppe et al., 1996).
the possible clinical applications which had been previously indicated by post-mortem binding studies on
parkinson's disease patient tissues (scherman et al., 1989)
have been beautifully confirmed on mptp-lesioned primate brain (da silva et al., 1993b) and on human patients
with parkinson's disease (fig. 5) (frey et al., 1996), olivopontocerebellar atrophy and multiple system atrophy
(gilman et al., 1996). an interesting aspect of this
approach is that the radiotracer distribution remains
unchanged after treatment with usual therapeutics drugs
(kilbourn et al., 1996).

acknowledgements
work in the authors laboratory was supported by the
centre national de la recherche scientifique and the
european commission training and mobility of
researchers programme.

references
adamson, c. r., emley, t. e., herbig, l. j., & near, j. a. (1997).
effects of  xxxg1564xxx  on dihydrotetrabenazine binding to
pc12 cells. neurochem. int., 30, 411-415.

242

./.-p. henry et al.

amara, s. g., & arriza, j. l. (1993). neurotransmitter transporters:
three distinct gene families. curr. opin. neurobiol., 3, 337 344.
amara, s. g., & kuhar, m. j. (1993). neurotransmitter transporters
recent progress. ann. rev. neurosci., 16, 73 93.
annaert, w. g., ltona, 1., backer, a. c., jacob, w. a., & de potter,
w. p. (1993). catecholamines are present in a synaptic-like microvesicle enriched fraction from bovine adrenal medulla. j. neurochem., 60. 1746 1754.
apps, d. k., pryde, j. g., & phillips, j. h. (1980). both the transmembrane ph gradient and the membrane potential are important
in the accumulation of amines by resealed chromaftin-granule
"ghosts". febs lett.. 111,386 390.
aranda, g., beaucourt, j. p., ponchant, m., isambert, m. f., & henry,
j. p. (1990). synthesis and biological activity ofiodinated and photosensitive derivatives of  xxxd3330xxx . eur. j. med. chem., 25, 369
374.
bauerfeind, r., jelinek, r., hellwig, a., & huttncr. w. b. (1995).
neurosecretory vesicles can be hybrids of synaptic vesicles and
secretory granules. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 92, 7342 7346.
bauerfeind, r., rdgnier-vigouroux, a., flatmark, t., & huttner. w.
b. (1993). selective storage of acetylcholine, but not catecholamines.
in neuroendocrine synaptic-like microvesicles of early endosomal
origin. neuron, 11, 105 121.
bennet, e. r., & kanner, b. i. (1997). the membrane topology oi"
gat-i, a (na + +ci ) coupled  xxxg2145xxx  from rat brain. j. biol. chem., 272. 1203 1210.
betz, w. j., & bewick, g. s. (1992). optical analysis of synaptic vesicle
recycling at the frog neuromuscular junction. science, 255,200 203.
carlsson, a., hillarp, n. a., & waldeck, b. (1963). analysis of the
mg + +-atp-dependent storage mechanism in the amine granules of
the adrenal medulla. acta physiol. scand. (stq~pl.), 215, 1 38.
carlsson, a. (1965). drugs which block the storage of 5-hydroxytryptamine and related amines. handbk. exit. pharmacol.. 19, 529
592.
carlsson, a., & lindqvist, m. (1966). the interference of tctrabenazine.
 xxxd312xxx  and  xxxd3007xxx  with the action of reserpine. acta
pharmacol. toxicol., 24, 112 120.
chaplin, l., cohen, a. h., huetl, p.. kennedy, m., njus d., & temperley, s. j. (1985). reserpic acid as an inhibitor of norepinephrine
transport into chromaffin vesicle "'ghosts". j. biol. ('hem,, 259.
10907 40912.
cidon, s., & nelson, n. (1983). a novel atpase in the chromaflin
granule membrane. j. biol. chem., 258, 2892 2898.
ciolkowski, e. l., cooper, b. r., jankowski. j. a., jorgcuson, j. w..
& wightman, r. m. (1992). direct obserwttion of epinephrine and
norepinephrine cosecretion from individual adrenal medullary chromaffin cells. j. ant. chem. sot., 114, 2815 2821.
coupland, r. e. (1984). ultrastructural features of the mammalian
adrenal medulla. in: u/trastructure q/'emh~crine cell.~ am/tisst,'~, ed,
p. m. motta, pp. 168 179. martinus nijhoff, the hague.
da silva, j. n., & kilbourn, m. r. (1992). in riro binding o[" [tl(,]
 xxxd3330xxx  to vesicular monoamine transporters in mouse brain.
l(/b sci.. 51,593-600.
da silva, j. n., kilbourn, m. r., & mangner, t. j. (1993a). synthcsis
of [lic] xxxd3330xxx , a vesicular monoamine uptake inhibitor, for
pet imaging studies. appl. radial. lsot., 44, 673 676.
da silva, j. n., kilbourn, m. r.. & domino. e. f. (1993b). in rit,o
imaging of monoaminergic nerve terminals in normal and mptplesioned primate brain using positron emission tomography (pet)
and [~'c] xxxd3330xxx . synapse, 14, 128 131.
daniels, a. j.. & reinhard. j. f., jr, (1988). energy-driven uptake of
the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium into chromaffin granules via the catecholamine transporter. j. biol. ('hem., 263, 5034
5036.
darchen, f., scherman. d., desnos, c., & henry. j. p. (1988a). characteristics of the transport of the quaternary ammonium 1-methyl-4-

phenylpyridinium by chromaffin granules. biochem. pharmacol.. 37,
4381~4387.
darchen, f., scherman, d., laduron, p. m., & henry, j. p. /1988b).
 xxxd2419xxx  binds to the  xxxg2099xxx  of chromatfin granules and of synaptic vesicles. mol. pharmacol., 33. 672 677.
darchen, f., scherman, d., & henry. j. p. (1989). reserpine binding
to chromaffin granules suggests the existence of two conformations
of the  xxxg2099xxx . biochemistry, 28, 1692 1697.
de potter, w. p., & chubb, 1. w. (1977). biochemical observations on
the formation of small noradrenergic vesicles in the splanchnic nerve
of the dog. neuroscience, 2, 167 174.
desnos, c., laran, m. p., & scherman, d. (1992). regulation of the
chromaffin granule catecholamine transporter in cultured bovine
adrenal medullary cells: stimulus biosynthesis coupling. j. neurochem., 59, 2105-2112.
desnos, c., clift-o'grady, l., & kelly, r. b. (1995a). biogenesis of
synaptic vesicles ill t'itro. .i. cell biol., 130, 1041 1049.
desnos, c., laran, m. p.. langley, k., aunis, d., & henry. j. p.
(1995b). long term stimulation changes the vesicular monoamine
transporter of chromaffin granules. biol. chem.. 270, 1603016038.
deupree, j. d., & weaver, j. a. (1984). identification and characterization of the catecholamine transporter in bovine chromaffin
granules using [~h]reserpine. j. biol. chem., 259, 10907 10912.
i)i chiara, g., & lmperato, a. (1988). drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 85,
5274 5278.
erickson, j. d., eiden, k. e.. & hoffman, b. j. (1992). expression
cloning of a reserpine-sensitive  xxxg2099xxx .
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 89, 10993 10997.
erickson. j. d.. & eiden, k. e. (1993). functional identification and
molecular cloning of a haman brain vesicle  xxxg2099xxx .
j. 3;'eurochem., 61, 2314~2317.
erickson, j. d.. varoqui. h., sch~ifer. m. k. h., modi, w., diebler,
m. f., weihe, e., rand, j., eiden, l. e , bonner, t. 1., & usdin.
t. b. (1994). functional identification of a vesicular acetylcholine
transporter and its expression from a "~cholinergic" gene locus..i,
biol. chem., 269, 21929 21932.
erickson, j. d., sch~ifer, m. k. h., bonner, t. 1., eiden, l. e., & weihe,
e. (1996). distinct pharmacological properties and distribution in
neurons and endocrine cells of two isoforms of the human vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx . proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 93. 5166 517 i.
erickson, j. d. (1998). a chimeric  xxxg2099xxx  dissociates
sensitivity to  xxxd3330xxx  and unsubstituted aromatic amines. a~h'.
pharmacol., 42, 227 232.
finnegan, j. m., pihel, k., cahill, p. s., huang, l., zerby, s. e., ewing,
a. g.. kennedy, r. t., & wightman, r. m. (1996). vesicular
quantal size measured by amperometry at chromaffin, mast. pheochromocytoma and pancreatic fi-cells. j. neurochem., 66, 1914
1923.
floor, e.. leventhal, p. s., wang, y., meng. l.. & chen. w. (1995).
dynamic storage of dopamine in rat brain synaptic vesicles in ritro.
j. neurochem., 64, 689 699,
frey, k. a., koeppe, r. a., kilbourm m. r., vander borght. t.
m., albin, r. l,, gilman, s., & kuhl, d. e. (1996). presynaptic
monoaminergic vesicles in parkinson's disease and normal ageing.
arm.  xxxd122xxx ., 40, 873 887.
fukami, m. h., holsen, h., & ugurbil, k. (1984). histamine uptake
in pig platelets and isolated dense granules. biochem. pharmacol..
33, 3869 3874.
gasnier, b., scherman. d., & henry. j. p. (1985). dicyclohexylcarbodiimide inhibits the monoamine carrier of bovine
chromaffin granule membrane. biochemistry, 24, 1239 1244.
gasnier, b., roisin, m. p., scherman, d., coornaert, s., desplanches,
g.. & henry, j. p. (1986). uptake of meta-iodobenzylguanidine by
bovine chromaffin granule membranes. mol. pharmacol., 29, 275
280.

the  xxxg2099xxx 
gasnier, b., scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1987). inactivation of the
catecholamine transporter during the preparation of chromaffin
granule membrane "ghosts". febs left., 222, 215-219.
gasnier, b., krejci, e., botton, d., massouli6, j., & henry, j. p. (1994).
expression of a bovine  xxxg2099xxx  in cos
cells. febs lett., 342, 225-229.
gilman, s., frey, k. a., koeppe, r. a., junck, l., little, r., vander
borght, t. m., lohman, m., martorello, s., lee, l. c., jewett, d.
m., & kilbourn, m. r. (1996). decreased striatal monoaminergic
terminals in olivoponto-cerebellar atrophy and multiple system
atrophy demonstrated with positron emission tomography. ann.
 xxxd122xxx . 40, 885-892.
giros, b., jaber, m., jones, s. r., wightman, r. m., & caron, m. g.
(1996). hyperlocomotion and indifference to cocaine and amphetamine in mice lacking the  xxxg2149xxx . nature, 379, 606612.
henry, j. p., & scherman, d. (1989). radioligands of the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  and their use as markers of monoamine
storage vesicles. biochem. pharmacol., 38, 2395-2404.
henry, j. p., botton, d., sagn6, c., isambert, m. f., desnos, c.,
blanchard, v., raisman-vozari, r., krejci, e., massouli6, j., &
gasnier, b. (1994). biochemistry and molecular biology of the  xxxg2099xxx  from chromaltin granules. j. exp.
biol., 196, 250-262.
henry, j. p., sagn6, c., botton, d., isambert, m. f., and gasnier,
b. (1998). molecular pharmacology of the vesicular monoamine
transporter. adv. pharmacol., 42, 23(~239.
howell, m., shirvan, a., sternbach, y., steiner-mordoch, s., strasser,
j. e., dean, g. e., & schuldiner, s. (1994). cloning and functional
expression of a  xxxd3330xxx  sensitive  xxxg2099xxx  from bovine chromaffin granules. febs lett., 338, 16-22.
hunter, a., waldron, k., & apps, d. k. (1982). determination of the
proportion of sealed vesicles in a preparation of chromaffin granule
membrane "ghosts". febs lett., 144, 51-56.
isambert, m. f., & henry, j. p. (1981). effect of diethylpyrocarbonate
on ph-driven monoamine uptake by chromaffin granule ghosts.
febs left., 136, 13 18.
isambert, m. f., & henry, j. p. (1985). photoaffinity labeling of the
 xxxd3330xxx  binding sites of bovine chromaffin granule
membranes. biochemistry, 24, 3660-3667.
isambert, m. f., gasnier, b., laduron, p. m., & henry, j. p. (1989).
photoaffinity labeling of the  xxxg2099xxx  of bovine chromattin granules and other monoamine storage vesicles using 7azido-8-[j25i]iodoketanserin. biochemistry, 28, 2265-2270.
isambert, m. f., gasnier, b., botton, d., & henry, j. p. (1992). characterization and purification of the  xxxg2099xxx  of bovine
chromaffin granules. biochemistry, 31, 1980-1986.
jacque, s. jr., tobes, m. c., sisson, j. c., baker, j. a., & wieland, d.
m. (1984). comparison of the sodium dependency of uptake of
meta-iodobenzylguanidine and norepinephrine into cultured bovine
adrenomedullary cells. mol. pharmacol., 26, 539-546.
jewett, d. m., kilbourn, m. r., & lee, l. c. (1997). a simple synthesis
of [l~c]dihydrotetrabenazine (dtbz). nucl. med. biol., 24, 197199.
johnson, r. g., & scarpa, a. (1976). ion permeability of isolated
chromaffin granules. j. gen. physiol., 68, 601-631.
johnson, r. g , carty, s. e., & scarpa, a. (1981). proton: substrate
stoechiometry during active transport of biogenic amines in chromartin ghosts. j. biol. chem., 256, 5773 5780.
johnson, r. g. (1988). accumulation of biological amines into chromaffin granules: a model for hormone and neurotransmitter transport. physiol. rev., 68, 232-307.
kanner, b. i., sharon, i., maron, r., & schuldiner, s. (1980). electrogenic transport of biogenic amines in chromaffin granule membrane vesicles. febs lett., 111, 83-86.
kanner, b. i., & schuldiner, s. (1987). mechanism of storage and
transport of neurotransmitters. crc crit. rev. biochem., 22, 1-38.

243

kilbourn, m. r., dasilva, j. n., frey, k. a., koeppe, r. a., & kuhl,
d. e. (1993). in vivo imaging of vesicular monoamine transporters
in human brain using [~c] xxxd3330xxx  and positron emission tomography. j. neurochem., 60, 2315-2318.
kilbourn, m. r., lee, l., vander borght, t. v., jewett, d., & frey,
k. (1995). binding of alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine to the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  is stereospecific. eur. j. pharmacol., 278,
249-252.
kilbourn, m. r., frey, k. a., vander borght, t., & sherman, p. s.
(1996). effect of dopaminergic drug treatments on in vivo radioligand binding to brain vesicular monoamine transporters. nucl.
med. biol., 23, 467-471.
kilbourn, m. r., lee, l. c., heeg, m. j., jewett, d. m. (1997). absolute
configuration of (+) alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine, an active metabolite of  xxxd3330xxx . chirality, 9, 59-62.
kirshner, n. (1962). uptake of catecholamines by a particulate fraction
of the adrenal medulla. j. biol. chem., 237, 2311 2317.
kitayama, s., shimada, s., & uhl, g. r. (1992a). parkinsonisminducing neurotoxin mpp+: uptake and toxicity in non-neuronal
cos cells expressing  xxxg2149xxx  cdna. ann.  xxxd122xxx .,
32, 109-111.
kitayama, s., shimada, s., xu, h., markham, l., donovan, d. m., &
uhl, g. r. (1992b).  xxxg2149xxx  site-directed mutations
differently alter substrate transport and cocaine binding. proc. natl.
acad. sci. usa, 89, 7782-7785.
klein, r. l. (1982). chemical composition of large noradrenergic
vesicles. in: neurotransmitter vesicles, eds r. l. klein, h. lagercrantz and h. zimmerman, pp. 133-174. academic press,
london.
klein, r. l., & lagercrantz, h. (1982). insights into the functional role
of the noradrenergic vesicles. in: neurotransmitter vesicles, eds r. l.
klein, h. lagercrantz and h. zimmerman, pp. 219-239. academic
press, london.
knoth, j., zallakian, m., & njus, d. (1981). stoechiometry of h ÷linked dopamine transport on chromaffin granule ghosts. biochemistry, 20, 6625-6629.
knoth, j., peabody, j. o., huetl, p., & njus, d. (1984). kinetics
of tyramine transport and permeation across chromaffin vesicle
membrane. biochemistry, 23, 20112016.
koeppe, r. a., frey, k. a., vander borght, t. m., karlamangla, a.,
jewett, d. m., lee l. c., kilbourn, m. r., & kuhl, d. e. (1996).
kinetic evaluation of [~c]dihydrotetrabenazine by dynamic pet:
measurement of  xxxg2099xxx . cereb. blood
flow metab., 16, 1288-1299.
krantz, d. e., peter, d., liu, y., & edwards, r. h. (1997). phosphorylation of a  xxxg2099xxx  by casein kinase
ii. j. biol. chem., 272, 6752~759.
krejci, e., gasnier, b., botton, d., isambert, m. f., sagn6, c., gagnon,
j., massouli6, j., & henry, j. p. (1993). expression and regulation
of the bovine  xxxg2099xxx  gene. febs lett.,
335, 2%32.
kung, m. p., canney, d. j., frederick, d., zhuang, z., billings, j. j.,
& kung, h. f. (1994). ~si-iodovinyltetrabenazine binding to cns
vesicular monoamine transport sites. synapse, 18, 225232.
laslop, a., mahata, s. k., wolkersdorfer, m., mahata, m., srivastava,
m., seidah, n. c., fischer-colbrie, r., & winkler, h. (1994). large
dense-core vesicles in rat adrenal after reserpine: levels of mrnas
of soluble and membrane-bound constituents in chromaffin and
ganglion cells indicate a biosynthesis of vesicles with higher secretory
quanta. j. neuroehem., 62, 2448-2456.
lee, l. c., vander borght, t., sherman, p. s., frey, k. a., & kilbourn,
m. r. (1996). in vitro and in vivo studies of benzisoquinoline ligands
for the brain synaptic vesicle  xxxg2099xxx . j. med.
chem., 39, 191-196.
lesch, k. p., gross, j., wolozin, b. l., murphy, d. l., & riederer, p.
(1993). extensive sequence divergence between the human and rat
brain  xxxg2099xxx : possible molecular basis for

244

j.-p. henry el al.

species differences in the susceptibility to m p p ' . j. neural transm.
[gensect], 93, 75 82.
leysen, j. e., niemegeers, c. j. e., van nueten, j. m., & laduron,
p. m. (1981). [3h] xxxd2419xxx  (r41468), a selective 'h-ligand for
serotonin 2-receptor binding site. mol. pharmacol., 2i, 301 314.
liu, y., roghani, a., & edwards, r. h. (1992a). gene-transfer of a
reserpine-sensitive mechanism of resistance to n-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 89, 9074 9078.
liu, y., peter d., roghani, a., schu[diner, s., privy, g. g., eisenberg,
d., brecha, n., & edwards, r. h. (1992b). a cdna that suppresses
mpp + toxicity encodes a  xxxg2099xxx . cell, 70, 539
551.
liu, y., schweitzer, e. r., nirenberg, m. j., pickel. v. m., evans, c.
j., & edwards, r. h. (19943. preferential localization of a vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  to dense core vesicles in pci2 cells. j. ('ell
biol., 127, 1419 1433.
ludowyke, r. 1., & lagunoff, d. l. (1986). amine uptake into intact
mast cell granules in vitro. biochemistry, 25, 6287 6293.
mahata, s. k., mahata, m., fischer-colbrie, r., & winkler, h. (1993a).
vesicle monoamine transporters 1 and 2 differential distribution
and regulation of their mrnas in chromaffin and ganglion cells of
rat adrenal medulla. neuroscience lett.. 156, 70 72.
mahata, s. k., mahata, m., fischer-colbrie, r., & winkler, h.
(1993b). reserpine causes differential changes in the mrna levels
of chromogranin b, secretogranin ii, alpha amidating monooxygenase, the  xxxg2099xxx  and of synaptin/
 xxxg2236xxx  in rat brain. mol. brain res., 19, 83 92.
maron~ r., stern, y., kanner, b., & schuldiner, s. (19833. functional
asymmetry of the amine transporter from chromaffin granules. j.
biol. chem., 258, 11476 11481.
masuo, y., pelaprat, d., scherman, d., & rostene w. (1990). ['h]dihydrotetrabenazine, a new marker for the visualization of dopaminergic denervation in the rat striatum. neurosci. lett., 114. 45
50.
merickel, a., & edwards, r. h. (1995). transport of histamine by
 xxxg2099xxx -2. neuropharmalo.qy, 34. t543
1547.
merickel, a., rosandich, p., peter, d., & edwards, r. h. (t9953.
identification of residues involved in substrate recognition by a
 xxxg2099xxx . j. biol. chem., 270, 25798 25804.
merickel, a., kaback, h. r., & edwards, r. h. (19973. charged residues in transmembrane domains ii and xi of a vesicular monoamine
transporter form a charge pair that promotes high affinity substrate
recognition. j. biol. chem., 272, 5403 5408. '
meshgin-azarian, s., chang, w., cugier, d. l.. vincent, m. s.. &
near, j. a. (1988). distribution of[3h]dihydrotetrabenazine binding
in bovine striatal subsynaptic fractions: enrichment of higher affinity
binding in a synaptic vesicle fraction. neurochem., 50, 824 830.
mitchell, p. ( 19613. coupling of phosphorylation to electron and hydrogen transfer by a chemi-osmotic type of mechanism. nature, 191.
144--146.
moriyama, y., yamamoto, a., yamada, h., tashiro, y., tomochika,
k. i., takahashi, m., maeda, m., & futai, m. (1995). microvesicles
isolated from bovine posterior pituitary accumulate norepinephrine.
j. biol. chem., 270, 11424-11429.
moriyama, y., yamamoto, a., yamada, h., tashiro, y., & futai, m.
(1996). role of endocrine cell microvesicles in intercellular chemical
transduction. biol. chem. hopp~seyler, 377, 155 165.
nakanishi, n., onozawa, s., matsumoto, r., kurihara, k., ueha, t..
hasegawa, h., & minami, n. (1995a). effects of protein kinase
inhibitors and protein phosphatase inhibitors in pheochromocytoma pc12 cells. febs lett., 368, 411~14.
nakanishi, n., onozawa, s., matsumoto, r., hasegawa, h., &
yamada, s. (1995b).  xxxd1773xxx -dependent modulation of  xxxg2099xxx  in pheocromocytoma cells. j. neurochem., 64, 60(~607.
navone, f., jahn, r., di goia, g., stukenbrok, h., greengard. p.. &

de camilli, p. (1986). protein p38: an integral membrane protein
specific for small vesicles of neurons and neuroendocrine cells. j.
cell biol., 103, 2511 2527.
neal, r. j.. & chater, k. f. (1987). nucleotide sequence analysis
reveals similarities between proteins determining methylenomycin a
resistance in streptomyces and tetracycline resistance in eubacteria.
gene, 58, 229 241.
near, j. a. (1986). [~h]dihydrotetrabenazine binding to bovine striatal
synaptic vesicles. mol. pharmaeol., 30, 252 257.
nelson, n. (1989). structure, molecular genetics, and evolution of
vacuolar h+-atpases. j. bioenerq. biomembr., 21,553 572.
nelson, n. (1992). the vacuolar h +-atpase, one of the most fundamental ion pumps in nature. j. exp. biol., 172, 19 27.
neyfakh, a. a., bidnenko, v. e., & chen, l. b. ( 19913. efflux-mediated
multidrug resistance in bacillus subtilis: similarities and dissimilarities with the mammalian system. proc. natl. aead. sci. usa,
88. 4781 4785.
nguyen, t. t.. postle, k., & bertrand, k. p. (1983). sequence homology
between the tetracycline-resistance determinants of tnl0 and
pbr322. gene, 25, 83 92.
nirenberg, m. j., liu, y., peter, d., edwards, r. h., & pickel, v. m.
(19953. the  xxxg2099xxx -2 is present in small
synaptic vesicles and preferentially localizes to large dense core
vesicles in rat solitary tract nuclei. proe. natl. acad. sci. usa, 92,
8773 8777.
nirenberg, m. j. j. c., lia, y., edwards. r. h., & pickel, v. m. (19973.
 xxxg2099xxx -2: immunogold localization in
striatal axons and terminals. synapse, 26, 194 198.
njus, d., & radda, g. k. (19783. bioenergetic processes in chromaffin
granules: a new perspective on some old problems. biochim. biophys.
aela, 463, 219 244.
njus, d., & radda, g. k. (19793. a potassium ion diffusion potential
causes adrenaline uptake in chromaffin granule ghosts. biochem. j.,
180, 579 585.
njus, d., kelley, p. m., & harnadek, g. j. (19863. bioenergetics of
secretory vesicles. biochim. biophys. acta, 853, 237 265.
olivares, l., aragon, c., gimenez, c., & zafra, f. (1997). analysis of
the transmembrane topology of the glycine transporter glyt1. j.
biol. chem.. 272, 1211 1217.
oskan, e. d., khilnani, a., & njus, d. (1993). histamine transport by
the chromaffin vesicle  xxxg2099xxx , pp. 94. abstract of
the intern. sympos. chromaffin cell biology and pharmacology,
ottawa, canada.
peter, d., finn, j., klisak, 1., liu, y., kojis, t., heinzmann, c., roghani, a., sparkes, r., & edwards, r. h. (19933. chromosomal localization of the human  xxxg2099xxx  genes. genomics,
18, 720 723.
peter, d., jimenez, j., liu, y., kim, j., & edwards, r. h. (1994). the
chromaffin granule and synaptic vesicle amine transporters differ in
substrate recognition and sensitivity to inhibitors. j. biol. chem.,
269. 7231 7237.
peter, d., liu, y., sternini, c.. de giorgio, r., brecha, n., & edwards,
r. h. (1995). differential expression of two vesicular monoamine
transporters. j. neuroscience, 15, 6179 6188.
peter, d.. vu, t., & edwards, r. h. (1996). chimeric vesicular
monoamine transporters identify structural domains that influence
substrate affinity and sensitivity to  xxxd3330xxx . j. biol. chem..
271, 2979 2986.
phillips, j. h. (1974a). transport of catecholamines by resealed chromaffin granule "ghosts". biochem. j., 144, 311 318.
phillips, j. h. (1974b). steady-state kinetics of catecholamine transport
by chromaffin granule ghosts. biochem. j., 144, 319-325.
phillips, j. h. (19823. dynamic aspects of chromaffin granule structure.
neuroscienee, 7, 1595 1609.
pifl. c., drobny, h., reither, h., hornykiewicz, o., & singer, e. a.
(1995). mechanism of the dopamine-releasing actions of amphet-

the  xxxg2099xxx 
amine and cocaine: plasmalemmal  xxxg2149xxx  versus  xxxg2099xxx . mol. pharmacol., 47, 368-373.
pifl, c., giros, b., & caron, m. g. (1993).  xxxg2149xxx 
expression confers cytotoxicity to low doses of the parkinsonisminducing neurotoxin l-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium. j. neuroscience,
13, 4246-4253.
pletscher, a., brossi, a., & gey, k. f. (1962). benzoquinolizine derivatives: a new class of monoamine decreasing drugs with psychotropic
action. int. rev. neurobiol., 4, 275-306.
reinhardt, j. f., jr, diliberto, e. j., viveros, o. h., & daniels, a. j.
(1987). subcellular compartimentalization of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium with catecholamines in adrenal medullary chromaffin
vesicles may explain the lack of toxicity to adrenal chromaffin cells.
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 84, 8160-8164.
roghani, a., feldman, j., kohan, s. a., shirzadi, a., gundersen, c.
b., brecha, n., & edwards, r. h. (1994). molecular cloning of a
putative vesicular transporter for acetylcholine. proc. natl. acad.
sci. usa, 91, 10620-10624.
roisin, m. p., scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1980). synthesis of atp
by an artificially imposed electrochemical gradient in chromaffin
granule ghosts. febs lett., 115, 143-147.
rudnick, g., steiner-mordoch, s. s., fishkes, h., stern-bach, y., &
schuldiner, s. (1990). energetics of reserpine binding and occlusion
by the chromaffin granule transporter. biochemistry, 29, 603-608.
rudnick, g., & wall, s. c. (1992). the molecular mechanism of
"ecstasy" [3,4- xxxd2611xxx  (mdma)]: serotonin transporters are targets for mdma-induced serotonin release.
proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 89, 1817-1821.
ryan, t. a., reuter, h., wendland, b., schweizer, f. e., tsien, r. w.,
& smith, s. j. (1993). the kinetics of synaptic vesicle recycling
measured at single presynaptic boutons. neuron, 11, 713 724.
sabol, k. e., & seiden, l. s. (1992). transporters of delight. curr.
biol., 2, 414416.
sagnr, c., isambert, m. f., henry, j. p., & gasnier, b. (1996). sdsresistant aggregation of membrane proteins: application to the purification of the  xxxg2099xxx . biochem. j., 316, 825-831.
sagnr, c., isambert, m. f., vandekerckhove, j., henry, j. p., &
gasnier, b. (1997). the photoactivatable  xxxd1350xxx -azido-8-iodoketanserin labels the n terminus of the  xxxg2099xxx  from bovine chromaffin granules. biochemistry, 36, 3345
3352.
sato, k., adams, r., betz, h., & schloss, p. (1995). modulation of a
recombinant glycine transporter (glytlb) by activation of protein
kinase c. j. neurochem., 65, 1967-1973.
scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1980a). role of the proton electrochemical gradient in monoamine transport by bovine chromaffin
granules. biochim. biophys. acta, 601,664-677.
scherman, d., & henry, j.-p. (1980b). effect of drugs on the atpinduced and ph gradient-driven monoamines transport by bovine
chromaflin granules. biochem. pharmacol., 29, 1883-1890.
scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1981). ph-dependence of the atpdependent uptake of noradrenaline by bovine chromaffin granule
ghosts. eur. j. biochem., 116, 535-539.
scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1982). acidobasic properties of the
catecholamine uptake inhibitors  xxxd3330xxx  and dihydrotetrabenazine. biochimie., 64, 915-921.
scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1983a). the catecholamine carrier of
bovine chromaffin granules: form of the bound amine. mol. pharmacol., 23, 431436.
scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1983b). solubilization of the catecholamine carrier ofchromaffin granule membrane in a form which
binds substrates and inhibitors of uptake. biochemistry, 22, 28052810.
scherman, d., jaudon, p., & henry, j. p. (1983). characterization of
the monoamine carrier of chromaffin granule membrane by binding
of [2,3h]dihydrotetrabenazine. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 80, 584588.

245

scherman, d., & henry, j. p. (1984). reserpine binding to bovine
chromaflin granule membranes: characterization and comparison
with dihydrotetrabenazine binding. mol pharmacol., 25, 113-122.
scherman, d. (1986). dihydrotetrabenazine binding and monoamine
uptake in mouse brain regions. j. neurochem., 47, 331-339.
scherman, d., boschi, g., rips, r., & henry, j. p. (1986). the regionalization of [3h]dihydrotetrabenazine binding sites in mouse brain
and its relationship to the distribution of monoamines and their
metabolites. brain res., 370, 176-181.
scherman, d., & boschi, g. (1988). time required for transmitter
accumulation inside monoamine storage vesicles differs in peripheral and in central systems. neuroscience, 27, 1029-1035.
scherman, d., raisman, r., ploska, a., & agid, y. (1988). [3h]
dihydrotetrabenazine, a new in t,itro monoaminergic probe for
human brain. j. neurochem., 50, 1131-1136.
scherman, d., desnos, c., darchen, f., pollak, p., javoy-agid, f., &
agid, y. (1989). striatal dopamine deficiency in parkinson's disease:
role of ageing. ann.  xxxd122xxx ., 26, 551-557.
schmidt, a., hannah, m., & huttner, w. b. (1997). synaptic-like
microvesicles of neuroendocrine cells originate from a novel compartment that is continuous with the plasma membrane and devoid
of transferrin receptor. j. cell biol., 137, 445458.
schuldiner, s., steiner-mordoch, s., yelin, r., wall, s. c., & rudnick,
c. (1993). amphetamine derivatives interact with both plasma membrane and secretory vesicle biogenic amine transporters. mol pharmacol., 44, 1227-1231.
schuldiner, s. (1994). a molecular glimpse of vesicular monoamine
transporters. neurochem., 62, 2067-2077.
schuldiner, s., shirvan, a., & linial, m. (1995). vesicular neurotransmitter transporters: from bacteria to humans. physiol. rev.,
75, 369-392.
shirvan, a., laskar o., steiner-mordoch, s., & schuldiner, s. (1994).
histidine-419 plays a role in energy coupling in the vesicular
 xxxg2099xxx  from rat. febs lett., 356, 145-150.
sietzen, m., schober, m., fischer-colbrie, r., scherman, d., sperk, g.,
& winkler, h. (1987). rat adrenal medulla levels ofchromogranins,
enkephalins, dopamine fl-hydroxylase and of the amine transporter
are regulated by nervous activity and hypophysectomy. neuroscience, 22, 131-139.
steiner-mordoch, s., shirvan, a., & schuldiner, s. (1996). modification
of the ph profile and  xxxd3330xxx  sensitivity of rat vmatl by
replacement of aspartate 404 with glutamate. j. biol. chem., 271,
13048-13054.
stern-bach, y., greenberg-ofrath, n., flechner, i., & schuldiner, s.
(1990). identification and purification of a functional amine transporter from bovine chromaffin granules. j. biol. chem., 265, 39613966.
stern-bach, y., keen, j. n., bejerano, m., steiner-mordoch, s.,
wallach, m., findlay, j. b. c., & schuldiner, s. (1992). homology
of a  xxxg2099xxx  to a gene conferring resistance to 1methyl-4-phenylpyridinium. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 89, 97309733.
stitzel, r. e. (1977). the biological fate of reserpine. pharmacol. rev.,
28, 17~205.
suchi, r., stern-bach, y., gabay, t., & schuldiner, s. (1991). covalent
modification of the amine transporter with n,n'-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide. biochemistry, 30, 6490-6494.
suchi, r., stern-bach, y., & schuldiner, s. (1992). modification of
arginyl or histidyl groups affects the energy coupling of the amine
transporter. biochemistry, 31, 12500-12503.
sulzer, d., & rayport, s. (1990). amphetamine and other psychostimulants reduce ph gradients in midbrain dopaminergic neurons and chromaffin granules: a mechanism of action. neuron, 5,
797-808.
sulzer, d., maidment, n. t., & rayport, s. (1993). amphetamine and
other weak bases act to promote reverse transport of dopamine in
ventral midbrain neurons. j. neurochem., 60, 527 535.

246

j.-p. henry et al.

sulzer, d., pothos, e. n., sun, b. c., chen, t. k., ewing, a., liu, y..
& edwards, r. h. (1996). modulation of quantal dopamine release
by psychostimulants, pp. 196. abstract 8th inter. catecholamine
symposium, asilomar, pacific grove.
surratt, c. k., persico, a. m., yang, x. d., edgar, s. r.. bird, g. s.,
hawkins, a. l., griffin, c. a.. li, x., jabs, e. w., & uhl, g. r.
(1993). a human synaptic vesicle  xxxg2099xxx  cdna
predicts posttranslational modifications, reveals chromosome-10
gene localization and identifies taql rflps. febs leti., 318, 325
330.
takei, k., mundigl, o., daniell, l., & de camilli, p. (1996). the
synaptic vesicle cycle: a single vesicle budding step involving clathrin
and dynamin. j. celi biol., 133, 1237 1250.
thureson-klein, a. (1982). ultrastructural preservation of vesicles in
sympathetic nervous tissue. in: neurotransmitter cesicle~, eds r. l.
klein, h. lagercrantz, & h. zimmerman, pp. 65 87. academic
press, london.
tipton, k. f., & singer, t. p. (1993). advances in our understanding
of the mechanisms of the neurotoxicity of mptp and related compounds. j. neuroehem., 61, 1191 1206.
uhl, g. r., walther, d., masu, d., faucheux, b., & ja~oy-agid,
f. (1994).  xxxg2149xxx  messenger rna in parkinson's
disease and control substantia nigra neurons. ann. neuro/., 35,494
498.
ungar, a., & phillips, j. h. (1983). regulation of the adrenal medulla.
physiol. re~'., 63, 787 843.
vander borght, t. m., sima, a. a. f., kilbourn, m. r., desmond, y.
j., kuhl, d. e., & frey, k. a. (1995a). [3h]methoxytetrabenazine: a
high specific activity ligand for estimating monoaminergic neuronal
integrity. neuroseience, 68, 955 962.

vander borght, t. m., kilbourn, m. r., koeppe, r. a., da silva, j.
n., carey, j. e., kuhl, d. e., & frey, k. a. (1995b). in ~it'o imaging
of the brain  xxxg2099xxx . j. nuclear med., 36,
2252 2260.
varoqui, h., diebler, m.-f., meunier. f.-m., rand, j. b., usdin, y.
b., bonner, t. l., eiden, l. e., & erickson, j. d. (1994). cloning
and expression of the vesamicol binding protein from the marine
ray torpedo. homology with the putative vesicular acetylcholine
transporter unc-17 from caenorhabditis elegans. febs lett., 342.
97 102.
vincent, m. s., & near, j. a. (1991). purification of a [3h]dihydrotetrabenazine-binding protein from bovine adrenal medulla.
molee. pharmaeol., 40, 889-894.
weihe, e., sh',iffer. m. k. h., erickson. j. d., & eiden, k. e. (1995).
localization of  xxxg2099xxx  isoforms ( xxxg2098xxx  and  xxxg2099xxx -2) to endocrine cells and neurons in rat. j. mol.
neuroseienee. 5, 149 164.
weihe, e.. tao-cheng, j. h., shfifer, m. k. h., & erickson, j. d.
(1996). visualization of the vesicular acetylcholine transporter in
cbolinergic nerve terminals and its targeting to a specific population
of small synaptic vesicles. proc. nail. acad. sei. usa, 93, 3547
3552.
winkler, h. (1977). the biogenesis of adrenal chromaffin granule granules. neuroseience, 2, 657 683.
winkler. h., sietzen, m., & schober, m. (1986). the life cycle of
catecholamine-storing vesicles. ann. n y acad. sei., 493, 3 19.
yelin, r., & schuldiner, s. (1995). the pharmacological profile of
the  xxxg2099xxx  resembles that of multidrug
transporters. febs lett., 377, 201 207.

