peripheral blood mononuclear cells express mutated  xxxg2080xxx  mrna in gitelman's syndrome: evidence for abnormal thiazide-sensitive nacl cotransport.  genetic analysis has demonstrated complete linkage between the human thiazide-sensitive  xxxd3213xxx  cotransporter gene ( xxxg2080xxx  or tsc) and gitelman's syndrome (gs). several genomic  xxxg2080xxx  mutations have been reported. this study was performed to determine whether peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmc) express  xxxg2080xxx  mrna and whether defective pbmc nacl cotransport could be demonstrated in gs. pbmc were isolated from two brothers with gs, their parents, and healthy control subjects. northern analysis revealed that  xxxg2080xxx  mrna is expressed in pbmc. the sequence of full-length  xxxg2080xxx  cdna amplified from normal pbmc was identical to human renal  xxxg2080xxx  cdna. two different mutations were detected in the patients'  xxxg2080xxx  cdna (compound heterozygote). in cdna derived from the patient's maternal allele, exon 24 was deleted, resulting in a premature stop codon (after amino acid 920). cdna derived from the patient's paternal allele had an additional 119-bp insertion between exons 3 and 4, generating a premature stop codon (after amino acid 187). the patient's genomic dna had a previously described 5' splice site mutation in intron 24, ggt --> gtt (maternal allele), and a new 3' splice site mutation in intron 3, cag --> caa (paternal allele), which resulted in the activation of a nearby cryptic splice site in intron 3. the latter mutation was not present in 300 normal chromosomes. to determine the functional significance of these findings, chlorothiazide-inhibitable 22na uptake was measured in pbmc from control subjects, the parents, and the patients with gs in the presence of bumetanide. in control pbmc, chlorothiazide inhibited 22na uptake by approximately 9%. pbmc from the two patients with gs failed to respond to chlorothiazide. these results demonstrate that pbmc can be used for mutational analysis of  xxxg2080xxx  mrna in patients with gs. furthermore, functional evidence is provided that the underlying cause of gs is defective  xxxg2080xxx  nacl cotransport.