

human reproduction update 1998, vol. 4, no. 1 pp. 83–101

european society for human reproduction and embryology

revisiting gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
agonist protocols and management of poor
ovarian responses to gonadotrophins
jean-noël hugues1 and isabelle cédrin durnerin
service de médecine de la reproduction, hopital jean verdier avenue du 14 juillet bondy 93143, université paris xiii, france

table of contents
introduction
gnrh agonists: structure and
hypophyseal action
gnrh agonist protocols
how gnrh agonist protocols improve the
outcome of ivf cycles?
how to manage poor ovarian responses to
gonadotrophins?
conclusions
references

83
84
85
89
92
95
95

within the past decade, gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone (gnrh) agonists have contributed greatly to
the success of cycles programmed for in-vitro
fertilization and embryo transfer. however, apart from a
preventive effect on the luteinizing hormone (lh) surge,
most of the beneficial effects of these molecules are still
only partly known. a precise analysis of regimens using
gnrh agonists for ovarian stimulation shows that many
parameters may interfere with the outcome of long-term
and short-term protocols. the great variability between
these protocols hampers our comprehension of the
mechanisms involved in the overall clinical improvement
seen with this therapy. the hypophyseal desensitization
induced by gnrh agonists is greatly dependent on the
dose and duration of their administration, but the
residual gonadotrophin secretion is imperfectly
estimated by hormonal measurements using radioimmunometric assays. moreover, the specific role of
gnrh agonist-induced ovarian quiescence on subsequent ovarian responsiveness to gonadotrophins and
on endometrial receptivity deserves further investigation. finally, a direct ovarian action of gnrh agonists on
steroidogenesis, folliculogenesis and embryo quality is
still controversial in humans. these putative deleterious
1to

whom correspondence should be addressed

effects of gnrh agonists have led some authors to
recommend a reduction of both dose and duration of
gnrh agonist administration for women identified by a
poor response to gonadotrophins. using this approach, a
few reports have recently shown some clinical advantages for ovarian responsiveness but no convincing
evidence for any improvement in pregnancy rate. it thus
appears that the overall impact of gnrh agonists on
reproductive function is still partly misunderstood.
key words: gnrh agonist/gonadotrophins/hypophysis/
ovary
introduction
from their first introduction in the management of
ovulation induction (fleming et al., 1982), gonadotrophinreleasing agonists (gnrha) have greatly contributed to the
success of cycles for in-vitro fertilization (ivf) and
embryo transfer. by inducing a hypophyseal desensitization, they allow a complete suppression of endogenous
luteinizing hormone (lh) surges, fewer occurrences of
premature oocyte luteinization and a significant reduction
in the subsequent cancellation of cycles previously treated
by gonadotrophins (fleming and coutts, 1985; wildt et al.,
1986; de ziegler et al., 1987; maclachlan et al., 1989;
abdalla et al., 1990). moreover, they facilitate scheduling
and they improve follicular recruitment, numbers of
harvested oocytes and total number of embryos obtained
(neveu et al., 1987; meldrum et al., 1989; hughes et al.,
1992; liu et al., 1992; oehninger et al., 1992; filicori et
al., 1996). finally, the simultaneous increase in
implantation rate testifies that benefits of gnrha are only
partly dependent on the improvement of the quantitative
ovarian response to gonadotrophins. it thus appears that
mechanisms involved in the overall improvement of ivf
cycles treated with gnrha are not limited to a hypophyseal

84

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

step and may possibly include additional action at the
ovarian and endometrial levels. besides these positive
effects, it has been simultaneously reported that gnrha
may be responsible for some adverse actions on ovarian
function, especially steroidogenesis, leading to higher
administration of exogenous gonadotrophins in order to
achieve follicular maturation. in addition, the quality of the
extra oocytes recruited by protocols including gnrha may
not be optimum. therefore, some authors have questioned
their current use in normo-ovulatory patients (maroulis et
al., 1991; polson et al., 1991; kingsland et al., 1992;
harrison et al., 1994), while others have recently suggested
that both the dose and duration of gnrha administration
should be reduced, or that certain formulations should be
selected, particularly for women whose ovarian response
was previously known to be poor.
this recent progress in programming ivf cycles gives
us the opportunity to revisit gnrha protocols: our
common reference to so-called short-term and long-term
gnrha protocols cannot really reflect the extreme
heterogeneity in the mode of their prescription. rather than
contrasting these two approaches, it seems more relevant to
analyse more closely their use, in order to recognize
differences between them and to identify their specific
benefit in terms of ivf outcome. by this means, we hope to
present a new insight into the management of patients with
poor ovarian response to gonadotrophins.
gnrh agonists: structure and hypophyseal
action
structure

from the natural gnrh, numerous superactive agonists
have been synthesized with a d-amino acid substitution at

position 6 (proteolysis site) and often with an ethylamide
group instead of the c-terminal  xxxd149xxx  residue
(high-affinity binding site), leading to an increased
biological activity of such peptides. among the agonists
most commonly used in europe,  xxxd3445xxx  ( xxxd3445xxx )
and  xxxd2691xxx  ( xxxd2691xxx ) are the result of only one
substitution at position 6 and have a relative potency of
100–200, whereas  xxxd387xxx  (suprefact) and  xxxd2463xxx 
( xxxd2463xxx ), obtained from two substitutions at positions 6
and 10, have a relative potency of ~50 (table i). these data
require further consideration regarding differences of
efficacy reported between analogues in some clinical
studies. several formulations are now available for clinical
purposes: short-acting, requiring daily subcutaneous or
intranasal administration; long-acting (sustained release
formulations) with a 30–40 day effect from the initial
injection.
hypophyseal action

repeated administration of gnrha in vivo is characterized
at the hypophyseal level by a biphasic pattern of gonadotrophin secretion composed of an initial stimulatory phase
during the first 48 h (called the ‘flare-up effect’) followed
by an inhibitory phase (sandow et al., 1978). this
functional state of hypophyseal desensitization is related to
both  xxxg931xxx  reduction (down-regulation) and
intracellular uncoupling. it leads to a progressive reduction
in gonadotrophin synthesis (decreased pituitary content)
which is maintained during gnrha administration and
persists some days after cessation (‘refractory period’ to
endogenous gnrh). these different components of
gnrha action are reflected in plasma lh and follicle
stimulating hormone (fsh) variations described as
follows.

table i. main characteristics of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (gnrh) agonists
generic name

agent

gnrh (native)

structure
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

glu

his

trp

ser

tyr

gly

leu

arg

pro

gly

pyro
 xxxd3445xxx 

 xxxd2691xxx 

 xxxd2691xxx 

d-nal

 xxxd387xxx 

suprefact

s-ser

ethyl-

(t-bu)

amide

d-leu

ethyl-

lupron

 xxxd1794xxx 

100

amide
 xxxd2463xxx 

 xxxd2463xxx 
lucrin

1

half-life
(min)
~10

nh2

 xxxd3445xxx 

leuprolide

relative
potency

450
200

~180

50

~90

50

~180

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

85

the initial stimulation phase (‘flare-up period’)

the final refractory phase (‘recovery period’)

within 48 h following the first administration of gnrha, a
sharp increase is observed in plasma fsh and lh
concentrations in relation to their release from the two
gonadotrophin pools (hoff et al., 1977). at doses currently
used, this gonadotroph flare-up is more pronounced for lh
than fsh (lemay et al., 1983). however, several animal
experiments (navot et al., 1991; scott et al., 1993a) and
clinical reports (shriock et al., 1985; deaton et al., 1996)
have recently shown that smaller doses of gnrha may
induce equivalent, even more prolonged, gonadotroph
flare-up with a larger increase in plasma fsh (scott et al.,
1993a). as a consequence of gonadotroph secretion, gonadal
steroid production (i.e.  xxxd2037xxx  and, to a lesser extent,
progesterone) is initially stimulated, and some authors have
demonstrated the prognostic value of the steroid pattern for
subsequent ovarian response to exogenous gonadotrophins
(padilla et al., 1990; winslow et al., 1991; hugues et al.,
1992).

after cessation of gnrha administration, the hypophysis
remains in a non-functional state for a period of time
necessary for a complete recovery. this refractory period is
usually determined by measurements of plasma
gonadotrophins concentrations in basal and stimulated
conditions. its duration is dependent on both the dose and
the formulation of gnrha, being several weeks following
administration of long-acting  xxxd3445xxx  but only 5–8 days
after daily injection of its short-acting form (barrière et al.,
1991; winslow et al., 1992; porcu et al., 1994). this period
seems to be even shorter when the dose of  xxxd3445xxx  is
lower (broekmans et al., 1996). recovery of normal
plasma concentrations is always slower for lh than for
fsh.
it must be stressed that most of these data have been
obtained after a long period of desensitization (3–4 weeks
as realized in long-term protocols). is it equivalent when
gnrha administration is shorter, as in short-term protocols? as discussed below, some data suggest that both the
duration and mode of gnrha administration may
influence the quality of residual fsh and lh secretion.
through their hypophyseal action, gnrha prevent any
premature endogenous lh surge and subsequent granulosa
cell luteinization during ovarian stimulation for ivf. the
question arises as to whether this is enough to explain the
overall improvement of ivf prognosis? is the enhancement of follicular recruitment and numbers of retrieved
oocytes or total embryos related to a common mechanism
in long- and short-term protocols? furthermore, gnrha
administration seems to improve the pregnancy rate
regardless of the number of transferred embryos. thus, it
seems likely that the preventive effect of gnrha on the lh
surge cannot totally account for their overall beneficial
effect on reproductive function, and which mechanisms are
involved is still a matter of discussion. in order to address
this issue, several approaches designed for the clinical use
of gnrha during ovarian stimulation are examined.

the secondary inhibition phase (‘desensitization period’)

with a progressive decrease in plasma lh concentrations, a
second inhibition phase is observed. during this period and
as long as gnrha administration is maintained, the pituitary
seems completely refractory to gnrh action, as attested by
the disappearance of lh pulsatile secretion and a lack of
significant hypophyseal response to exogenous gnrh or
 xxxd2038xxx  administration (fraser, 1981; bergquist
et al., 1982; insler et al., 1988; bider et al., 1989; caraty et
al., 1990; broekmans et al., 1993). the intensity and
duration of hypophyseal desensitization are dose dependent,
at least for lh (bergquist et al., 1979; oppenheimer et al.,
1992; broekmans et al., 1996). as far as fsh secretion is
concerned, the desensitizing effect of gnrha is less evident,
suggesting its relative independence from gnrh control.
however, it is well recognized that, during this period of
desensitization, regular radioimmunoassays do not really
reflect hormonal bioactivity: indeed, after a 3-week
desensitization, lh bioactivity is completely suppressed but
lh concentrations remain measurable by radioimmunoassay in relation to persistent secretion of nonbiologically active hormones (alpha subunits and/or molecules
with modified glycosylation). moreover, fsh secretion is
also modified: some studies have shown that the fsh
bioactivity/immunoreactivity ratio tends to increase after
gnrha administration (huhtaniemi et al., 1988; matikainen
et al., 1992). conversely, other studies have reported the
release of a fsh-deglycosylated form that could even act as
an anti-hormone in conjunction with its ability to bind to
fsh receptors and to decrease action of exogenous fsh
(dahl et al., 1988).

gnrh agonist protocols
long-term gnrh agonist protocol

the main aim of this protocol is to achieve a complete
suppression of ovarian activity (via gnrha-induced
hypophyseal desensitization) before starting follicular
stimulation with exogenous gonadotrophins. it must be
stressed that gonadotroph desensitization may be qualitatively checked for its rapidity, its intensity (usually
monitored by residual plasma lh and  xxxd2037xxx 
concentrations) and its duration. in fact, all these
parameters are critically dependent on numerous factors in

86

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

the gnrha protocol: type of molecule, time of its first
administration in the cycle, dose and duration of
administration and formulation. moreover, both quantitative and qualitative ovarian responses to exogenous
gonadotrophins seem to be closely linked to the quality of
this previous gonadotroph desensitization. therefore, it is
essential to analyse carefully the different ways of using
these long-term protocols, even if involvement of multiple
parameters may preclude any firm conclusion on the
specific role of each factor.
gnrha molecules

to determine if any differences between agonists with regard
to structure and in-vitro activities on granulosa cells are
clinically relevant, comparisons between several gnrha
molecules have been performed in long-term protocols. it
may be presumed that both the rapidity and completeness of
ovarian suppression are directly related to the biopotency of
the compound. in fact, this is not always true: for instance,
 xxxd2691xxx , which has a high intrinsic biological potency,
induces a dose-dependent lh and  xxxd2037xxx  suppression
(monroe et al., 1986) that is lower than that achieved by
leuprolide, a weaker in-vitro agent (dantas et al., 1994).
several authors have observed a negative correlation
between the intensity of ovarian suppression and the subsequent efficacy of exogenous gonadotrophins in stimulating
follicular development. following administration of  xxxd2691xxx , which induces a modest hypophyseal lh suppression,
the amount of gonadotrophins required for ovarian
stimulation is lower than after leuprolide (penzias et al.,
1992),  xxxd387xxx  (goldman et al., 1994) or  xxxd3445xxx  (tanos
et al., 1995). moreover, the suppressive effect of the agonist
on fsh secretion must be considered: the more effective
fsh inhibitory action of  xxxd387xxx  could account for the
lower oestrogenic response to gonadotrophins and the
smaller number of mature oocytes collected as compared
with other agonists (balasch et al., 1992; parinaud et al.,
1992; gianoroli et al., 1994). as far as pregnancy rate is
concerned, no significant difference could be demonstrated
between the efficiency of leuprolide and  xxxd387xxx ,
irrespective of the protocol (tarlatzis et al., 1994).
collectively, these data show that each gnrha results in
a specific pattern of pituitary desensitization and follicular
growth. however, no clear superiority of any gnrha
molecule has been established so far. as discussed below, a
direct gnrha effect on ovarian function must be also taken
into account.
time of administration

the clinical objective of prompt and consistent suppression
of ovarian activity has prompted investigation of the best

time to start agonist administration: either the early follicular
or the mid-luteal phase of the cycle. among four prospective
randomized studies, only two enrolled >100 patients:
ron-el et al. (1990) and urbancsek and witthaus (1996)
showed that down-regulation is achieved more rapidly when
the gnrha is started in the mid-luteal phase. contrasting
findings were reported by pellicer et al. (1989a) on a smaller
number of patients and by serafini et al. (1988), who treated
‘poor responders’. this suppressive effect was thought to be
even more pronounced with the long-acting formulation of
the agonist (vauthier et al., 1989; ron-el et al., 1990; gonen
et al., 1991) or with a combination of  xxxd2751xxx  acetate
and gnrha, with a lower incidence of ovarian cyst
formation (ditkoff and sauer, 1996). however, none of these
studies showed any clinical advantage in achieving a prompt
and profound desensitization. it is evident that an aberrant
 xxxd2037xxx  flare-up, despite gnrha induced suppression, is
associated with impaired implantation (penzias et al., 1994).
conversely, a prompt desensitization seems to induce a
relative refractory state of the ovary to exogenous
gonadotrophins (goswami et al., 1996) and is associated
with either an improved (seifer et al., 1991) or a reduced
fertilization rate (chang et al., 1993). there is still no clear
consequence in terms of pregnancy rate (ron-el et al., 1991;
ferraretti et al., 1996; urbancsek and witthaus, 1996).
dose and duration of gnrha administration

during the desensitization phase
consequences of a reduction in the gnrha dose during the
desensitization phase have been investigated in few studies
using the long-acting form. after injection of 3.75 or
1.88 mg of  xxxd3445xxx , no difference in cycle outcome was
demonstrated (balasch et al., 1992a; simon et al., 1994). it
may be more informative to check whether the duration of
the desensitization phase influences the subsequent
ovarian response to gonadotrophins and the ivf outcome.
using leuprolide for 14–115 days prior to ovulation
induction, scott et al. (1993b) did not observe any impact
of the duration of hypo-oestrogenic state on ovarian
responsiveness to gonadotrophins, nor on ivf success.
apart from the increased cost, scott et al. (1993b) found no
reason to believe that a patient must be stimulated as soon
as suppression is achieved. this observation allows great
flexibility in scheduling ovulation induction cycles but
seems contradictory to other evidence in the literature indicating that implantation rate is higher in amenorrhoeic patients (edwards et al., 1990), as discussed below. this
study warrants confirmation in patients with poor ovarian
reserve, especially in older women.

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

87

table ii. factors influencing main parameters of desensitization
parameters of

factors

desensitization

molecules

time of
administration

dose/duration of
administration

formulations

rapidity

?

+

?

?

intensity

+

?

+

+

duration

?

?

?

+

subsequent ovarian

+

?

+/–

?

response to gonadotrophins

during the stimulation phase
it is usual to administer the same dose of short-acting gnrha
during both the pituitary desensitization and ovarian
stimulation phases. by contrast, it has been shown that the
dose needed to maintain desensitization gradually decreases
with the length of treatment (sandow and donnez, 1990).
thus, some authors tried to reduce gnrha doses or even to
stop its administration during exogenous gonadotrophin
stimulation in normo-responder patients in order to improve
ovarian responsiveness and/or implantation rate; however,
the results are contradictory: smitz et al. (1992a), by
stopping  xxxd387xxx  (600 µg/day intranasally) once
desensitization was achieved (usually 21 days), did not
expose patients to a premature lh surge, but this may have
resulted in lower quality supernumerary embryos.
conversely, for pantos et al. (1994), discontinuation of
 xxxd387xxx  administration 10 days after its initiation in the
luteal phase (500 µg/day s.c.) increased the pregnancy rate
without any risk of premature luteinization. finally, simon
et al. (1994) reported that it is cost effective to reduce the
 xxxd3445xxx  dose from 0.5 to 0.1 mg/day after pituitary
desensitization without affecting either ovarian response or
clinical outcome of an ivf attempt.
altogether, these data challenge the concept of a
standard protocol. is there any advantage to calibration of a
prescription according to an individual hormonal profile?
as discussed below, the potential adverse ovarian effects of
gnrha have recently led some authors to reduce agonist
doses in patients classified as poor responders.
gnrha formulations

although a single injection of a long-acting gnrha
formulation is more convenient for patients than daily
administration of a short-acting one, it is essential to check
whether long-acting formulations may have some adverse
effects during the luteal phase and early pregnancy.
comparing short-acting and depot forms of leuprolide,
tsai et al. (1995) did not observe any difference in ivf
outcome. other studies compared different molecules,

particularly short-acting  xxxd387xxx  and long-acting
 xxxd3445xxx : gianaroli et al. (1994) found that the longacting form is more convenient and reduces cost and sideeffects. nevertheless, devreker et al. (1996) recently
reported that short-acting formulations should be preferred
because both implantation and pregnancy rates are
impaired by the long-acting depot forms. they maintain
that the gnrha molecule could interfere with embryo
quality, function of the corpus luteum or endometrium
receptivity. it should be noted that, in this study, plasma lh
values during the late follicular phase were significantly
higher in patients receiving daily  xxxd387xxx  administration,
without any adverse consequences on embryo quality and
implantation rate.
in conclusion, analysis of long-term protocols is
hampered by interference of several factors which
individually interact with the rapidity, intensity and
duration of the desensitization phase (table ii). at present,
it is difficult to define the state of ‘ideal’ desensitization
that can prevent premature luteinization without interfering with ovarian responsiveness, embryo quality, luteal
function and endometrial receptivity. in addition, as
measurements of plasma immunoreactive lh cannot
reflect lh bioactivity, there are no specific criteria to
measure hypophyseal desensitization adequately.
short-term gnrh agonist protocol

specificity of short-term gnrha protocols depends on
almost simultaneous administration of short-acting agonist
and exogenous gonadotrophins. advantage is taken of
effect of the initial rise (flare-up) of serum gonadotrophins
on follicular recruitment, with a subsequent pituitary
desensitization induced by daily agonist administration.
their clinical efficacy has been previously established
(fleming and coutts, 1986; barrière et al., 1987; garcia et
al., 1990; acharya et al., 1992a,b). in clinical practice,
short-term protocols are not easily comparable because
they may differ on several points: previous progestogen (or
contraceptive) administration for cycle programming,
gnrha molecules, respective timing of agonist and

88

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

gonadotrophin administration, and dose and duration of
agonist injection. the overall consequences of these
apparently minor differences between short-term agonist
protocols are considered below.
effect of progestogen pre-treatment on gonadotrophin
flare-up

padilla et al. (1990) demonstrated the prognostic value of
fsh, lh and  xxxd2037xxx  responses to the gnrha action of
leuprolide during the early follicular phase when used as an
adjuvant to ovarian stimulation in ivf. this ‘lupron
screening test’ allows evaluation of both pituitary sensitivity
to gnrh and ovarian responsiveness to endogenous
gonadotrophins. these authors described four early
 xxxd2037xxx  patterns and showed that a brief but significant
elevation followed by a transient fall of plasma  xxxd2037xxx 
concentrations may identify most patients who will succeed
in ivf. by contrast, a prompt but persistent rise or the
absence of significant variation in plasma  xxxd2037xxx  was
associated with a poor prognosis in ivf outcome. in this
latter case, early exogenous fsh supplementation improved
the pregnancy rate (padilla et al., 1991). winslow et al.
(1991) considered absolute differences between basal and
post flare-up  xxxd2037xxx  values (∆e2) as the best prognostic
parameters of the ivf cycle (final hormonal values, number
of oocytes and embryos, pregnancy rate). in these studies,
leuprolide was used as agonist.
we performed a similar study except that the ivf protocol
involved a pretreatment with  xxxd2751xxx  (10 mg/day for
10–20 days) and administration of short-acting  xxxd3445xxx 
(0.1 mg/day). we confirmed that serum  xxxd2037xxx  variations
(∆e2) during the flare-up period are closely correlated to
most ivf parameters (final  xxxd2037xxx  value, number of
retrieved oocytes, pregnancy rate) (hugues et al., 1992).
however, cycles pretreated with progestogen were
characterized by: (i) a reduced gonadotrophin flare-up.
consequently, the threshold predictive of ivf success was
lower than the previously reported 2-fold increase over the
baseline  xxxd2037xxx  concentration (cédrin-durnerin et al.,
1995): (ii) no increase in plasma progesterone values,
considered by others as deleterious for oocyte maturity when
observed in early follicular phase (cédrin-durnerin et al.,
1996b). thus corpus luteum rescue induced by gnrha
(castracane et al., 1996) is totally prevented by a
progestogen pretreatment; (iii) an identical pregnancy rate
compared with cycles without any pretreatment.
besides their interest for early identification of poor
prognosis patterns, these studies have given rise to some
major but still controversial issues, e.g. why does an initial
biphasic  xxxd2037xxx  pattern result in a higher ovarian
response by the time of human  xxxd2228xxx 

(hcg) injection? it may be speculated that this early
 xxxd2037xxx  drop before initiation of ovulation induction
allows for granulosa cell fsh receptors to become more
available and functional (padilla et al., 1990). is there any
definitive proof that an increase in plasma progesterone
during the early follicular phase adversely affects follicular
development, oocyte maturity or the success rate of ivf as
previously reported (antoine et al., 1988; brzyski et al.,
1988; loumaye et al., 1989a)? as suggested by sims et al.
(1994), it may rather indicate a progesterone threshold
beyond which an impairment in follicular development
may be observed. from a clinical point of view, such a risk
may be easily prevented by a progestogen pre-treatment.
effect of duration in gnrh analogue administration

in addition to the protocol first described, in which gnrha
administration was maintained up to the time of hcg
injection, two simplified regimens were proposed: (i) a 3-day
administration (‘ultra-short protocol’). initially reported by
howles et al. (1987) and macnamee et al. (1989), this
abbreviated schedule still allows reduction of endogenous
tonic lh secretion during the latter stages of follicular
development. it must be stressed that mean plasma lh
concentrations measured in the late follicular phase of an
ultra-short protocol are even lower than those observed in the
same period with a long-term protocol (ron-el et al., 1992).
however, this potentially cost-reducing protocol does not
totally prevent the occurrence of an endogenous lh surge
(smitz et al., 1990; acharya et al., 1992a,b). this observation may be explained by the relative shortness of the
refractory period when the gnrha is administered for only 3
days; (ii) a 7-day administration (‘mini-short protocol’). a
7-day course of gnrha seems sufficient to provide a reliable
protection against the risk of premature plasma lh elevation
and yet yield similar overall ivf results as the long-term
gnrha protocol with a reduced amount of exogenous
gonadotrophins (hazout et al., 1993).
in a recent prospective study comparing the effectiveness
of a 7 and a 14 day administration of gnrha, we observed
that stopping injection of  xxxd3445xxx  on day 7 leads to a
sudden and dramatic decrease of plasma lh combined with
a plasma  xxxd2037xxx  stagnation and an increased requirement
for gonadotrophins (cédrin-durnerin et al., 1996a). these
data, in agreement with those of sungurtekin and jansen
(1995), would suggest a state of incomplete hypophyseal
desensitization after a 7 day period of gnrha administration, with a relative lh release following daily agonist
administration. by using highly specific immunometric
assays for lh alpha and beta subunits and for dimeric lh, we
observed a progressive decrease in lh beta subunits within
the 7 days of the agonist administration which persists

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

during the whole follicular phase, regardless of the duration
of gnrha administration. by contrast, lh  xxxg216xxx 
secretion seems to be dependent on duration of treatment,
with a dramatic decrease concomitant with cessation of
agonist administration that is in contrast with a constant
synthesis when gnrha administration is maintained
(hugues et al., 1997). such persistence of lh  xxxg216xxx 
secretion under gnrh treatment was previously reported
during long-term administration of  xxxd3445xxx  for precocious
puberty (lahlou et al., 1987). moreover, as shown by
oppenheimer et al. (1992), each daily gnrha administration can lead to a partial release of lh  xxxg216xxx . thus, in this
early phase of hypophyseal desensitization, the limiting step
of dimeric lh secretion could be the synthesis of lh alpha
subunit. however, such an observation cannot account for
the lower amount of exogenous gonadotrophins needed to
sustain follicular development when gnrha is maintained,
because lh alpha subunits are usually considered as biologically
inactive, with no effect on progesterone secretion (lincoln et
al., 1995). is this effect related to modifications in hypophyseal fsh secretion? immunometric plasma fsh
concentrations were not influenced by duration of treatment.
nevertheless, unlike lh (meldrum et al., 1984), fsh
bioactivity does not decrease during gnrha administration
(matikainen et al., 1992) and a daily administration of
500 µg of  xxxd387xxx  induces a significant release of bio-fsh
without any change in immunometric fsh activity
(huhtaniemi et al., 1988). it may therefore be speculated that
the apparent beneficial effect of maintaining gnrha
administration for 14 days is related to the persistence of
bio-fsh secretion. an additional study is in progress to test
this hypothesis and to improve our knowledge of the
structure and bioactivity of gonadotrophins secreted during
the refractory period. from a practical point of view, these
data lead us to maintain gnrha administration up to the time
of hcg administration in short-term protocols, especially
for patients known to be poor responders to exogenous
gonadotrophins.
timing of administration of gnrh analogue and
gonadotrophins

in short-term protocols, the starting day of gnrha
administration is usually the first or third day of the cycle.
smitz et al. (1990) and benadiva et al. (1990) obtained
better results when the gnrha supply was started on day 3
of the cycle and attributed any rise of progesterone plasma
concentration to an earlier administration of the agonist
with a subsequent rescue of the corpus luteum. similarly,
ron-el et al. (1992) found that high doses of exogenous
gonadotrophins administered concomitantly with gnrha
may be responsible for progesterone secretion, which has

89

been related to a potential deleterious effect on oocyte
quality (antoine et al., 1988; bryszki et al., 1988;
loumaye et al., 1989a,b; sims et al., 1994). nevertheless,
as far as is known, no correlation has been demonstrated
between increasing plasma progesterone concentrations
during the early follicular phase and subsequent reduction
in pregnancy rate (smitz et al., 1990; cédrin-durnerin et
al., 1996b).
collectively, these data show the extreme and largely
underestimated heterogeneity of protocols using gnrha
for ovarian stimulation. recognizing these differences is
the first step towards a better understanding of the success
and failure of these regimens, which have been generally
analysed under the general heading of long- and short-term
protocols. many aspects of the overall improvement in ivf
outcome achieved by using gnrha are still a matter of
debate: short- and long-term effects of hypophyseal
desensitization, consequences of gonadotroph flare-up or
hypophyseal quiescence on ovarian function etc.
how do gnrh agonist protocols improve the
outcome of ivf cycles?
hypophyseal effects

it is commonly recognized that the main beneficial effect
of gnrha is to prevent any pre-ovulatory lh surge during
ovarian stimulation. nevertheless, despite pituitary
desensitization, a small elevation in serum progesterone
can occur at the end of the follicular phase in up to 20% of
stimulated cycles. considerable attention has been given to
progesterone concentrations at the time of hcg
administration after a report that pregnancy rate may be
adversely affected (schoolcraft et al., 1991). some
(edelstein et al., 1990) have described a critical threshold
progesterone concentration of 0.9 ng/ml on the day of
hcg, above which a negative impact on pregnancy rate is
seen (silverberg et al., 1991; fanchin et al., 1993). this
subtle premature rise in serum progesterone was thought to
impair endometrial receptivity rather than oocyte quality
(legro et al., 1993; silverberg et al., 1994; fanchin et al.,
1996; shulman et al., 1996). in support of this possibility is
the recent report that premature progesterone elevation
does not affect blastulation (fanchin et al., 1997b), and
recommendation has been made to cryopreserve embryos
for a subsequent transfer. however, several other studies
have not found a relationship between late follicular
progesterone concentrations and ivf outcome (edelstein
et al., 1990; givens et al., 1994; abuzeid and sasy, 1996;
hofmann et al., 1996). the mechanisms that account for
the premature elevation of progesterone by gnrha,
despite suppressed endogenous gonadotrophins, are still

90

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

unclear. a pituitary escape from the suppressive effect of
gnrha is unlikely because lh concentrations are
invariably low and the incidence of premature progesterone rise has been found to be identical in women
receiving long and ultra-short gnrha protocols (fanchin
et al., 1993; hazout et al., 1993). another theory proposes
that progesterone elevation could result from exposure to
large amounts of exogenous gonadotrophins (fanchin et
al., 1995). an increased fsh-induced lh receptivity
would be more to be involved in this process than the
presence of hcg in exogenous gonadotrophin preparations (ubaldi et al., 1996). another possibility is to
examine the contribution of the adrenal gland to both
progesterone and androgen production. these hormonal
secretions may be reduced by simultaneous
dexamethasone administration, but improvement of the
subsequent ivf outcome by this treatment needs further
confirmation (eldar-geva et al., 1997; fanchin et al.,
1997a). at present, using serum progesterone
concentration thresholds on the day of hcg administration
as a means of making a clinical decision regarding
cancellation of fresh transfer and the cryopreservation of
all embryos for future transfer must be questioned (moffitt
et al., 1997).

than in normogonadotrophic women. for these authors,
such a difference could be related to the natural agonadal
state of these women prior to ovarian stimulation.
collectively, these data suggest that a spontaneous or
induced state of hypogonadism contributes simultaneously
to an increase in homogeneity of follicular recruitment and
to a reduction in ovarian sensitivity to gonadotrophins
(filicori et al., 1994). it is easily understood that gonadotrophin suppression, which maintains the ovary in a
quiescent state by controlling gonadotrophic-dependent
follicular growth, could lead to a greater homogeneity of
the cohort that will subsequently be recruited at the time of
stimulation. in contrast, it is more difficult to explain the
lower sensitivity to gonadotrophins. indeed, scheele et al.
(1993) have shown, in an elegant study, that the follicular
fsh threshold is unaffected by gnrha administration. it
cannot be ruled out that the low residual lh bioactivity
induced by a long-term gnrha administration may
deprive granulosa cells of their androgenic substrate, in
accordance with the ‘two cell, two gonadotrophin’ model
(hillier et al., 1994; hillier, 1996). finally, the involvement
of paracrine ovarian factors or modifications of ovarian
receptors to gonadotrophins may also contribute to the
reduction of ovarian responsiveness.

role of ovarian quiescence

endometrial effect

the role of ovarian quiescence may be considered when
ovarian stimulation is achieved with a long-term gnrha
protocol or when a short-term one is programmed by
oestro-progestogen or progestogen administration. the
subsequent hypo-oestrogenic state may have some
influence on both ovarian sensitivity to gonadotrophins
and endometrium receptivity.

as discussed by edwards (1995), women in a state of
amenorrhoea seem to display an enhanced fertility; this
group includes acyclic and agonadal women <49 years of
age who were given oocyte donation and hormone
replacement therapy, cyclic women with endometriosis
aged <40 years who become highly fertile after 4 months of
pituitary down-regulation and women in their late teenage
years who have just begun to have complete menstrual
cycles after their adolescent period. in these situations, a
significantly higher rate of implantation has been reported,
but the reasons for this enhanced fertility in amenorrhoeic
women are still partially unknown. one hypothesis is that
steroid-sensitive systems in the uterus, such as progesterone-dependent pinopodes, have been impaired
during many years of regular cycles and require some time
to recover from this constant stimulus (edwards, 1995).
conversely, it has been shown in some reports (forman et
al., 1988; pellicer et al., 1989b; 1996; simon et al., 1995a)
that high serum  xxxd2037xxx  concentrations following hcg
administration are detrimental to uterine receptivity.
nevertheless, this assumption has been challenged by
others (chenette et al., 1990; toner et al., 1991) and the
steroid threshold concentrations required to achieve
implantation are still a matter of debate (younis et al.,
1994; de ziegler, 1995).

effects of an induced period of agonadal state and
subsequent ovarian response to gonadotrophins

long before the first introduction of gnrha, jones et al.
(1969) reported that ovarian quiescence induced by
oestro-progestogens reduces the variability of the ovarian
response to gonadotrophins by a synchronizing effect on
the follicular cohort. however, in this situation, a larger
amount of gonadotrophin is needed (lewinthal et al.,
1988). these reports fully agree with observations on the
consequences of long-term gnrha protocols which
usually lead to the recruitment of a more homogeneous
cohort of follicles with a lower sensitivity to exogenous
gonadotrophins (fleming et al., 1985). in another study,
schwartz et al. (1980) also underlined the high
effectiveness of ovarian stimulation using exogenous
gonadotrophins in patients with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, whose pregnancy rate was significantly higher

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

collectively, these data support the concept that a
transient state of hypophyseal desensitization induced by
gnrha improves ivf cycle success through a beneficial
effect on both ovarian folliculogenesis and endometrial
receptivity.
ovarian direct effects of gnrh agonists

there is still controversial information regarding a possible
extra-pituitary action of gnrh and its agonists. in
hypophysectomized animals, direct negative effects on
ovarian function have been reported. in humans, there is
evidence for gnrh binding sites within the follicle
(latouche et al., 1989) and the corpus luteum (bramley et
al., 1986). their specific effects on steroidogenesis,
folliculogenesis and oocyte quality are considered below.
effects on steroidogenesis.

in rodents, a direct inhibitory effect of gnrh on
fsh-induced steroidogenesis was demonstrated in cultured
granulosa cells (hsueh and erickson, 1979) and specific high
affinity gnrh receptors in ovarian tissue were also reported
(clayton et al., 1979). more recently it has been shown that
 xxxg931xxx  expression is developmentally regulated,
with an inverse relationship between gene expression and
granulosa cell differentiation measured by  xxxg1325xxx 
mrna levels (whitelaw et al., 1995), suggesting that gnrh
is involved in the process of apoptosis and follicular atresia
(billig et al., 1994).
in humans, evidence for a direct ovarian effect of gnrh
and its agonists is less clear because the methodological
approach is often restricted to in-vitro cultures of luteinized
granulosa cells obtained from ivf programmes. however,
this question requires some consideration; indeed, both
characterization of specific binding sites and purification of a
gnrh-like protein in human ovaries attest to the existence of
a complete ligand–receptor system for gnrh. moreover,
detectable concentrations of bioactive peptide may be
measured within follicular fluid after nasal  xxxd387xxx 
administration (loumaye et al., 1989b), although it was not
observed 48 h after leuprolide injection (dodson et al.,
1988).
in in-vitro studies, contradictory effects of gnrha on
steroid production have been shown. as for progesterone
synthesis in vitro, some investigators have found an
inhibitory effect (tureck et al., 1982), while others have
reported no effect (casper et al., 1984; dodson et al., 1988)
or a stimulatory effect only at low concentrations of the
agonist (parinaud et al., 1988; guerrero et al., 1993).
discrepancies between these studies may be related to
differences in the maturity of collected granulosa cells and in

91

gnrha concentrations used in vitro. regarding  xxxd2037xxx 
synthesis, similar divergent effects of gnrha have been
published and this could be related to the nature of gnrha
molecules. indeed, bussenot et al. (1993) reported that
 xxxd2037xxx  production would be increased only in the
presence of the two gly6 and gly10-substituted agonists
( xxxd387xxx  and leuprolide, whereas molecules substituted
only for gly6 ( xxxd3445xxx ) had no effect. this observation
suggests that modification in position 10 of the native
molecule may be involved in its ovarian bioactivity and/or its
affinity for granulosa gnrh receptors. however, any
stimulating effect of leuprolide was not confirmed in other
reports (guerrero et al., 1993; fabbri et al., 1996).
clinical studies have dealt with measurements of steroid
concentrations within the follicular fluid and steroid
production by granulosa cells exposed in vivo to gnrha
during ovarian stimulation. results are also contradictory.
follicular fluid  xxxd2037xxx  concentrations seem to decrease in
leuprolide-treated patients (bryszki et al., 1990) whereas,
using the same gnrha, pellicer and miro (1990) observed
an increase in in-vitro  xxxd2037xxx  production. the only
clinical study comparing three agonists has shown a weaker
 xxxd2037xxx  production following  xxxd387xxx  administration
(parinaud et al., 1992), attesting to its potential
antigonadotrophic effect on small follicles as previously
shown in rats (reddy et al., 1980) and monkeys (gougeon et
al., 1992). as far as progesterone production is concerned,
results were diverse: normal (stone et al., 1988), increased
(hartshorne, 1989) or decreased in relation to a conversion to
the inactive 20-oh derivative (pellicer and miro, 1990) or to
a reduced stimulating effect of fsh on  xxxg1325xxx  synthesis
(maruo et al., 1985). from these data, it is not possible to
demonstrate clearly any conclusive effects of gnrha on
human granulosa cell steroidogenesis.
effects of gnrha on luteal cell steroid production are
inhibitory: their luteolytic action (shriock et al., 1985;
smitz et al., 1992b) seems to be secondary to abolition of
gonadotrophin pulsatile secretion and/or to a direct
negative effect upon steroid synthesis (pellicer and miro,
1990). these conclusions justify systematically supplementing the luteal phase in protocols with gnrha
(bourgain et al., 1994).
effects on folliculogenesis

in monkeys, follicle quality appears to be altered by the
introduction of gnrha in ovarian stimulation protocols:
fewer follicles with normally dissociated granulosa walls
and a larger number of follicles in late atresia have been
reported when using short-term protocols. however, this
could be either a consequence of the gonadotrophin flare-up
or related to a direct effect of the gnrha (lefevre et al.,

92

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

1991). to our knowledge, such effects have not been proved
in humans. for brzyski et al. (1990), significant lower
 xxxd2037xxx  concentrations in follicles from leuprolide-treated
patients, in the presence of metaphase ii oocytes, would
reflect an adverse effect of the agonist on the maturity of the
cumulus–oocyte complex. however, a similar asynchrony
was also observed in protocols without gnrha (hammit et
al., 1993). it is thus unclear whether the follicular
environment is modified by gnrha exposure.
effects on oocyte and embryo quality

most studies have used animal species (rat, rabbit, monkey),
for which it has been demonstrated that gnrh and gnrha
induce complete oocyte maturation and meiosis resumption
in follicle-enclosed oocytes (hillensjo and le maire, 1980;
erikson et al., 1983; yoshimura et al., 1992) or in isolated
oocytes (lefevre et al., 1988). although receptors for gnrh
were found in oocytes (dekel et al., 1988), mechanisms by
which gnrha induces oocyte maturation have yet to be
elucidated because of an apparently associated increasing
degeneration (yoshimura et al., 1991). in humans, some
clinical studies have reported a higher incidence of immature
(ron-el et al., 1991; wojcik et al., 1995) or fractured zona
oocytes (testart et al., 1989a; cordeiro et al., 1993). more
recently, a higher incidence of diploid oocytes and
prematurely condensed sperm chromosomes was observed
in gnrha treated patients, indicating impairment of the
nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation processes in some
oocytes (racowsky et al., 1997). however, these reports
were unable to separate a specific deleterious effect of
gnrha from the negative consequences of the larger cohort
of retrieved oocytes, the high doses of gonadotrophins
administered in these protocols, or from the aetiology of
infertility (selva et al., 1991). nevertheless, one of the major
advances with the use of gnrha is undoubtedly the ability to
postpone hcg administration with less concern for
development of a premature lh surge, permitting the
majority of oocytes to achieve greater maturity before
aspiration (hammit et al., 1993).
finally, plachot et al. (1988) reported in a multicentric
study that the rate of triploid human embryos observed after
ivf was significantly higher when gnrha were included in
the treatment protocol, with a trend for more chromosomally
abnormal oocytes. furthermore, accelerated development of
embryos produced in gnrha treated cycles was also
reported (keenan et al., 1991). these data could account for
the lower implantation rate of embryos obtained from ivf
programmes incorporating gnrha (testart et al., 1989b;
1993).
collectively, these data are still contradictory, at least in
humans. differences between in-vitro experiments preclude

any significant comparison, and the absence of an in-vivo
model to separate any specific effect of gnrha
administration from the role of gonadotrophins does not
allow any firm conclusions to be made. in any case, these
putative effects of gnrha on ovarian function cannot
account for their beneficial action on ivf outcome.
endometrial direct effects of gnrh agonists

as no gnrh binding sites have been demonstrated at the
endometrial level, direct effects are unlikely. nevertheless,
comparison of implantation rates between different
protocols have led some authors to believe that the beneficial
effects of gnrha are related to an improved endometrial
receptivity (testart et al., 1989b; 1993; rutherford et al.,
1988). however, this positive effect of agonists is not
constant (hassiakos et al., 1990; remohi et al., 1994), and a
direct action of gnrha on endometrium remains
speculative. we must also consider that, as lh/hcg
receptors have been recently recognized at the endometrial
level (reshef et al., 1990; han et al., 1996; toth et al., 1996),
another way for gnrha to influence uterine receptivity
might be through the reduction of gonadotrophin synthesis,
with subsequent consequences on endometrial  xxxg1325xxx 
function. this hypothesis deserves further investigation.
it seems that the mechanisms involved in the overall
improvement of ivf outcome mediated by gnrha are
largely unknown. apart from the compelling evidence for
prevention of any pre-ovulatory lh surge, most of the other
consequences of agonist administration are still being
discussed: the residual secretion of endogenous bioactive
gonadotrophins following hypophyseal desensitization
differs according to the schedule of gnrha administration;
the reduced ovarian sensitivity to exogenous gonadotrophins
is poorly understood but is dependent on the degree of
hypophyseal desensitization; the putative deleterious direct
effects of the agonist on ovarian steroidogenesis and
folliculogenesis have not been proven in humans;
modifications of oocyte and embryo quality in ivf cycles
with agonist treatment are not conclusive. nevertheless,
these potential negative effects of gnrha have led some
authors to reconsider their prescription in women whose
ovarian response to exogenous gonadotrophins was poor. is
there any clinical evidence to recommend suppression or
reduction of gnrha doses in this particular group of
patients?
how to manage poor ovarian response to
gonadotrophins?
before addressing this question, it must be noted that both
the definition and pathophysiology of what is commonly

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

called ‘a poor response’ to gonadotrophins are still
controversial. identification of these patients is usually
based on results of a previous ivf stimulation and the
presence of one of the following characteristics: three or
fewer recruited dominant follicles or collected oocytes;
serum  xxxd2037xxx  concentrations lower than 300 or
500 pg/ml at the time of hcg administration; in fact, these
criteria are not universally accepted, and some authors
include patients whose cycle was cancelled because of a
spontaneous lh surge or who require a large dose of
gonadotrophins.
is there any common feature in poor responders to
gonadotrophins? in some of them, an incipient ovarian
failure can be predicted by hormonal markers in basal and
stimulated conditions; indeed, ovarian reserve and prediction
of ovarian stimulation response have been, so far, evaluated
by a single basal fsh determination during the early
follicular phase (muasher et al., 1988; scott et al., 1989,
1990; hansen et al., 1996; magarelli et al., 1996; kim et al.,
1997) or by dynamic challenge tests:  xxxd1726xxx 
(scott et al., 1995; scott and hofmann, 1995) or gnrh
agonist stimulation test (galtier-dereure et al., 1996;
yamashita et al., 1996). moreover, the prognostic value of
day 3 plasma  xxxd2037xxx  determination has been reported
(licciardi et al., 1995; smotrich et al., 1995). finally, some
authors have shown that ovarian volume, determined by
transvaginal ultrasonography, may be clinically useful in the
prediction of response to ovulation induction (syrop et al.,
1995; lass et al., 1997; tomas et al., 1997). in other women
with apparently normal ovarian function, an alteration of the
somatotrophic axis has been suggested (giudice, 1992;
salobir et al., 1996). however, in poor responders, growth
hormone-releasing hormone or growth hormone supplementation significantly improved ovarian stimulation in
spite of a significant increase in plasma insulin-like growth
factor-i concentrations, showing that the somatotrophic axis
plays only a permissive role in ovarian function (hugues et
al., 1991; salat-baroux et al., 1993; homburg and
ostergaard, 1995). it is thus likely that alterations in intraovarian factors or gonadotrophin receptor regulation are
involved in some poor responder patients.
the large heterogeneity within the group of poor
responders easily explains our current difficulties in
managing ovarian stimulation in this group, and emphasizes
that every new therapeutic approach must be analysed
carefully, with special attention given to the criteria of patient
inclusion. keeping in mind these restrictions, let us examine
the recent reports on adaptations of gnrha protocols in this
situation.
in the late 1980s, introduction of gnrha in ovarian
stimulation protocols clearly improved prognosis of human

93

menopausal
gonadotrophin-treated
cycles
whose
cancellation rate was high in cases of an endogenous lh
surge or a premature luteinization. in this particular group of
patients, protocols with gnrha were associated with an
improved rate of follicular recruitment and a higher number
of collected oocytes and pregnancies (awadallah et al.,
1987; frydman et al., 1988; palermo et al., 1988; serafini et
al., 1988; maclachlan et al., 1989; salat-baroux et al.,
1988; antoine et al., 1990). however, it is still unclear
whether this improvement is related only to the prevention of
the endogenous lh surge or to other factors. moreover,
these conclusions must be tempered by other reports that
fsh plasma concentrations are reduced by gnrha
administration (ben-rafael et al., 1991) and that the overall
pregnancy rate may not be improved (droesch et al., 1989;
sathanandan et al., 1989; van kasteren et al., 1995). nowadays, ovarian stimulation with gnrha in association with
gonadotrophins is currently used for ivf, and a subgroup of
patients has been identified as poor responders to these
protocols. the two kinds of adaptation from current
protocols that have been proposed are discussed below.
increment of gonadotrophin doses

an increase of the doses of exogenous gonadotrophins is
currently performed in this situation but is not supported by
any clear pathophysiological approach. furthermore, its
beneficial effect may be reduced by inducing a receptor
down-regulation, as previously observed with hcg
administration. in fact, an incremental increase in gonadotrophin supply may be responsible for various effects,
depending on ovarian sensitivity.
in patients with a normal response to gonadotrophins
alone

a slight increase in dose (150–225 iu/day) to improve
ovarian recruitment exposes the patient to the risk of lower
oocyte quality (ben rafael et al., 1987) in relation to the
hormonal modifications (ben rafael et al., 1986), and to an
inadequate luteal phase or altered endometrial receptivity
(edwards et al., 1980). in this group of patients, the
introduction of gnrha has produced different effects: a
slight reduction in the number of ampoules needed to
achieve follicular maturation, which is secondary to the
hormonal flare-up induced by a short-term protocol
(luxman et al., 1995). conversely, a higher consumption
of exogenous gonadotrophins after pituitary desensitization has been induced by a long-term protocol (lewinthal
et al., 1988), but the consequences for ivf outcome are still
unclear. stadtmauer et al. (1994) found that the pregnancy
rate was inversely correlated with the number of ampoules

94

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

administered, while others did not find any detrimental
effect (simon et al., 1995b). thus, at present, there is no
proven advantage to increasing the usually recommended
supply of gonadotrophins for normo-responder patients.
in poor-responder women

it has been established that a greater amount of
gonadotrophins may only allow a slight improvement in
serum  xxxd2037xxx  concentrations (jenkins et al., 1991; manzi
et al., 1994) or number of oocytes (land et al., 1996), but
does not increase the pregnancy rate because the fertilization
rate is unchanged or even reduced (benadiva et al., 1988;
karande et al., 1990; hershlag et al., 1990; van hoof et al.,
1993). it is thus clear that the problem of poor response
cannot simply be overcome by increasing the dose of
gonadotrophins. this is not surprising if we consider that
only 1% of receptor occupancy by a substrate is usually
enough to achieve a significant biological cell response. it
remains to be shown whether alterations in gonadotrophin
receptivity and/or in intra-cellular machinery can account for
ovarian hypo-responsiveness to exogenous stimulation.
adaptation of gnrh agonist protocols

as gnrha itself may be involved in the poor response to
gonadotrophins through its potential deleterious effects on
reproductive function, it has been claimed by some authors
(davis and rosenwaks, 1993) that the dose of agonist must
be calibrated in order to obtain a significant flare-up effect
(only in short-term protocol) and to prevent an endogenous
lh surge. although there are no studies that define the range
of dosages that may be successfully used for flare-up
stimulations, it was shown in baboons that doses which are
equivalent to 1, 5 and 10 µg in humans induce a significant
flare-up, with a rise in fsh which is greater in magnitude
and lasts longer than that for lh (scott et al., 1993a).
moreover, it was reported that the doses of gnrha
required to maintain pituitary suppression decrease with
the length of treatment ( sandow and donnez, 1990). it
thus seemed logical to evaluate the effects of a reduction in
doses and duration of gnrha administration in poorresponder patients.
adaptation of gnrha dosage in long-term protocol

to address this issue, clinical investigations were recently
performed in patients whose poor ovarian responsiveness
to gonadotrophins was not similarly defined. a reduction
in gnrha dosage at the end of the desensitization period
was proposed for women with a high basal fsh (ben
rafael et al., 1993; feldberg et al., 1994). a significant
improvement in the follicular and hormonal ovarian

response was observed following administration of low
doses of short-acting  xxxd3445xxx  (starting with 0.1 mg and
reduced to 0.05 mg/day) as compared with higher doses of
short-acting or with long-acting formulations. a lower
amount of gonadotrophins was needed in a shorter period
to achieve follicular development but the pregnancy rate
was not improved. a similar approach was investigated by
olivennes et al. (1996) with the use of low doses of
leuprolide (0.5-0.25 mg/day) for patients whose basal fsh
concentrations were above the normal range and who were
not pregnant following a previous ivf attempt with a longacting  xxxd3445xxx  protocol. a significant improvement in
the hormonal response was only observed on day 8 of the
stimulation, but  xxxd2037xxx  values at the time of hcg
administration (>2000 pg/ml) in both groups testify that
selected patients could not really be considered as poor
responders. finally, muasher et al. (1996) recently
evaluated the consequences of discontinuing leuprolide
administration (0.5 mg/day started on day 21) with onset of
menses when high dosage gonadotrophin stimulation was
initiated. they selected patients with elevated fsh or
 xxxd2037xxx  values at day 3 of a spontaneous cycle and/or a
history of poor response (<5 oocytes) in a previous ivf
cycle with a current long-term protocol. despite a still high
rate of cancellation, they observed a significant improvement in follicular recruitment and a good implantation rate.
it must be noted that only one patient triggered a premature
lh surge, despite cessation of leuprolide for a mean of 13
days prior to hcg injection.
although this new approach of gnrha protocols was
not applied to patients selected on similar criteria, there
was a trend for an overall improvement in ovarian response
with the use of short-acting rather than depot forms and
lower doses for a shorter period of time. the results require
confirmation in poor responders whose day 3 fsh
concentrations are normal.
adaptation of gnrha dosage in short-term protocol

a similar approach was proposed for women undergoing
an ivf cycle with a short-term gnrha protocol. to our
knowledge, few studies have really evaluated the
beneficial effects of a reduction in gnrha dosage on ivf
outcome. scott and navot (1994) studied women with a
poor responsiveness defined as a weak follicular development in a previous cycle using a long-term protocol and
with normal basal fsh values. following administration
of oral contraceptives, a flare-up was induced by leuprolide
20 µg twice daily and a similar dose of gonadotrophins was
used. their data demonstrated that micro-doses of gnrha
triggered the release of significant amounts of endogenous
gonadotrophins and were still adequate to suppress prema-

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation

ture lh surge. furthermore, this protocol resulted in the
development of more follicles and higher peak  xxxd2037xxx 
concentrations, as well as the recovery of more mature
oocytes and the transfer of a greater number of embryos.
similar conclusions were more recently reported by
schoolcraft et al. (1997). although these results indicate
that a flare-up protocol using micro-doses of gnrha may
be of value in poor responders, dose–range studies are still
required to define the magnitude of the gonadotrophin
release and the rate of desensitization and their impact on
clinically oriented endpoints. indeed, the nature of the
experimental design in both studies precludes comparison
of pregnancy rates.
two other studies evaluated the benefits of high doses of
gonadotrophins in poor responders with a lack of flare-up
 xxxd2037xxx  response (padilla et al., 1996) or with normal
fsh concentrations at the onset of stimulation (karande et
al., 1997). in these reports, current doses of gnrha were
used and better pregnancy rates were obtained when
gonadotrophins were administered in a step-down fashion
(padilla et al., 1996). these results emphasize that the
regimen of gonadotrophin administration must be taken
into account in the evaluation of new protocols and that, in
these poor responders, milder forms of ovarian stimulation
could be applied in ‘tailor-made’ modes to improve
qualitatively follicular development (edwards et al., 1996;
edwards et al., 1997).
collectively, these data do not allow adequate prediction
of how to optimize gnrha protocols in patients with a
previous poor ovarian responsiveness. however, they
provide a new insight into the potential deleterious effects
of large doses of gnrha in some, but not all, women. the
consequences of such a gnrha dosage reduction on
qualitative hypophyseal secretion during the flare-up
period, as well as during the desensitization and the
recovery periods, remains to be determined.
conclusions
the addition of gnrh agonists to ovarian stimulation
regimens for ivf has several recognized advantages,
including reduced cancellation rates, increased ease of
scheduling and fewer cases of premature luteinization.
although the increased number of oocytes obtained per
retrieval generally results in an increase in the number of
embryos available for transfer, oocyte quality may not be
optimum. mechanisms involved in the several sites of
action of gnrha on reproductive function are still partly
unknown. consequences of the induced hypophyseal
desensitization are quite different from one protocol to
another, and evaluation of the residual gonadotrophin

95

secretion under this therapy remains critical. this may
probably explain the emergence of poor responses to
gonadotrophins with protocols including gnrha. the
recent trend for a reduction in both dose and duration of
gnrha administration also reflects the fear that these
compounds may adversely affect oocyte quality and
endometrial receptivity. although some studies have
reported a slight improvement in ovarian response, further
investigations are needed to evaluate the effects of the
gnrha reduction on pregnancy rate. introduction of
gnrh antagonists in the near future will probably be
helpful in the recognition of the specific effects of the
agonists on reproductive function.

references
abdalla, h.i., ahuja, k.k., leonard, y. et al. (1990) comparative trial of
 xxxd2226xxx  analog/human menopausal
gonadotropin and  xxxd1726xxx /human menopausal gonadotropin
in an assisted conception program. fertil. steril., 53, 473–478.
abuzeid, m.i. and sasy, m.a. (1996) elevated progesterone levels in the late
follicular phase do not predict success of in vitro fertilization–embryo
transfer. fertil. steril., 65, 981–985.
acharya, u., irvine, s., hamilton, m. and templeton, a. (1992a)
prospective study of short and ultrashort regimens of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist in an in vitro fertilization
program. fertil. steril., 58, 1169–1173.
acharya, u., small, j., randall, j. et al. (1992b) prospective study of short
and long regimens of  xxxg930xxx  agonist in in
vitro fertilization program. fertil. steril., 57, 815–818.
antoine, j.m., firmin, c., alvarez, s. et al. (1988) hormonal levels in late
follicular phase with long and short regimen of gnrh agonists.
contracept. fertil. sex., 16, 630–631.
antoine, j.m., salat-baroux, j., alvarez, s. et al. (1990) ovarian stimulation
using human menopausal gonadotrophins with and without  xxxg930xxx 
analogues in a long protocol for in-vitro fertilization: a prospective
randomized comparison. hum. reprod., 5, 565–569.
awadalla, s.g., friedman, c.i., chin, n.w. et al. (1987) follicular
stimulation for in vitro fertilization using pituitary suppression and
human menopausal gonadotropins. fertil. steril., 48, 811–815.
balasch, j., gomez, f., casamitjana, r. et al. (1992a) pituitary–ovarian
suppression by the standard and half-doses of  xxxd1794xxx -6-luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone depot. hum. reprod., 7, 1230–1234.
balasch, j., jove, i.c., moreno, v. et al. (1992b) the comparison of two
 xxxg930xxx  agonists in an in vitro fertilization
program. fertil. steril., 58, 991–994.
barrière, p., lopes, p., boiffard, j.p. et al. (1987) use of gnrh analogues in
ovulation induction for in vitro fertilization: benefit of a short
administration regimen. j. in vitro fertil. embryo transfer, 4, 64–65.
barrière, p., dubourdieu, s., schatz, b. and charbonnel, b. (1991)
modifications of pituitary reactivity after ultrashort gnrh analogs
administration during early follicular phase in normal women. 7th
annual meeting of the european society of human reproduction and
embryology, paris, abstr. 466.
ben-rafael, z. and feldberg, d. (1993) the poor-responder patient in an in
vitro fertilization–embryo transfer program. j. assist. reprod. genet.,
10, 118–120.
ben-rafael, z., strauss iii, j.f., mastroianni, l. and ficklinger, g.l. (1986)
differences in ovarian stimulation in human menopausal gonadotropin
treated women may be related to follicle-stimulating hormone
accumulation. fertil. steril., 46, 586–592.
ben-rafael, z., benadiva, c.a., ausmanas, m. et al. (1987) dose of human
gonadotropin influences the outcome of in vitro fertilization program.
fertil. steril., 48, 964–968.

96

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

ben-rafael, z., lipitz, s., bider, d. and mashiach, s. (1991) ovarian
hyporesponsiveness in combined  xxxg930xxx 
agonist and menotropin therapy is associated with low serum
follicle-stimulating hormone levels. fertil. steril., 55, 272–275.
benadiva, c.a., ben-rafael, z., strauss iii, j.f. et al. (1988) ovarian
response of individuals to different doses of human menopausal
gonadotropin. fertil. steril., 49, 997–1001.
benadiva, c.a., blasco, l., tureck, r. et al. (1990) comparison of different
regimens of a  xxxg930xxx  analog during ovarian
stimulation for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 53, 479–485.
bergquist, c., nillius, s.j. and wide, l. (1979) reduced gonadotropin
secretion in postmenopausal women during treatment with a
stimulatory lrh analog. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 49, 472–474.
bergquist, c., nillius, s.j. and wide, l. (1982) failure of positive feedback
of  xxxd2037xxx  during chronic intranasal luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone analog treatment. clin. endocrinol., 16, 147–151.
bider, d., ben-rafael, z. and shalev, j. (1989) pituitary and ovarian
suppression rate after high dosage of  xxxg930xxx 
analog. fertil. steril., 51, 578–581.
billig, h., furuta, j. and hsueh, a.j.w. (1994) gonadotropin-releasing
hormone directly induces apoptotic cell death in the rat ovary:
biochemical and in situ detection of desoxyribonucleic acid
fragmentation in granulosa cells. endocrinology, 134, 245–252.
bourgain, c., smitz, j., camus, m. et al. (1994) human endometrial
maturation is markedly improved after luteal supplementation of
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogue/human menopausal
gonadotrophin stimulated cycles. hum. reprod., 9, 32–40.
bramley, t., menzies, g. and baird, d. (1986) specificity of gnrh binding
sites of human corpus luteum: comparison with receptors of rat pituitary
gland. j. endocrinol., 108, 323–328.
broekmans, f.j., bernadus, r.e., broeders, a. et al. (1993) pituitary
responsiveness after administration of a gnrh agonist depot
formulation:  xxxd3445xxx  cr. clin. endocrinol., 38, 579–587.
broekmans, f.j., hompes, p.g.a., lambalk, c.b. et al. (1996) short term
pituitary desensitization: effects of different doses of the
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist  xxxd3445xxx . hum. reprod.,
11, 55–60.
brzyski, r.g., muasher, s.j., droesch, k. et al. (1988) follicular atresia
associated with concurrent initiation of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone agonist and follicle-stimulating hormone for oocyte
recruitment. fertil. steril., 50, 917–921.
brzyski, r.g., hofmann, g.e., scott, r. and jones, h.w. (1990) effects of
 xxxd2463xxx  on follicular fluid hormone composition at oocyte
retrieval for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 54, 842–847.
bussenot, i., azoulay-barjonet, c. and parinaud, j. (1993) modulation of the
steroidogenesis of cultured human granulosa–lutein cells by
 xxxg930xxx  analogs. j. clin. endocrinol. metab.,
76, 1376–1379.
caraty, a., locatelli, a., delaleu, b. et al. (1990) gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (gnrh) analogs and gnrh antagonists do not alter
endogenous gnrh secretion in short-term castrated rams.
endocrinology, 127, 2523–2529.
casper, r., erickson, g. and yen, s.c.c. (1984) studies on the effect of
gnrh and its agonist on human luteal steroidogenesis in vitro. fertil.
steril., 42, 39–43.
castracane, v.d., schmidt-sarosi, c.l., goldsmith, l.y. and weiss, g.
(1996)  xxxg930xxx  agonist and human
menopausal gonadotropin (hmg) short protocol, but not hmg alone,
rescues the corpus lutuem from the preceding cycle. fertil. steril., 66,
577–581.
cédrin-durnerin, i., herve, f., huet-pecqueux, l. et al. (1995) progestogen
pretreatment in the short-term protocol does not affect the prognostic
value of the  xxxd2037xxx  flare-up in response to a gnrh agonist. hum.
reprod., 10, 2904–2908.
cédrin-durnerin, i., bulwa, s., herve, f. et al. (1996a) increased
requirement of gonadotropins after discontinuation of the
gnrh-agonist treatment in a short protocol for ivf. the ovary:
regulation, dysfunction and treatment. ferring conference, marco
island, florida, abstr. p56.
cédrin-durnerin, i., bulwa, s., herve, f. et al. (1996b) the hormonal
flare-up following gonadotrophin-releasing agonist administration is

influenced by a progestogen pretreatment. hum. reprod., 11,
1859–1863.
chang, s.y., lee, c.l., wang, m.l. et al. (1993) no detrimental effects in
delaying initiation of gonadotropin administration after pituitary
desensitization with  xxxg930xxx  agonist. fertil.
steril., 59, 183–186.
chenette, p.e., sauer, m.v. and paulson, r.j. (1990) very high serum
estradiol levels are not detrimental to clinical outcome of in vitro
fertilization. fertil. steril., 54, 858–863.
clayton, r.n., harwood, j.p. and catt, k.j. (1979) gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogue binds to luteal cells and inhibits progesterone
production. nature, 282, 90–92.
cordeiro, i., calhaz-jorge, c., leal, f. et al. (1993) fractured zona oocytes in
in-vitro fertilization cycles stimulated with gonadotrophin- releasing
hormone analogue and  xxxd2564xxx . hum.
reprod., 8, 609–611.
dalh, k.d., bicsak, t.a. and hsueh, a.j.w. (1988) naturally occurring
anti-hormones: secretion of fsh antagonists by women treated with a
gnrh analog. science, 239, 72–74.
dantas, z.n., vicino, m., balmaceda, j.p. et al. (1994) comparison between
 xxxd2691xxx  and  xxxd2463xxx  for in vitro fertilization: preliminary
clinical study. fertil. steril., 61, 705–708.
davis, o. and rosenwaks, z. (1993) the ovarian factor in assisted
reproductive technology. in adashi, e. and leung, p. (eds), the ovary.
raven press, ny, pp. 553–555.
de ziegler, d. (1995) hormonal control of endometrial receptivity. hum.
reprod., 10, 4–7.
de ziegler, d., cedars, m.i., randle, d. et al. (1987) suppression of the
ovary using a gonadotropin releasing-hormone agonist prior to
stimulation for oocyte retrieval. fertil. steril., 48, 807–810.
deaton, j.l., bauguess, p., huffman, c.s. and miller, k.a. (1996) pituitary
response to early follicular-phase minidose gonadotropin releasing
hormone agonist (gnrha) therapy: evidence for a second flare. j.
assist. reprod. genet., 13, 390–394.
dekel, n., lewysohn, o., ayalon, d. and hazum, e. (1988) receptors for
gnrh are present in rat oocytes. endocrinology, 123, 1205–1209.
devreker, f., govaerts, i., bertrand, e. et al. (1996) the long-acting
 xxxg930xxx  analogues impaired the implantation
rate. fertil. steril., 65, 122–126.
ditkoff, e.c. and sauer, m.v. (1996) a combination of  xxxd2751xxx 
acetate and  xxxd2463xxx  blocks the gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone agonistic response and minimizes cyst formation during
ovarian stimulation. hum. reprod., 11, 1035–1037.
dodson, w.c., myers, t., morton, p.c. and conn, p.m. (1988) leuprolide
acetate: serum and follicular fluid concentrations and effects on human
fertilization, embryo growth, and granulosa–lutein cell progesterone
accumulation in vitro. fertil. steril., 50, 612–617.
droesch, k., muasher, s.j., brzyski, r.g. et al. (1989) value of suppression
with a  xxxg930xxx  agonist prior to gonadotropin
stimulation for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 51, 292–297.
edelstein, m.c., seltman, h.j., cox, b.j. et al. (1990) progesterone levels on
the day of  xxxd2228xxx  administration in cycles with
 xxxg930xxx  agonist suppression are not predictive
of pregnancy outcome. fertil. steril., 54, 853–857.
edwards, r.g. (1995) clinical approaches in increasing uterine receptivity
during human implantation. hum. reprod., 10 (suppl. 2), 60–66.
edwards, r.g., steptoe, p. and purdy, j.m. (1980) establishing full term
human pregnancies using cleaving embryos grown in vitro. br. j.
obstet. gynaecol., 87, 737.
edwards, r.g., morcos, s., macnamee, m. et al. (1990) high fecundity of
amenorrhoeic women in embryo transfer programmes. lancet, 338,
292–294.
edwards, r.g., lobo, r. and bouchard, p. (1996) time to revolutionize
ovarian stimulation. hum. reprod., 11, 917–919.
edwards, r.g., lobo, r.a. and bouchard, p. (1997) why delay the obvious
need for milder forms of ovarian stimulation? hum. reprod., 12,
399–401.
eldar-geva, t., margalioth, e.j., brooks, b. et al. (1997) elevated serum
progesterone levels during pituitary suppression may signify adrenal
hyperandrogenism. fertil. steril., 67, 959–961.

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation
erikson, g., hofeditz, c. and hsueh, a. (1983) gnrh stimulated meiotic
maturation in preantral follicles of hypophysectomised rats. in
greenwald, g. and terranova, p. (eds), factors regulating ovarian
function. raven press, new york, pp. 257–261.
fabbri r., porcu e., pession a., et al. (1996) the effect of leuprolin on
steroidogenesis of human preovulatory granulosa cells in vitro. j. assist.
reprod. genet., 13, 287–292.
fanchin, r., de ziegler, d., taieb, j. et al. (1993) premature elevation of
plasma progesterone alters pregnancy rate of in vitro fertilization and
embryo transfer. fertil. steril., 59, 1090–1094.
fanchin, r., de ziegler, d., castracane, v.d. et al. (1995) physiopathology
of premature progesterone elevation. fertil. steril., 64, 796–801.
fanchin, r., righini, c., olivennes, f. et al. (1996) premature progesterone
elevation does not alter oocyte quality in in vitro fertilization. fertil.
steril., 65, 1178–1183.
fanchin, r., righini, c., olivennes, f. et al. (1997a) premature plasma
progesterone and androgen elevation are not prevented by adrenal
suppression in in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 67, 115–119.
fanchin, r., hourvitz, a., olivennes, f. et al. (1997b) premature
progesterone elevation spares blastulation but not pregnancy rates in
ivf and embryo transfer with co-culture. 13th annual meeting of the
european society of human reproduction and embryology, edinburgh.
hum. reprod., 12, (abstract bk.1)abstr. 040.
feldberg, d., farhi, j., ashkenazi, j. et al. (1994) minidose
 xxxg930xxx  agonist is the treatment of choice in
poor responders with high follicle-stimulating hormone levels. fertil.
steril., 62, 343–346.
ferrareti, a.p., magli, c., feliciani, e. et al. (1996) relationship of timing of
agonist administration in the cycle phase to the ovarian response to
gonadotropins in the long down-regulation protocols for assisted
reproductive technologies. fertil. steril., 65, 114–121.
filicori, m., flamigni, c., dellai, p. et al. (1994) treatment of anovulation
with pulsatile  xxxg930xxx : prognostic factors and
clinical results in 600 cycles. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 79,
1215–1220.
filicori, m., cognigni, g.e., arnone, r. et al. (1996) role of different gnrh
agonist regimens in pituitary suppression and the outcome of controlled
ovarian hyperstimulation. hum. reprod., 11 (suppl. 3), 123–132.
fleming, r. and coutts, j.r.t. (1986) induction of multiple follicular growth
in normally menstruating women with endogenous gonadotropin
suppression. fertil. steril., 45, 226–230.
fleming, r., adam, a.h., barlow, d.h. et al. (1982) a new systematic
treatment for infertile women with abnormal hormone profiles. br. j.
obstet. gynaecol., 89, 80–83.
fleming, r., haxton, m.j., hamilton, m.p.r. et al. (1985) successful
treatment of infertile women with oligomenorrhea using a combination
of an  xxxg930xxx  agonist and exogenous gonadotropins. br. j. obstet.
gynaecol., 92, 369–373.
forman, r., fries, n., testart, j. et al. (1988) evidence for an adverse effect
of elevated serum estradiol concentrations on embryo implantation.
fertil. steril., 49, 118–122.
fraser, h.m. (1981) effect of estrogen on gonadotrophin release in
stumptailed monkeys (macaca arctoides) treated chronically with an
analog of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone. j. endocrinol., 91,
525–530.
frydman, r., parneix, i., belaisch-allart, j. et al. (1988)  xxxg930xxx  agonists in
ivf: different methods of utilization and comparison with previous
ovulation stimulation treatments. hum. reprod., 3, 559–563.
galtier-dereure, f., de bouard, v., picot, m.c. et al. (1996) ovarian reserve
test with the gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist  xxxd387xxx :
correlation with in-vitro fertilization outcome. hum. reprod., 11,
1393–1398.
garcia, j.e., padilla, s.l., bayati, j. and baramki, t.a. (1990) follicular
phase  xxxg930xxx  agonist and human
gonadotropins: a better alternative for ovulation induction in in vitro
fertilization. fertil. steril., 53, 302–305.
gianoroli, l., ferraretti, a.p., feliciani, e. et al. (1994) prospective
randomized study of d-trp6- xxxg930xxx  versus  xxxd387xxx  in long
desensitization protocols for medically assisted conception cycles hum.
reprod., 9, 220–225.

97

giudice, i.c. (1992) insulin-like growth factors and ovarian follicular
development. endocr. rev., 13, 641–669.
givens, c.r., shriock, e.d., dandekar, p.v. and martin, m.c. (1994)
elevated serum progesterone levels on the day of human chorionic
gonadotropin administration do not predict outcome in assisted
reproduction cycles. fertil. steril., 62, 1011–1017.
goldman, j.a., dicker, d., feldberg, d. et al. (1994) prospective
randomized comparison of two gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
agonists,  xxxd2691xxx  acetate and  xxxd388xxx , in in-vitro
fertilization-embryo transfer. hum. reprod., 9, 226–228.
gonen, y., dirnfeld, m., goldman, s. et al. (1991) the use of long-acting
 xxxg930xxx  agonist (gnrh-a;  xxxd3445xxx ) and
gonadotropins versus short-acting gnrh-a ( xxxd387xxx ) and
gonadotropins before and during ovarian stimulation for in vitro
fertilization (ivf). j. in vitro fertil. embryo transfer, 8, 254–259.
goswami, s.k., chakravarty, b.n. and kabirs, n. (1996) significance of an
abnormal response during pituitary desensitization in an in vitro
fertilization and embryo transfer program. j. assist. reprod. genet., 13,
374–380.
gougeon, j., lefevre, b. and testart, j. (1992) influence of a gnrh agonist
and gonadotrophins on morphometric characteristics of the population
of small ovarian follicles in cynomolgus monkey (macaca fascicularis)
j. reprod. fertil., 95, 567–575.
guerrero, h., stein, p., asch, r.h. et al. (1993) effect of a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist on luteinizing hormone
receptors and steroidogenesis in ovarian cells. fertil. steril., 59,
803–809.
hammitt, d.g., syrop, g.m., van voorhuis, b.j.v. et al. (1993) maturational
asynchrony between oocyte cumulus–coronal morphology and nuclear
maturity in gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist stimulations.
fertil. steril., 59, 375–381.
han, s.w., lei, z.m. and rao, ch.v. (1996) up-regulation of
 xxxg1884xxx  gene expression by  xxxd2228xxx  during
the differentiation of human endometrial stromal cells into decidua.
endocrinology, 137, 1791–1797.
hansen, l.m., batzer, f.r., gutmann, j.n. et al. (1996) evaluating ovarian
reserve: follicle stimulating hormone and  xxxd2037xxx  variability during
cycle days 2–5. hum. reprod., 11, 486–489.
harrison, r.f., kondaveeti, u., kinsella, c.b. et al. (1994) should
 xxxg930xxx  down-regulation therapy be routine in
in vitro fertilization? fertil. steril., 62, 568–573.
hartshorne, g. (1989) preovulatory follicular fluid: relationship to ovarian
stimulation protocol, fertilization and sperm penetration in vitro. fertil.
steril., 52, 998–1005.
hassiakos, d., toner, j.p., muasher, s.j. and jones, g.s. (1990) implantation
and pregnancy rates in relation to  xxxd2037xxx  and progesterone profiles in
cycles with and without the use of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
agonist suppression. hum. reprod., 8, 1004–1008.
hazout, a., de ziegler, d., cornel, c. et al. (1993) comparison of short 7-day
and prolonged treatment with  xxxg930xxx  agonist
desensitization for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. fertil. steril.,
59, 596–600.
hershlag, a., asis, m.c., diamond, m.p. et al. (1990) the predictive value
and the management of cycles with low initial estradiol levels. fertil.
steril., 53, 1064–1067.
hillensjo, t. and le maire, w. (1980) gnrh agonists stimulate meiotic
maturation of follicle-enclosed rat oocytes in vitro. nature, 287, 145.
hillier, s.g. (1996) roles of follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing
hormone in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. hum. reprod., 11
(suppl. 3), 113–121.
hillier, s.g., whitelaw, p. and smyth, c.d. (1994) follicular oestrogen
synthesis: the ‘two-cell, two gonadotrophin’ model revisited. mol. cell.
endocrinol., 100, 51–54.
hoff, j., lasley, b.l., wang, c.f. and yen, s.s.c. (1977) the two pools of
pituitary gonadotropin: regulation during the menstrual cycle. j. clin.
endocrinol. metab., 44, 302–312.
hofmann, g.e., khoury, j., johnson, c.a. et al. (1996) premature
luteinization during controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for in vitro
fertilization–embryo transfer has no impact on pregnancy outcome.
fertil. steril., 66, 980–986.

98

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

homburg, r. and ostergaard, h. (1995) clinical applications of growth
hormone for ovarian stimulation. hum. reprod. update, 1, 264–275.
howles, c.m., macnamee, m.c. and edwards, r.g. (1987) short-term use
of an  xxxg930xxx  agonist to treat poor responders entering an in-vitro
fertilizing programme. hum. reprod., 2, 655–656.
hsueh, a.j.w. and erickson, g.f. (1979) extrapituitary action of
gonadotropin releasing hormone: direct inhibition of ovarian
steroidogenesis. science, 204, 854–855.
hughes, e.g., fedorkow, d.m., daya, s. et al. (1992) the routine use of
 xxxg930xxx  agonists prior to in vitro fertilization
and gamete intrafallopian transfer: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. fertil. steril., 58, 888–896.
hugues, j.n., torresani, t., herve, f. et al. (1991) interest of growth
hormone-releasing hormone administration for improvement of ovarian
responsiveness to gonadotropins in poor responder women. fertil.
steril., 55, 945–951.
hugues, j.n., attalah, m., herve, f. et al. (1992) effects of short-term gnrh
agonist– xxxd2564xxx  stimulation in patients
pre-treated with progestogen. hum. reprod., 7, 1079–1084.
hugues, j.n., bidart, j.m., robert, p. and cédrin-durnerin, i. (1997)
differential pattern of hlh and  xxxg216xxx  secretion during short and
ultra-short administration of gnrh agonist in ivf protocol. 13th
annual meeting of the european society of human reproduction and
embryology. edinburgh. hum. reprod., 12, (abstract bk.1) abstr. 203.
huhtaniemi, i.t., dahl, k.d., rannikko, s. and hsueh, a.j.w. (1988) serum
bioactive and immunoreactive fsh in prostatic cancer patients during
 xxxg930xxx  agonist treatment and after
orchidectomy. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 66, 308–313.
insler, v., lunenfeld, e., potashnik, a. and levy, j. (1988) the effects of
different gnrh analogs on the levels of immunoreactive
gonadotropins. gynecol. endocrinol., 2, 305–312.
jenkins, j.m., davies, d.w., devenport, h. et al. (1991) comparison of
‘poor’ responders with ‘good’ responders using a standard
 xxxd387xxx / xxxd2564xxx  regime for in-vitro
fertilization. hum. reprod., 6, 918–921.
jones, g.s., moraes ruehsen, m., johanson, a.j. et al. (1969) elucidation of
normal ovarian physiology by exogenous gonadotropins stimulation
following steroid pituitary suppression. fertil. steril., 20, 14–21.
karande, v.c., jones, g.s., veeck, l.l. and muasher, s.j. (1990) high-doses
follicle-stimulating hormone stimulation at the onset of the menstrual
cycle does not improve the in vitro fertilization outcome in
low-responder patients. fertil. steril., 53, 486–489.
karande, v., morris, r., rinehart, j. et al. (1997) limited success using the
‘flare’ protocol in poor responders in cycles with low basal
follicle-stimulating hormone levels during in vitro fertilization. fertil.
steril., 67, 900–903.
keenan, d., cohen, j., suzman, m. et al. (1991) stimulation cycles
suppressed with gnrh analog yield accelerated embryos. fertil. steril.,
55, 792–796.
kim, y.k., wasser, s.k., fujimoto, v.y. et al. (1997) utility of follicle
stimulating hormone (fsh), luteinizing hormone (lh),  xxxd2037xxx  and
fsh:lh ratio in predicting reproductive age in normal women. hum.
reprod., 12, 1152–1155.
kingsland, c., tan, s.-l., bickerton, n. et al. (1992) the routine use of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist for all patients undergoing in
vitro fertilization. is there any medical advantage? a prospective
randomized study. fertil. steril., 57, 804–809.
lahlou, n., roger, m., chaussain, j.l. et al. (1987) gonadotropin and
alpha-subunit secretion during long term pituitary suppression by
d-trp6- xxxd2226xxx  microcapsules as
treatment of precocious puberty. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 65,
946–953.
land, j.a., yarmolinskaya, j.c.m. and evers, j.l.h. (1996) high-dose
human menopausal gonadotropin stimulation in poor responders does
not improve in vitro fertilization outcome. fertil. steril., 65, 961–965.
lass, a., skull, j., macveigh, e. et al. (1997) measurement of ovarian
volume by transvaginal sonography before ovulation induction with
 xxxd2564xxx  for in-vitro fertilization can predict
poor response. hum. reprod., 12, 294–297.
latouche, j., coumeyrolle-arias, m., jordan, d. et al. (1989) gnrh
receptors in human granulosa cells: anatomical localization and

characterization by autoradiographic study. endocrinology, 125,
1739–1741.
lefevre, b., gougeon, a., peronny, h. and testart, j. (1988) a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist and an activator of protein
kinase c improve in vitro oocyte maturation in macaca fascicularis.
gamete res., 21, 193–198.
lefevre, b., gougeon, a., nome, f. and testart, j. (1991) effect of a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist and gonadotropins on ovarian
follicles in cynomolgus monkey: a model for human ovarian
hyperstimulation. fertil. steril., 56, 119–125.
legro, r.s., ary, b.a., paulson, r.j. et al. (1993) premature luteinization as
detected by elevated serum progesterone is associated with a higher
pregnancy rate in donor oocyte in vitro fertilization. hum. reprod., 8,
1506–1511.
lemay, a., metha, a.e., tolis, g. et al. (1983) gonadotropins and  xxxd2037xxx 
response to single intranasal or subcutaneous administration of a
 xxxd2226xxx  agonist in the early follicular
phase. fertil. steril., 39, 668–673.
lewinthal, d., taylor, p.j., pattinson, h.a. and corenblum, b. (1988)
induction of ovulation with  xxxd2463xxx  and human menopausal
gonadotropin. fertil. steril., 49, 585–588.
licciardi, f.l., liu, h.c. and rosenwaks, z. (1995) day 3 estradiol serum
concentration as prognosticators of ovarian stimulation response and
pregnancy outcome in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization. fertil.
steril., 64, 991–994.
lincoln, s.r., long, c.a., whitworth, n.s. et al. (1995) elevated luteinizing
hormone on the day of  xxxd2228xxx  administration
does not reduce cycle fecundity in a low-dose flare-up in vitro
fertilization protocol. fertil. steril., 63, 563–565.
liu, h.c., lai, y.m., davis, o. et al. (1992) improved pregnancy outcome
with gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist (gnrh-a) stimulation is
due to improvement in oocyte quantity rather than quality. j. assist.
reprod. genet., 9, 338–344.
loumaye, e., vankrieken, l., depreester, s. et al. (1989a) hormonal
changes
induced
by
short-term
administration
of
a
gonadotropin-releasing
hormone
agonist
during
ovarian
hyperstimulation for in vitro fertilization and their consequences for
embryo development. fertil. steril., 51, 105–111.
loumaye, e., coen, g., pampfer, s. et al. (1989b) use of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist during ovarian stimulation
leads to significant concentrations of peptide in follicular fluids. fertil.
steril., 52, 256–263.
luxman, d., cohen, j.r., lessing, j.b. et al. (1995) in vitro fertilization for
women with pure tubal occlusion: the impact of short
 xxxg930xxx  agonist treatment. fertil. steril., 63,
357–360.
maclachan, v., besanko, m., o’shea, f. et al. (1989) a controlled study of
 xxxd2226xxx  agonist ( xxxd387xxx ) for the
induction of folliculogenesis before in vitro fertilization. n. engl. j.
med., 320, 1233–1237.
macnamee, m.c., howles, c.m., edwards, r.g. et al. (1989) short-term
 xxxd2226xxx  agonist treatment: prospective
trial of a novel ovarian stimulation regimen for in vitro fertilization.
fertil. steril., 52, 264–269.
magarelli, p.c., pearlstone, a.c. and buyalos, r.p. (1996) discrimination
between chronological and ovarian age in infertile women aged 35 years
and older: predicting pregnancy using basal follicle stimulating
hormone, age and number of ovulation induction/intra-uterine
insemination cycles. hum. reprod., 11, 1214–1219.
manzi, d.l., thornton, k.l., scottl, b. and nulsen, j.c. (1994) the value of
increasing the dose of human menopausal gonadotropins in women who
initially demonstrate a poor response. fertil. steril., 62, 251–256.
maroulis, g.b., emery, m., verkauf, b.s. et al. (1991) prospective
randomized study of human menotropins versus a follicular and a luteal
phase  xxxg930xxx  analog–human menotropin
stimulation protocol for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 55,
1157–1164.
maruo, t., otani, t. and mochizuki, m. (1985) antigonadotropic actions of
gnrh agonist on ovarian cells in vivo and in vitro. j. steroid biochem.,
23, 765–770.

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation
matikainen, t., ding, y.q., vergara, m. et al. (1992) differing responses of
plasma bioactive and immunoreactive fsh and lh to
 xxxg930xxx  antagonist and agonist treatments in
postmenopausal women. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 75, 820–825.
meldrum, d.r., tsao, z., monroe, s.e. et al. (1984) stimulation of lh
fragments with reduced bioactivity following gnrh agonist
administration in women. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 58, 755–757.
meldrum, d.r., wisot, a., hamilton, f. et al. (1989) routine pituitary
suppression with leuprolide before ovarian stimulation for oocyte
retrieval. fertil. steril., 51, 455–459.
moffitt, d.v., queenanj, y., shaw, r. and muasher, s.j. (1997) progesterone
levels on the day of  xxxd2228xxx  do not predict
pregnancy outcome for transfer of fresh or cryopreserved embryos from
the same cohort. fertil. steril., 67, 296–301
monroe, s.c., blumenfeld, z., andreyko, j.l. et al. (1986) dose-dependent
inhibition of pituitary–ovarian function during administration of a
 xxxg930xxx  agonist analog ( xxxd2691xxx ). j. clin.
endocrinol. metab., 63, 1334–1341.
muasher, s.j., oehninger, s., simonetti, s. et al. (1988) the value of basal
and/or stimulated serum gonadotropin levels in prediction of stimulation
response and in vitro fertilization outcome. fertil. steril., 50, 298–307.
muasher, s.j., mohti, d., mayer, j. et al. (1996) cessation of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist (gnrh-a) down regulation
combined with high dosage gonadotropin stimulation yield favorable
pregnancy results in low responder patients. 52nd meeting of the
american society for reproductive medicine. abstr. s38.
navot, d., rosenwaks, z., anderson, f. and hodgen, g.d. (1991)
gonadotropin-releasing
hormone
agonist-induced
ovarian
hyperstimulation: low-dose side effects in women and monkeys. fertil.
steril., 55, 1069–1075.
neveu, s., hedon, b., bringer, j. et al. (1987) ovarian stimulation by a
combination of a  xxxg930xxx  agonist and
gonadotropin for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 47, 639–643.
oehninger, s., toner, j.p., veeck, l.l. et al. (1992) performance of
cryopreserved pre-embryos obtained in in vitro fertilization cycles with or
without a  xxxg930xxx  agonist. fertil. steril., 57,
620–625.
olivennes, f., righini, c., fanchin, r. et al. (1996) a protocol using a low
dose of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist might be the best
protocol for patients with high follicle stimulating hormone
concentrations on day 3. hum. reprod., 11, 1169–1172.
oppenheimer, d.s., bikkai, h., crowley, w.f. and kilbanski, a. (1992)
effects of chronic gnrh analogue administration on gonadotrophin and
alpha-subunit secretion in post-menopausal women. clin. endocrinol.,
36, 559–564.
padilla, s.l., bayati, j. and garcia, j.e. (1990) prognostic value of the early
serum estradiol response to  xxxd2463xxx  in in vitro fertilization.
fertil. steril., 53, 288–294.
padilla, s.l., smith, r.d. and garcia, j.e. (1991) the lupron screening test:
tailoring the use of  xxxd2463xxx  in ovarian stimulation for in vitro
fertilization. fertil. steril., 56, 79–83.
padilla, s.l., dugan, k., maruschak, v. et al. (1996) use of the flare-up
protocol with high dose  xxxd2564xxx  and human
gonadotropins for in vitro fertilization in poor responders. fertil. steril.,
65, 796–799.
palermo, r., amodeo, g., navot, d. et al. (1988) concomitant
 xxxg930xxx  agonist and menotropin treatment for
the synchronized induction of multiple follicles. fertil. steril., 49,
290–295.
pantos, k., meimeth-damianaki, t., vaxevanoglou, t. and kapetanakis, e.
(1994) prospective study of a modified  xxxg930xxx 
agonist long protocol in an in vitro fertilizing program. fertil steril., 61,
709–713.
parinaud, j., beaur, a., bourreau, e. et al. (1988) effect of a  xxxg930xxx  agonist
( xxxd387xxx ) on steroidogenesis of cultured human preovulatory granulosa
cells. fertil. steril., 50, 597–602.
parinaud, j., oustry, p., perineau, m. et al. (1992) randomized trial of three
 xxxd2226xxx  analogues used for ovarian
stimulation in an in vitro fertilization program. fertil. steril., 57,
1265–1268.

99

pellicer, a. and miro, f. (1990) steroidogenesis in vitro of human
granulosa–luteal cells pretreated in vivo with gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogs. fertil. steril., 54, 590–596.
pellicer, a., simon, c., miro, f. et al. (1989a) ovarian response and outcome
of in-vitro fertilization in patients treated with gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogues in different phases of the menstrual cycle. hum.
reprod., 4, 285–289.
pellicer, a., ruiz, a., castellvi, r.m. et al. (1989b) is the retrieval of high
numbers of oocytes desirable in patients treated with
gonadotropin-releasing
hormone
analogues
(gnrha)
and
gonadotrophins? hum. reprod., 4, 536–540.
pellicer, a., valbuena, d., cano, f. et al. (1996) lower implantation rates in
high responders: evidence for an altered endocrine milieu during the
preimplantation period. fertil. steril., 65, 1190–1195.
penzias, a.s., shamma, f.n., gutmann, j.n. et al. (1992)  xxxd2691xxx  versus
leuprolide in ovulation induction for in vitro fertilization: a randomized
clinical trial. obstet. gynecol., 79, 739–742.
penzias, a.s., lee, g., seifer, d.b. et al. (1994) aberrant estradiol flare despite
 xxxg930xxx -agonist-induced suppression is
associated with impaired implantation. fertil. steril., 61, 558–560.
plachot, m., veiga, a., montagut, j. et al. (1988) are clinical and biological
ivf parameters correlated with chromosomal disorders in early life?: a
multicentric study. hum. reprod., 3, 627–635.
polson, d.w., maclachlan, v., krapez, j.a. et al. (1991) a controlled study of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist ( xxxd387xxx  acetate) for
folliculogenesis in routine in vitro fertilization patients. fertil. steril., 56,
509–514.
porcu, e., prato, l.d., serachioli, r. et al. (1994) comparison between depot
and standard release  xxxd3445xxx  in in vitro fertilization: pituitary
sensitivity, luteal function, pregnancy outcome, and perinatal results.
fertil. steril., 62, 126–132.
racowsky, c., prather, a.l., johnson, m.k. et al. (1997) prematurely
condensed chromosomes and meiotic abnormalities in unfertilized human
oocytes
after
ovarian
stimulation
with
and
without
 xxxg930xxx  agonist. fertil. steril., 67, 923–928.
reddy, p., azhar, r. and menon, k. (1980) multiple inhibitory actions of
 xxxg930xxx  agonist on lh/hcg receptor-mediated ovarian responses.
endocrinology, 107, 930–936.
remohi, j., gutierrez, a., vidal, a. et al. (1994) the use of
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues in women receiving oocyte
donation does not affect implantation rates. hum. reprod., 9, 1761–1764.
reshef, e., lei, z.m., rao, c.v. et al. (1990) the presence of gonadotropin
receptors in nonpregnant human uterus, human placenta, fetal
membranes, and decidua. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 70, 421–430.
ron-el, r., herman, a., golan, a. et al. (1990) the comparison of early
follicular
and
midluteal
administration
of
long-acting
 xxxg930xxx  agonist. fertil. steril., 54, 233–237.
ron-el, r., herman, a., golan, a. et al. (1991) gonadotropins and combined
gnrh-a-gonadotropins protocols in a randomized prospective study.
fertil. steril., 55, 574–578.
ron-el, r., herman, a., golan, a. et al. (1992) ultrashort
 xxxg930xxx  agonist (gnrh-a) protocol in
comparison with the long-acting gnrh-a protocol and menotropin alone.
fertil. steril., 58, 1164–1168.
rutherford, a.j., subak-sharpe, r.j., dawson, k.j. et al. (1988) improvement
of in vitro fertilization after treatment with  xxxd387xxx , an agonist of
luteinising releasing hormone. br. med. j., 296, 1765–1768.
salat-baroux, j., alvarez, s., cornet, d. et al. (1988) programmed ovulation
induction and oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization. j. in vitro fertil.
embryo transfer, 5, 153–157.
salat-baroux, j., rotten, d., alvarez, s. and antoine, j.m. (1993) comparison
of growth hormone responses to  xxxg891xxx  and
clonidine in women with normal or poor response to gonadotropin
stimulation. fertil. steril., 60, 791–799.
salobir, b., prezelj, j., meden-vrtovec, h. et al. (1996) insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-3 (igfbp-3) serum concentrations and ovarian
responsiveness in in-vitro fertilization. hum. reprod., 11, 2208–2210.
sandow, j., von rechenberg, w., jerzaberg, g. and stoll, w. (1978) pituitary
gonadotropin inhibition by highly active analog of luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone. fertil. steril., 30, 205–209.

100

j.-n.hugues and i.cedrin durnerin

sandow, j. and donnez, j. (1990) clinical pharmacokinetics of  xxxg930xxx 
analogues. in brosens, i., jacobs, h.s. and runnebaum, b. (eds),  xxxg930xxx 
analogues in gynecology. parthenon publishing, carnforth,
lancashire, uk, pp. 17–31.
sathanandan, m., warnes, g.m., kirby, c.a. et al. (1989) adjuvant
leuprolide in normal, abnormal, and poor responders to controlled
ovarian hyperstimulation for in vitro fertilization/gamete intrafallopian
transfer. fertil. steril., 51, 998–1006.
scheele, f., hompes, p.g.a., van der meer, m. et al. (1993) the relationship
between follicle-stimulating hormone dose and level and its relevance
for ovulation induction with adjuvant gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-agonist treatment. fertil. steril., 60, 620–625.
schoolcraft, w., sinton, e., schlenker, t. et al. (1991) lower pregnancy rate
with premature luteinization during pituitary suppression with
 xxxd2463xxx . fertil. steril., 55, 563–566.
schoolcraft, w., schlenker, t., gee, m. et al. (1997) improved controlled
ovarian hyperstimulation in poor responder in vitro fertilization patients
with a microdose follicle-stimulating hormone flare, growth hormone
protocol. fertil. steril., 67, 93–97.
schwartz, m., jewelewicz, r. and dyrenfurth, i. (1980) the use of human
menopausal and  xxxd2228xxx  for induction of ovulation.
sixteen years’ experience at the sloane hospital for women. am. j.
obstet. gynecol., 138, 801–807.
scott, r.t. and navot, d. (1994) enhancement of ovarian responsiveness
with microdoses of  xxxg930xxx  agonist during
ovulation induction for in vitro fertilization. fertil. steril., 61, 880–885.
scott, r.t. and hofmann, g.e. (1995) prognostic assessment of ovarian
reserve. fertil. steril., 63, 1–11.
scott, r.t., toner, j.p., muasher, s.j. et al. (1989) follicle simulating
hormone levels on day 3 are predictive of in vitro fertilization outcome.
fertil. steril., 51, 651–654.
scott, r.t., hofmann, g.e., oehninger, s. and muashers, j. (1990)
intercycle variability of day 3 follicle-stimulating hormone levels and
its effect on stimulation quality in in vitro fertilization. fertil steril., 54,
297–302.
scott, r.t., dee carey, k., leland, m. and navot, d. (1993a) gonadotropin
responsiveness to ultralow-dose  xxxd2463xxx  administration in
baboons. fertil. steril., 59, 1124–1128.
scott, r.t., neal, g.s., illions, e.h. et al. (1993b) the duration of leuprolide
acetate administration prior to ovulation induction does not impact
ovarian responsiveness to exogenous gonadotropins. fertil. steril., 60,
247–253.
scott, r.t., opsahl, m.s., leonardi, m.r. et al. (1995) life table analysis of
pregnancy rates in a general infertility population relative to ovarian
reserve and patient age. hum. reprod., 10, 1706–1710.
seifer, d.b., thornton, k.l., decherney, a.h. and lavy, g. (1991) early
pituitary desensitization and ovarian suppression with  xxxd2463xxx 
is associated with in vitro fertilization–embryo transfer success. fertil.
steril., 56, 500–504.
selva, j., martin-pont, b., hugues, j.n. et al. (1991) cytogenetic study of
human oocytes uncleaved after in-vitro fertilization. hum. reprod., 6,
709–713.
serafini, p., stone, b., kerin, j. et al. (1988) an alternate approach to
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation in “poor responders”: pretreatment
with a  xxxg930xxx  analog. fertil. steril., 49,
90–95.
shriock, e.d., monroe, s.e., martin, m.c. et al. (1985) effect on corpus
luteum function of luteal phase administration of a potent
 xxxg930xxx  analog ( xxxd2691xxx ). fertil. steril., 43,
844–850.
shulman, a., ghetler, y., beyth, y. and ben-num, i. (1996) the significance
of an early (premature) rise of plasma progesterone in in vitro
fertilization cycles induced by a “long protocol” of gonadotropin
releasing hormone analogue and human menopausal gonadotropins. j.
assist. reprod. genet., 13, 207–211.
silverberg, k.m., burns, w.n., olive, d.l. et al. (1991) serum progesterone
levels predict success of in vitro fertilization/embryo transfer in patients
stimulated with  xxxd2463xxx  and human menopausal
gonadotropins. j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 73, 797–803.
silverberg, k.m., martin, m., olive, d.l. et al. (1994) elevated serum
progesterone levels on the day of  xxxd2228xxx 

administration in in vitro fertilization cycles do not adversely affect
embryo quality. fertil. steril., 61, 508–513.
simon, a., benshushan, a., shushan, a. et al. (1994) a comparison between
a standard and reduced dose of  xxxd1794xxx -6-luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone administered after pituitary suppression for in-vitro
fertilization. hum. reprod., 9, 1813–1817.
simon, c., cano, f., valbuena, d. et al. (1995a) clinical evidence for a
detrimental effect on uterine receptivity of high serum  xxxd2037xxx 
concentrations in high and normal responder patients. hum. reprod.,
10, 2432–2437.
simon, t., oehninger, s., toner, j. et al. (1995b) high doses of
gonadotropins have no detrimental effect on in vitro fertilization
outcome in normal responders. fertil. steril., 63, 1333–1336.
sims, j.a., seltman, h.j. and muasher, s.j. (1994) early rise of serum
progesterone concentration in response to a flare-up effect of
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist impairs follicular
recruitment for in-vitro fertilization. hum. reprod., 9, 235–240.
smitz, j., bollen, n., camus, m. et al. (1990) short-term use of  xxxd387xxx  in
combination with human menopausal gonadotrophins for ovarian
stimulation for in-vitro fertilization in endocrinologically normal
women. hum. reprod., 5, 157–162.
smitz, j., van den abbeel, e., bollen, n. et al. (1992a) the effect of
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (gnrh) agonist in the follicular
phase on in-vitro fertilization outcome in normo-ovulatory women.
hum. reprod., 7, 1098–1102.
smitz, j., erard, p., camus, m. et al. (1992b) pituitary gonadotrophin
secretory capacity during the luteal phase in superovulation using
gnrh-agonists and hmg in a desensitization or flare-up protocol.
hum. reprod., 7, 1225–1229.
smotrich, d.b., widra, e.a., gindoff, p.r. et al. (1995) prognostic value of
day 3 estradiol on in vitro fertilization outcome. fertil. steril., 64,
1136–1140.
stadtmauer, l., ditkoff, e.c., session, d. and kelly, a. (1994) high dosages
of gonadotropins are associated with poor pregnancy outcomes after in
vitro fertilization–embryo transfer. fertil. steril., 61, 1058–1064.
stone, b., vargyars, j., marrs, r. et al. (1988) levels of steroid and protein
hormones in antral fluids of women treated with different combination
of gonadotropins,  xxxd1726xxx  and a gnrh analog. fertil. steril.,
49, 249–257.
sungurtekin, u. and jansen, r.p.s. (1995) profound luteinizing hormone
suppression after stopping the  xxxg930xxx -agonist
 xxxd2463xxx . fertil. steril., 63, 663–665.
syrop, c.h., willhoite, a. and van voorhis, b.j. (1995) ovarian volume: a
novel outcome predictor for assisted reproduction. fertil steril., 64,
1167–1171.
tanos, v., friedler, s., shushan, a. et al. (1995) comparison between
 xxxd2691xxx  acetate and d-trp6- xxxg930xxx  for pituitary suppression in in vitro
fertilization (ivf) patients: a prospective crossover study. j. assist.
reprod. genet., 12, 715–719.
tarlatzis, b.c., grimbizis, g., pournaropoulos, f. et al. (1994) evaluation of
two  xxxg930xxx  (gnrh) analogues (leuprolide
and  xxxd387xxx ) in short and long protocols for assisted reproduction
techniques. j. assist. reprod. genet., 11, 85–91.
testart, j. (1990) qualité des ovocytes et stimulation ovarienne. contracept.
fertil. sex., 18, 639–643.
testart, j., belaisch-allart, j., forman, r. et al. (1989a) influence of different
stimulation treatments on oocyte characteristics and in-vitro fertilizing
ability. hum. reprod., 4, 192–197.
testart, j., forman, r., belaisch-allart, j. et al. (1989b) embryo quality and
uterine receptivity in in-vitro fertilization cycles with or without
agonists of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone. hum. reprod., 4,
198–201.
testart, j., lefevre, b. and gougeon, a. (1993) effects of gonadotrophinreleasing hormone agonists (gnrha) on follicle and oocyte quality.
hum. reprod., 8, 511–518.
tomas, c., nuojua-huttunen, s. and martikainen, h. (1997) pretreatment
transvaginal ultrasound examination predicts ovarian responsiveness to
gonadotrophins in in-vitro fertilization. hum. reprod., 12, 220–223.
toner, j., brzyski, r., oehninger, s. et al. (1991) combined impact of the
number of preovulatory oocytes and cryopreservation on ivf outcome.
hum. reprod., 6, 284–289.

gnrh agonist protocals for ovarian stimulation
toth, p., li, x. and rao, ch.v. (1996) expression of human chorionic
gonadotropin (hcg)/luteinizing hormone receptors and regulation of
 xxxg1883xxx  gene by exogenous hcg in human fetal membranes.
j. clin. endocrinol. metab., 81, 1283–1288.
tsai, h.d., chen, c.m., lo, h.y. and chang, c.c. (1995) subcutaneous low
dose  xxxd2463xxx  depot versus  xxxd2463xxx  for women
undergoing ovarian stimulation for in-vitro fertilization. hum. reprod.,
10, 2909–2915.
tureck, r., mastroianni, l., blasco, l. and strauss, j. (1982) inhibition of
human granulosa cell progesterone secretion by a gnrh agonist. j.
clin. endocrinol. metab., 54, 1078–1080.
ubaldi, f., camus, m., smitz, j. et al. (1996) premature luteinization in in
vitro fertilization cycles using  xxxg930xxx  agonist
(gnrh-a) and recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (fsh) and
gnrh-a and urinary fsh. fertil. steril., 66, 275–280.
urbancsek, j. and witthaus, e. (1996) midluteal  xxxd387xxx  is superior to early
follicular phase  xxxd387xxx  in combined  xxxg930xxx 
analog and gonadotropin stimulation in in vitro fertilization. fertil.
steril., 65, 966–971.
van hoof, m.h.a., alberda, a.t., huisman, g.j. et al. (1993) doubling the
 xxxd2564xxx  dose in the course of an in-vitro
fertilization treatment cycle in low responders: a randomized study.
hum. reprod., 8, 369–373.
van kasteren, y.m., hoek, a. and schoemaker, j. (1995) ovulation
induction in premature ovarian failure: a placebo-controlled
randomized trial combining pituitary suppression with gonadotropin
stimulation. fertil. steril., 64, 273–278.
vauthier, d. and lefebvre, g. (1989) the use of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogs for in vitro fertilization: comparison between the
standard form and long-acting formulation of  xxxd1794xxx -6-luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone. fertil. steril., 51, 100–104.
whitelaw, p.f., eidne, k.a., sellar, r. et al. (1995) gonadotropin-releasing
 xxxg1603xxx  messenger ribonucleic acid expression in rat ovary.
endocrinology, 136, 172–179.

101

wildt, l., diedrich, k., van der ven, h. et al. (1986) ovarian
hyperstimulation for in-vitro fertilization controlled by gnrh agonist
administered in combination with human menopausal gonadotrophins.
hum. reprod., 1, 15–19.
winslow, k.l., toner, j.p., brzyski, r.g. et al. (1991) the
 xxxg930xxx  agonist stimulation test: a sensitive
predictor of performance in the flare-up in vitro fertilization cycle.
fertil. steril., 56, 711–717.
winslow, k.l., gordon, k., williams, r.f. and hodgen, g.d. (1992)
interval required for  xxxg930xxx  agonist-induced
down regulation of the pituitary in cynomolgus monkeys and duration
of the refractory state. fertil. steril., 58, 1209–1214.
wojcik, c., guerin, j.f., pinatel, m.c. et al. (1995) morphological and
cytogenetic observations of unfertilized human oocytes and abnormal
embryos obtained after ovarian stimulation with pure follicle
stimulating hormone following pituitary desensitization. hum. reprod.,
10, 2617–2622.
yamashita, t., ishimaru, t., fujishita, a. et al. (1996) influence of serum
follicle stimulating hormone to luteinizing hormone ratio during
 xxxd388xxx -induced pituitary desensitization on ovarian response
to exogenous gonadotrophins in an in-vitro fertilization and embryo
transfer programme. hum. reprod., 11, 1615–1619.
yoshimura, y., nakamura, y., yamada, h. et al. (1991)
 xxxg930xxx  agonists induce meiotic maturation
and degeneration of oocytes in the in vitro perfused rabbit ovary. fertil.
steril., 55, 177–183.
yoshimura, y., nakamura, y., ando, m. et al. (1992) direct effect of
 xxxg930xxx  agonists on the rabbit ovarian follicle.
fertil. steril., 57, 1091–1097.
younis, j.s., ezra, y., sherman, y. et al. (1994) the effect of estradiol
depletion during the luteal phase on endometrial development. fertil.
steril., 62, 103–107.

received on july 22, 1997; accepted on december 17, 1997

