1167

st segment elevation induced by class ic
antiarrhythmic agents: underlying electrophysiologic
mechanisms and insights into drug-induced proarrhythmia
subramaniam c. krishnan, m.d., and mark e. josephson, m.d.
from the h;u-vard-thomdike electrophysiology institute, beth israel deaconess hospital. boston. massachusetts

sodium block-induced st segment elevation. three patients in whom class ic
sodium channel blockers induced st segment elevation in leads v, through v, are described.
the underlying electrophysiologic mechanism, implications for drug-induced proarrhythmia,
and the relationship of the finding to the brugada syndrome type of idiopathic ventricular fibrillation are discussed. (j cardiovasc electrophysiol, vol. 9. pp. 1167-1172, november 199s)

 xxxd1991xxx ,  xxxd2113xxx , st segment elevation, proarrhythmia

introduction
recent studies have revealed that class ta
sodium channel blockers. specifically procainamide and  xxxd96xxx , can induce an elevation
of the st segment in the early precordial leads
of the ecg, or can increase preexisting st segment elevations in palients with the brugada syndrome.'- we present three cases where st segment elevations were induced by class ic sodium
channel blockers. a discussion of the pathophysiology of the unusual observations seen also
is provided.
methods and results
patient number 1
a 46-year-old male with a structurally nonnal
heart and a 15-year history of palpitations presented in 1997 for further work-up and management. his baseline ecg (fig. ia)is significant
for an incomplete right bundle branch block
(rbbb) pattern and minimal st segment elevation in leads i and v-,. an electrophysiology study

address for correspondence: mark e. josephson, m,d.. harvardthorntlike elecin)physi()l()gy insulutc, beth israel deuconess
hospital. 330 brookline avenue. boston, ma 02215. fax: 617f.67-8769.
manuscripi received 6 march 1998; accepted for publication 7
augusl 1998.

revealed the presence of a concealed right anterior bypass tract and inducibie orthodromic
supraventricular tachycardia (fig. ib). the ecg
during the tachyarrhythmia is significant for the
absence of any signitlcant st segment changes.
catheter ablation of tbe bypass tract was unsuccessful, and a decision was made to proceed with
medical therapy.  xxxd2113xxx  (100 mg b.i.d.) and
atenolol (50 mg qd) were commenced. a stress
test on these medications was pertbrmed as per
routine assessment of the use-dependent effects
of  xxxd2113xxx .
on the day of the stress test, performed 1
week after initiation of antiarrhythmic thetapy, a resting ecg revealed an accentuation of
the rbbb pattern as well as st segment elevation in leads v, through v, (fig. ic). with
exercise (duration of 12 mins, reaching a peak
heart rate of 120 beats/min). a marked increase
in the magnitude of st segment elevation was
noted (fig. id). as seen in figure ie, the st
changes were noted to persist well into recovery. due to the abnonnalities noted on the ecg,
the dose of antiarrhythmics was reduced, and a
follow-up ecg (fig. if) revealed the resolution of rbbb pattern as well as tbe st segment elevation.
patient number 2
a 55-year-old man with an idiopathic cardiomyopathy and left ventricular systolic dys-

168

journal of cardiovascular electrophysiology

vol. 9, no. j i, november 1998

ib

figure i- serial 12-lead ecgs of patient no. i. (a) baseline resting !2-lead ecg. (b) ecg recorded during supraventricular
tachycardia. (c) one week following initiation of  xxxd2113xxx  (100 mg b.i.d.) and atenoloi therapy: ecg recorded prior to
commencement of stress rest. (d) ecg recorded at peak exercise. (e) ecg recorded 7 minutes into recovery. (e) re.sting 12lead ecg recorded il days following reduction of  xxxd2113xxx  dose (50 mg b.i.d.).

function (ejection fraction 30%) presented for
management of .symptomatic nonsustained ventricular tachycardia in 1985. a baseline ecg
showed left ventricular hypertrophy and nonspecific t wave abnormalities.  xxxd1991xxx  therapy (25 mg po l.i.d.) was commenced for the
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. an exercise stress test was planned, and. similar to the
first patient, the pretreadmill ecg revealed a new
rbbb pattern along with st .segment elevation
and t wave inversions in leads v, and v2.
with exercise, a wide sine wave tachycardia was
induced with hemodynatnic collapse, from which
he was shocked successfully to sinus rhythm.
the  xxxd1991xxx  was discontinued, with a followup tracing revealing resolution of the bundle

blanch block pattern as well as the st segment
elevation. amiodarone therapy was commenced at that time.
patient number 3

a 53-year-old man presented with a structurally normal heart and a 7-year history of
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. initially, quinidine
had been used, but due to abnotmal qt prolongation, this had to be stopped. beta blockers or sotalol were not used due to the presence of reactive airways disease. a baseline 12lead ecg is shown in figure 2a. a combination
of verapamil (120 mg q.d. of sustained release
preparation) and tlecainide (200 mg b.i.d.) ap-

krishnan and josephson

sodium blw.'k-induced st segment eilevation

w—-'jl-'"—^^j -....y~-—',.

—^y—ujl^-

n>-

1169

u

d
4

j.-

-a-'~—'•'

figure 2. patient no. 2 's l2-iead ecgs. (a) resting 12-tead ecg before commencement offlecainide and verapamil therapy.
(8) twelve-lead ecg after  xxxd2113xxx  (200 mg b.i.d.) and verapamil (120 mg q.d.). <c) ecg after inadvertent september 8.
1998,  xxxd2113xxx  overdose (400 mg). (d) ecg recorded 24 hours later .showing resolution ofst segment elevation.

peared to work best in suppressing atrial fibrillation, and the patient remained symptom free
on this regimen. a 12-lead ecg obtained on
this regimen (fig. 2b) is significant for an incomplete rbbb pattem. on the day of admission, the patient twice took his  xxxd2113xxx  dose
(i.e., 400 mg) by mistake. upon presenting to
the emergency department, he was noted to have
stable vital signs. an ecg (fig. 2c) revealed
rbbb pattem as well as st segment elevation
and t wave inversions in the right precordial
leads (leads v, and v^). the qt interval was
noted to be prolonged, and bifid t waves were
seen as well. he was then observed taking no
 xxxd2113xxx  for 24 hours, and an ecg (fig. 2d)
revealed a resolution ofthe bundle branch morphology as well as the st segment elevation.
 xxxd2113xxx  and verapamil therapy was continued, and the patient has done well.
discussion
the induction of new st segment elevation
by antiarrhythmic agents is unusual, but not unheard of. one entity where it has been noted is

the brugada syndrome, which is a clinical and
electrocardiographic syndrome characterized by
an rbbb pattern, persistent st segment elevation in the early precordial leads, i.e., v, through
v,, a nonnal qt interval, nonnal ventiiculai" function, and sudden cardiac death (scd)." a gene
defect in the cardiac sodium channel gene
 xxxg2028xxx , located on chromosome 3, has been
found in some patients with the brugada syndrome/
in an attempt to gain insight into the mechanisms of st segment elevation in this condition,
miyazaki et al.' examined the effects of phannacologic interventions on the st segment of patients
with the brugada syndrome. they showed tbat in
these patients the magnitude of st segment elevation was increased by class ia sodium cbannel blockers and by stimulation ofthe muscarinic
and alpha-adrenergic receptors. beta-adrenergic
stimulation or muscarinic receptor blockade was
noted to normalize the st segment or minimize
the degree of elevation.
although no syncope, family history of scd,
or aborted scd was seen in our patients (except
for ventricular tachycardia in patient no. 2), the

1170

journal of cardiovascular electrophysiology

vol. 9, no. i i. november 1998

ecg changes with sodium channel blockade were
markedly similar to those seen in the bmgada syndrome. recent experimental data help explain why
sodium channel blockers induce st segment elevation and why this may represent a risk for proar-

proposed electrophysiologic mechanism

unlike cells from the endocardium, action potentials recorded from the ventricular subepicardium have a prominent spike and dome morphology. the presence of a transient outward current in ihe epicardial tissues has been shown to
be responsible for this difference.^ in the
subepicardial tissues, the transient outward current gives rise to a prominent phase 1, and delays the calcium inward current that is responsible for the dome. due to these differences, various interventions, including sodium current
inhibition (i.e..  xxxd2113xxx ), elicit a differential
electrophysiologic response from tbe two tissues.*'*'
sodium channel blockers decrease the amplitude
of phase 0 of the action potential. in the subepicardium, when the amplitude of phase 0 decreases,
phase i now ends at a more negative potential,
sometimes bringing the membrane potential to a
voltage below that required for the activation of
tbe calcium current. tbe resulting action potential that is devoid of a dome is greatly abbreviated, and is termed an "all or none repolarization
response." because of the early repolarization occurring in the subepicardium, a transmural gradient of repolarization from endocardium to epicardium occurs, wbich potentially could give rise
to st segment elevation in the ecg. the appearance of tbe st segment elevation only in tbe
right precordial leads in our patients is consistent
with the observation that the transient outward
current is greater in the right ventricular epicardium."'' and therefore loss of the action potential dome would preferentially occur in the
right ventricular cpicardium.
in patients with the brugada syndrome, in the
daig-lree situation, catecholamines or exercise may
increase the calcium inllux and thus may restore
the action potential plateau in the subepicardium.
the resulting abolition of the repolarization gradient may thus serve to normalize the st segment.
however, with  xxxd2113xxx , the exercise-induced usedependent effects of the drug on the sodium channel may counterbalance the effects of exercise on
the st segment. when the use-dependent effects

on sodium current inhibition predominate with exercise,  xxxd2113xxx . by shortening the subepicardial
action potentials even further, would be expected
to increase the magnitude of st elevation.
under experimentiil conditions, hecainide-induced loss of the epicardial action potential dome
often occurs in a heterogeneous manner. under
these conditions, propagation of the action potential done via electrotonic flow of current from sites
at which it is maintained to sites at which it is abolished can cause reexcitation. this novel mechanism of reentry, termed by krishnan and
antzeievitch as phase 2 reentry,^'' can prtxluce isolated extrasystoles or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation.
the finding of a mutation in tbe sodium channel gene in patients with the brugada syndrome
supports the hypothesis tbat tbe ecg abnormalities and anhythmias in these patients may represent a differentia! response of the tissues across
the ventricular wall to sodium current inhibition.-" studying the effect of sodium channel blockers on tissues across the ventricular wall may help
create an experimental model of the brugada syndrome.
we do not have a good explanation for tbe bifid nature of tbe t wave as well as the prolongation of the qt interval seen in patient no. 3. hi
this individual, quinidine therapy had been attempted in the pa.st but had to be discontinued due
to abnonnal qt prolongation. could this represent
a "form fruste" version of the congenital long
qt syndrome ? although verapamil tberapy could
be playing a role, we think that  xxxd2113xxx  therapy may be playing a greater role.  xxxd2113xxx  has
been shown to block the delayed rectifier potassium cunent (1^) in cat ventricuhir myik-ytes'" and
produce a dose-dependent or rate-dependent prolongation of apd,),, in mammalian atrial and ventricular tissues.''"
concept of pseudo-rbbb

in typical rbbb, tbe right ventricle is activated via the spread of impulses from the left
ventricle. the qrs prolongation is therefore accompanied by a delayed intrinsicoid deflection
(r') in lead v,. and abnormal rightward forces
during the terminal portion of the qrs complex
giving rise to wide s waves in leads i and v^.'^
in addition, in typical rbbb, the right precordial
leads do not demonstrate any elevation of the st
segment. patients with the brugada syndrome
might well have some conduction disease, as ev-

krishnan and josephson

idenced by tbe fact that 4 of the original 8 patients described by biugada and bmgada in their
original report were noted to have a prolonged
hv interval.'^ nevertheles.s, the possibility exists
that the rbbb seen in these patients represents
a "pseudobundle branch block" (i.e., due to early
repolarization occurring in the right ventricular
epicardium, the r' represents a variant of an osbome wave and does not indicate delayed activation of the right ventricle). the resolution of
the st elevation as well as the rbbb morphology by  xxxd2401xxx , anticholinergics, and rapid
pacing is highly unusual for typical rbbb. the
hypothesis of the rbbb being due to early epicardial repolarization is supported by the observation made by miyazaki et al.,' where they found
that electrograms recorded from the right ventricle in any of their patients with the syndrome
showed normal activation titnes and did not occur with a delay.

sodium block-induced st segment elevation

1171

ing stress tests in patients taking class ic sodium
channel blockers.
no family history of syncope or scd was present in any of tbe three patients described. the
optimal long-term management of patients with no
prior history of syncope or a family history of premature scd is uncleiir. these me patients in whom
concern about whether they had the brugada
syndrome would not have arisen had they not received class ic agents. we feel tbat in patients
with a normal baseline ecg and no hi.stoiy of syncope or family history of sudden dealb, ecg
changes induced by .sodium channel blockers do
not constitute enough evidence to warrant implantation of a defibrillator. at this time, tests are
being conducted to determine if the sodium
channel mutation noted in other patients with the
brugada syndrome^ is present in patients 1 and 3.

references
clinical implications
in addition to sodium channel blockers, myocardial ischemia also has been shown to cause
pha.se 2 reentry.^ the adverse outcome in patients
in  xxxd1991xxx / xxxd2113xxx  limb in tbe cast study
raised the possibility of a proarrhythniic cause.'•*
the possibility of synergism between ischemia
and class ic agents in giving rise to phase 2 reentry and proarrhythmia could well explain the outcome. in addition, our data suggest that class ic
agents by themselves might lead to proarrbythmia based on phase 2 reentry.^''-'-^ this mechanism is separate from the proarrhythmia induced by slowing of conduction. augmentation
of the  xxxd2113xxx -indiiced st segment elevation
witb exercise also provides a possible explanation as to why exercise or pacing predisposes to
the occurrence of ttecainide-induced proarrhythamong sodium channel blockers, the class ic
dmgs bind to activated sodium channels and are
slowest to dissociate.'"' probably due to the fact
that strong sodium current inhibition and therefore
marked dispersion of repolarization can occur at
relatively slow rates, we observed in earlier studies that "all or none repolarization" and phase 2
reentry were much more easily induced in isolated
epiciudium with tlecainide than with other sodium
channel blockers.^'' it is possible, therefore, that
sodium channel blocker-induced st elevation may
occur more often with class ic agents. our case
report also illustrates the impottance of perform-

1. miyazaki t. mltamura h, miyoshi s. et al: autonomic

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

and antiaithytliniic drtig niotliilation of st seginenl elevation in palient.s with brugada syndrome. j am coll
cardioi !996:27:1061-1070.
brtigada j. brugada p. brugada r:  xxxd96xxx  unmasks
righi bundle branch-like and st segment elevation in
v|-v, in patients with idiopathic ventricular fibrillation. (abstract) pace 1996:19:599.
bmgada j. brugada r. brugada p: right bundle branch
hlock and st-seginent elevation in leads v, ihrough
v,. a nnarker for sudden death in patients without
demonstrable struclural heart disease. circulation
1998;97:457-460.
chen q. kirsch g. zhang d. et al: genetic and molecular mechanisms for idiopathic ventricular fibrillatit)n.
nature 1998:392:293-296.
krishnan s, antzelevitch c: sodium channel block
produces opposite electrophysiologic effects across the
ventricular wall. circ res 1991:69:277-291.
krishnan s. antzelevitch c:  xxxd2113xxx -induced arrhythmia in canine ventricular epicardium: phase 2
reentry? circulation 1993;87:562-572.
antzelevitch c. sicouri s. litovsky s. et al: heterogeneity within the ventricular wall: electrophysioiogy
and pharmacology of epicardial. endocardial and m
cells. circ res 1991;69:1427-1449.
didiego jm. sicouri s, litovsky s, et al: two components ofthe transient outward current in canine ventricular epicardium: right versus left. circulation
1991;84:ii-179.
didiego jm, sun z. antzelevitch c: !„, and action potential notch are smaller in left vs right canine ventricular epicardium. am j physiol 1996;271 :h548-h561.
follmer ch. colatsky tj: block of delayed rectifier
current i^ by  xxxd2113xxx  and e-4031 in cat ventricular
myocytes. circulation l990;82:289-293.

172

journal of cardiovascular electrophysiology

vol. 9, no. i i, november 1998

11. wang 2. pelletier lc. talajic m. et al: the effects of
flccainidc and quinidine on human atrial action potentials: role of rate dependence and comparison with
guinea pig. rabbit, and dog tissues. circulation
1990:82:278-283.
12. wagner g: mcnriot's practical etecfrocardiography.
ninth edition. williams & wilkins. baltimore. 1994.
13. bnigada p. brugada j: right bundle branch block, persistent st segment elevation and sudden cardiac death:
a distinct clinical and electrocardiographic syndrome.
j am coll cardiol 1992:20:1391-1396.
14. cast investigators: preliminary report: effect of  xxxd1991xxx  and  xxxd2113xxx  on mortality in a randomized
trial of aithythmia suppression after myocardial infarction. n engi j med 1989;.321:406-412.

\5. anastasiou-nana m, anderson jl, stewart jr. ci al:
occurrence of exercise-induced and spontaneous wide
complex tachycardia during therapy with  xxxd2113xxx 
for complex ventricular arrhythmias: a probable
proarrhythmic effect. am heart j 1987:113:10711077.
16. ranger s, talajic m. lemery r. et al: amplification of
tlecainide-induced ventricular conduction slowing by
exercise: a potentially significant clinical consequence
of use-dependent sodium channel blockade. circulation 1988:79: hkk)-uk)6.
17, anno t, hondeghem lm: interactions offiecainide
with guinea pig cardiac sodium channels: importance
of activation unblocking lo the voltage dependence of
recovery. circ res 1990;66:789-803.

