an examination of the interactions between the
antinociceptive effects of morphine and various m-opioids:
the role of intrinsic efficacy and stimulus intensity
drake morgan,

phd,

charles d. cook,

ma,

mark a. smith,

phd,

and mitchell j. picker,

phd

department of psychology, university of north carolina at chapel hill, chapel hill, north carolina

we examined the effects of several opioids that vary in
intrinsic efficacy at the m-opioid receptor alone and in
combination with morphine in a rat warm water tail
withdrawal procedure using 50°c and 52°c water (i.e.,
low- and high-stimulus intensities). morphine, levorphanol,  xxxd1864xxx , and buprenorphine produced dosedependent increases in antinociception using both
stimulus intensities. butorphanol produced maximal
levels of antinociception at the low, but not at the high,
stimulus intensity, whereas nalbuphine failed to produce antinociception at either stimulus intensity. for
cases in which butorphanol and nalbuphine failed to
produce antinociception alone, these opioids dosedependently antagonized the effects of morphine.
when levorphanol,  xxxd1864xxx , and buprenorphine were
combined with morphine, there was a dose-dependent
enhancement of morphine’s effects. similar effects were

t

he concept of a drug’s intrinsic efficacy encompasses several assumptions generally made in
pharmacology, including: 1) a given drug effect
is proportional to receptor occupancy, 2) a maximal
effect can be produced by occupying only a proportion of the available receptors, and 3) the maximal
effects produced by a drug can vary across dependent
measures (1,2). by definition, lower efficacy opioids

this work was supported by united states public service grant
da10277 from the national institute on drug abuse. dm and mas
were supported by predoctoral fellowships da05669 and da05173,
respectively. cdc was supported by training grant da07244 from
the national institute on drug abuse.
accepted for publication november 12, 1998.
address correspondence to drake morgan, center for the neurobiological investigation of drug abuse, department of physiology and pharmacology, wake forest university school of medicine,
medical center blvd., winston salem, nc 27157.
address reprint requests to mitchell j. picker, department of
psychology, cb#3270, university of north carolina at chapel hill,
chapel hill, nc 27599-3270.
this manuscript partially fulfilled the requirements for a doctor
of philosophy degree from the university of north carolina at
chapel hill for dm.
©1999 by the international anesthesia research society
0003-2999/99/$5.00

obtained at the low-stimulus intensity when butorphanol was administered with morphine. in most cases, the
effects of these combinations could be predicted by
summating the effects of the drugs when administered
alone. these results indicate that the level of antinociception produced by an opioid is dependent on the intrinsic efficacy of the drug and the stimulus intensity.
furthermore, the level of antinociception produced by
the opioid, not necessarily the opioids’ intrinsic efficacy, determines the type of interaction among opioids.
implications: compared with high-efficacy opioids,
lower efficacy opioids produce lower levels of pain relief, especially in situations of moderate to severe pain.
when opioids are given in combination, the effects can
only be predicted on the basis of the antinociception
obtained when the drugs are administered alone.
(anesth analg 1999;88:407–13)

must bind to more receptors than higher efficacy opioids to produce a given effect. different effects of a
drug also depend on activation of different numbers
of receptors, which can be altered by changing various
parameters of the task, such as the intensity of the
nociceptive stimulus in antinociceptive procedures.
when the intensity is increased, the potency of any
drug will decrease as more receptors must be occupied, and there will be a point at which drugs that
must bind to a large proportion of receptors (i.e.,
lower efficacy drugs) cannot occupy enough receptors
to produce a given effect. in these situations, lower
efficacy opioids produce antinociception using lowintensity stimuli but fail to produce antinociception
using high-intensity stimuli (3– 8). thus, there is an
interaction between the intrinsic efficacy of an opioid
and the stimulus intensity (or the efficacy requirement
of the task) in producing antinociception.
previous studies have examined the interactions
among opioids with varying degrees of intrinsic efficacy in cases in which the lower efficacy opioid fails to
produce antinociception on its own. in these instances,
the lower efficacy opioid competitively antagonizes
anesth analg 1999;88:407–13

407

408

regional anesthesia and pain management
interactions among m-opioids

morgan et al.

the effects of higher efficacy opioids. for example, in a
rat warm water tail withdrawal procedure using 55°c
water, the low-efficacy opioids nalbuphine and butorphanol fail to produce antinociception and shift the
dose-effect curves for the high-efficacy opioids alfentanil and etonitazene to the right in a competitive
manner (6,7).
few studies have examined the interactions among
opioids in situations in which both drugs produce
antinociceptive effects. one question posed in the
present study was whether the interaction among opioids is directly dependent on the efficacy of the drug.
that is, do higher efficacy opioids interact with morphine differently than lower efficacy opioids interact
with morphine? the answer could have important
implications regarding the use of opioid analgesic
combinations in clinical situations and the theoretical
underpinnings of drug interactions. therefore, we designed the present study to examine the interaction
between morphine and several other drugs in an antinociceptive procedure. to establish the generality of
the findings, we used multiple stimulus intensities
(water temperatures), and morphine’s antinociceptive
effects were examined in combination with the highefficacy opioid levorphanol, the intermediate-efficacy
opioids  xxxd1864xxx  and buprenorphine, and the lowefficacy opioids butorphanol and nalbuphine (9 –13).

method
animals used in this study were maintained in accordance with the guidelines of, and the experiments
were approved by, the animal care and use committee of the university of north carolina. the subjects
were long-evans hooded rats weighing 250 –275 g at
the beginning of the experiment, and they were individually housed in a climate-controlled colony room
maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle. after several
weeks of ad libitum feeding, rats were handled and
food-deprived until they weighed approximately 80%
of their free-feeding weight, and they were maintained at that weight for the remainder of the experiment. each drug and drug combination was examined
in groups of 8 –10 rats, and each group was used to
examine the effects of morphine alone, another opioid
alone, and the combination tests.
the tail withdrawal procedure used has been described extensively elsewhere (8). briefly, rats were
gently restrained along the edge of a table, and their
tails were immersed in a cup containing either 40°c,
50°c, or 52°c water. the water was maintained at a
particular temperature using hot water baths. the latency until tail withdrawal was measured using a
hand-held stopwatch, and a cutoff of 15 s was used to
avoid tissue damage. control tests were conducted to

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

obtain baseline latencies for 40°c, 50°c, and 52°c water. two baseline latencies were obtained and averaged for a particular rat. throughout a test, all trials
with the warm water were conducted at least 3 min
apart, and the order of testing was counterbalanced
across rats.
after baseline trials, a cumulative dosing test procedure was initiated. fifteen minutes after the first
injection of the test drug, the latency until tail withdrawal from both 50°c and 52°c water was recorded.
after these tests, another injection was administered,
which increased the cumulative dose by either 0.25, 0.5,
or 1.0 log units. in this manner, entire dose-effect curves
could be generated within a single session. in combination tests, the test dose of the opioid was administered
immediately before the first dose of morphine.
the test latencies were converted to percent antinociceptive effect using the following formula: percent
antinociceptive effect 5 [(test 2 baseline)/(15 2 baseline)] 3 100. the percent antinociceptive effect was
plotted as a function of drug dose. doses that produced a 50% effect (ed50 dose) were determined using
log-linear interpolation from at least three points on
the ascending limb of the dose-effect curve. the effects
of each drug combination were compared with the
predicted effects of the combination (i.e., summing the
effects of the drugs when administered alone). this
comparison was made by using two-way analysis of
variance with dose (i.e., dose of morphine) and effects
(i.e., observed and predicted) as the factors. the a
level was set at 0.05. where appropriate, an apparent
pkb analysis was conducted to estimate the antagonist
dose required to produce a twofold shift in the agonist
dose-effect curve. the apparent pkb value was estimated using the following formula: pkb 5 2log
(b/dr-1), where b is the dose of antagonist in moles
and dr is the dose ratio of the ed50 of the combination
and the ed50 of morphine alone.
the following drugs were used:  xxxd2670xxx ,
buprenorphine hydrochloride (provided by the national institute on drug abuse, rockville, md), butorphanol tartrate (supplied by bristol-myers, wallingford, ct), nalbuphine hydrochloride, levorphanol
tartrate (both purchased from research biochemical
inc., natcik, ma), and  xxxd1864xxx  hydrochloride (astra
pharmaceutical products, inc., westborough, ma).
doses for all drugs are expressed in terms of their
salts. all drugs were dissolved in distilled water and
administered intraperitoneally in an injection volume
of 0.5–1.0 ml/kg.

results
figure 1 shows the effects of the relatively high-efficacy
agonists morphine and levorphanol, the intermediateefficacy agonists buprenorphine and  xxxd1864xxx , and the

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

regional anesthesia and pain management
morgan et al.
interactions among m-opioids

409

figure 1. effects of morphine (average
of five groups, n 5 8 –10), levorphanol
(n 5 8), buprenorphine (n 5 10),  xxxd1864xxx  (n 5 8), butorphanol (n 5 10), and
nalbuphine (n 5 8) on percent antinociceptive effect as assessed in a rat warm
water tail withdrawal procedure using
50°c and 52°c water. percent antinociceptive effect is plotted as a function of
drug dose. vertical bars represent the
standard errors; when not indicated, the
standard error fell within the data point.

low-efficacy agonists butorphanol and nalbuphine in the
tail withdrawal procedure using two stimulus intensities
(50°c and 52°c water). morphine, levorphanol, buprenorphine, and  xxxd1864xxx  produced dose-dependent
increases in percent antinociception with maximal effects
obtained in each stimulus intensity. based on ed50 values, morphine, levorphanol, buprenorphine, and  xxxd1864xxx  were approximately 1.9-, 1.3-, 2.4-, and 2.8-fold more
potent at the lower intensity stimulus. butorphanol produced dose-dependent increases in percent antinociceptive effect in the low-temperature water with maximal
effects obtained at 56 mg/kg but failed to produce appreciable antinociception in the high-temperature water.

in contrast, nalbuphine failed to produce antinociception
using either stimulus intensity.
figure 2 shows the effects of morphine after pretreatment with various doses of levorphanol (top panels), buprenorphine (center panels), and  xxxd1864xxx  (bottom panels) using a low- (left panels) and high- (right
panels) stimulus intensity. data points over “c” represent the effects of these drugs when administered
alone (also shown in figure 1). administration of
these opioids before redetermination of the effects of
morphine generally resulted in dose-dependent leftward and/or upward shifts in the morphine doseeffect curve. the extent to which levorphanol and

410

regional anesthesia and pain management
interactions among m-opioids

morgan et al.

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

figure 2. effects of morphine in combination with various doses of levorphanol (n 5 8), buprenorphine (n 5 10), and
 xxxd1864xxx  (n 5 8) on percent antinociceptive effect as assessed in a rat warm water tail withdrawal procedure using 50°c
and 52°c water. data points over “c”
represent the effects of the opioid when
administered alone. percent antinociceptive effect is plotted as a function of drug
dose. vertical bars represent the standard errors; when not indicated, the
standard error fell within the data point.

 xxxd1864xxx  increase the effects produced by morphine
was not different (p . 0.05) from that predicted based
on the summation of the effects of each drug (dose)
when administered alone; that is, the interaction between these opioids and morphine was effectadditive. each combination of buprenorphine with
morphine resulted in an interaction that was less than
effect-additive (p , 0.05); that is, the combination
resulted in less antinociception than would have been
predicted from the drug effects alone.
figure 3 (top panels) shows the effects of combining
four doses of butorphanol with morphine using low(left panel) and high- (right panel) stimulus intensities.
butorphanol alone produced dose-dependent increases in antinociception at the lower temperature
(points over “c”) and, when combined with morphine, generally produced dose-dependent leftward

and upward shifts in the dose-effect curve. as with
levorphanol and  xxxd1864xxx , this interaction was not
different from that predicted given the effects of the
two drugs administered alone (p . 0.05). using the
higher temperature water, butorphanol failed to produce antinociception (points over “c”) and produced
dose-dependent rightward and downward shifts in
the morphine dose-effect curve. the apparent pkb
estimate for 0.3 mg/kg butorphanol versus morphine
was 5.6.
figure 3 also shows the effects of combining 3.0 and
30 mg/kg nalbuphine with morphine (bottom panels)
using low- (left panel) and high- (right panel) stimulus
intensities. administered alone, nalbuphine failed to
produce antinociception at either temperature (points
over “c”) and, in combination, produced dosedependent rightward and downward shifts in the

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

regional anesthesia and pain management
morgan et al.
interactions among m-opioids

411

figure 3. effects of morphine in combination with various doses of butorphanol (n 5 10) and nalbuphine (n 5 8) on
percent antinociceptive effect as assessed in a rat warm water tail withdrawal procedure using 50°c and 52°c
water. data points over “c” represent
the effects of the opioid when administered alone. percent antinociceptive effect is plotted as a function of drug dose.
vertical bars represent the standard errors; when not indicated, the standard
error fell within the data point.

morphine dose-effect curve. apparent pkb estimates
determined for nalbuphine (3.0 mg/kg) versus morphine were 5.2 at both temperatures.

discussion
the relative intrinsic efficacy of opioids has previously
been determined using a number of experimental
methods and procedures, including irreversible antagonists (1,9,13–15), tolerance/cross-tolerance regimens
(16,17), different training doses in drug discrimination
procedures (10 –12), and suppression and precipitation of withdrawal effects in opioid-dependent subjects (18). collectively, these studies indicate an rank
order of intrinsic efficacy at the m-opioid receptor of
the drugs used in the present study as: levorphanol $
morphine .  xxxd1864xxx  $ buprenorphine . butorphanol . nalbuphine. each of these drugs has significant
affinity for other types of opioid receptors (e.g., k
receptors); however, studies from our laboratory using irreversible and competitive antagonists and
cross-tolerance regimens have demonstrated that the
antinociceptive effects of these drugs in this procedure
are mediated by actions at the m-opioid receptor (19;
unpublished observations). because of this affinity for
multiple receptors and because these drugs differ in
intrinsic efficacy, this group of drugs has been called
agonists, partial agonists, or agonist/antagonists. as

described below, referring to the drug’s intrinsic efficacy accounts for these apparently different actions.
in the present study, we examined the effects of
opioids that differ in their relative intrinsic efficacy at
the m receptor in a rat warm water tail withdrawal
procedure using low- and relatively high-stimulus intensities (i.e., water temperatures). when administered alone, morphine, levorphanol,  xxxd1864xxx , and buprenorphine produced dose-dependent increases in
antinociception at both stimulus intensities, whereas
butorphanol produced maximal levels of antinociception at the low-intensity stimulus and failed to produce antinociception at the high-intensity stimulus.
the effects of these opioids contrast to those obtained
with nalbuphine, which failed to produce antinociception at either stimulus intensity. these findings extend
previous studies indicating that the level of antinociception produced by an opioid is determined by both
the opioid’s intrinsic efficacy and the intensity of the
nociceptive stimulus (3–7). the data for butorphanol
(antinociception at one temperature, no effect at the
other temperature) demonstrate that these stimulus
intensities are functionally different, which validates
using the phrase “low-intensity and high-intensity
stimuli.”
by definition, lower efficacy opioids must occupy a
larger number of receptors to produce a given effect
and thus have a lower receptor reserve. by increasing

412

regional anesthesia and pain management
interactions among m-opioids

morgan et al.

the stimulus intensity, the number of receptors that
must be activated concomitantly increases. this will
result in a rightward shift of the dose-effect curve, as
occurred with morphine,  xxxd1864xxx , levorphanol, and
buprenorphine. once the number of receptors that
must be occupied exceeds the available number of
receptors, the opioids can no longer produce a maximal effect in that procedure, which seems to have
occurred with butorphanol. nalbuphine could not activate enough receptors to produce the effect at either
stimulus intensity. based on the magnitude of the
potency change across stimulus intensities, coupled
with the maximal effect obtained, the rank order of
efficacy of the opioids used in the present study was:
levorphanol 5 morphine $  xxxd1864xxx  5 buprenorphine . butorphanol . nalbuphine, which is identical
to the rank order among these opioids determined in
other assays (see above).
in the present study, we also examined the effects of
the low-efficacy opioids nalbuphine and butorphanol
in combination with morphine. although nalbuphine
failed to produce antinociception at either stimulus
intensity tested, it produced a dose-dependent antagonism of morphine’s antinociceptive effects, which
was observed at both stimulus intensities. in cases in
which parallel rightward shifts were observed, apparent pkb values of 5.2 were found at both water temperatures, which suggests that the same receptor population mediated the effects of nalbuphine in both
cases (20). similarly, butorphanol failed to produce
antinociception at the higher stimulus intensity and
produced a dose-dependent antagonism of morphine’s antinociceptive effects. such findings extend
previous investigations indicating that, under conditions in which butorphanol and nalbuphine fail to
produce an antinociceptive effect, these opioids will
competitively antagonize the effects of higher efficacy
m-opioids (6,7).
one question not addressed in the studies that evaluated interactions among opioids with varying degrees of intrinsic efficacy is the nature of the interaction under conditions in which the both test opioids
produce maximal antinociceptive effects. specifically,
can these interactions be predicted on the basis of
the efficacy of the test opioids? we examined this
issue in the present study by comparing the interactions between morphine and various opioids that differ in intrinsic efficacy at the m-opioid receptor but
are capable of producing maximal effects under some
conditions. all of the opioids tested that produced
antinociceptive effects alone also dose-dependently
enhanced morphine’s effects when administered in
combination. with levorphanol,  xxxd1864xxx , and butorphanol at the low-intensity stimulus, the effects of the
combination could be predicted based on the summation of the effects produced by the two drugs when
administered alone; that is, the interaction between

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

the two opioids was effect-additive. the interaction
between the two opioids does not depend on the
intrinsic efficacy of the opioid per se, but rather the
level of effect produced by that opioid under those
conditions. the level of effect produced is influenced
by the intrinsic efficacy of the drug, as described
above, which suggests an indirect influence of intrinsic efficacy on the degree of enhancement observed
when administered in combination.
in contrast to these findings, the interaction between
buprenorphine and morphine was generally less than
effect-additive. previous work has shown buprenorphine to have an unusual profile regarding interactions with higher efficacy opioids (21). in particular,
buprenorphine produced antinociception in conditions with low-intensity stimuli at some time points
and antagonized the effects of higher efficacy opioids
at other time points (i.e., agonist and antagonist effects
at the same temperature, depending on the pretreatment interval). this unusual interaction may be partially due to buprenorphine’s slow rate of dissociation
from the receptor (22). the interaction between morphine and buprenorphine observed in the present
study also may be partially due to this slow rate of
dissociation in which both agonist and antagonist effects of buprenorphine are evident, thereby resulting
in a less than effect-additive interaction.
the present findings are in accordance with predictions derived from receptor theory (2) and are similar
to the findings obtained with opioids in other assays.
for example, several studies have demonstrated that
lower efficacy opioids, such as nalbuphine and butorphanol, only partially depress respiration function, as
opposed to higher efficacy opioids, which completely
suppress respiration (23). in such cases, the combination of a lower and a higher efficacy opioid should
result in a partial antagonism of the higher efficacy
opioid’s effects (24). for this reason, lower efficacy
opioids are being combined with higher efficacy opioids in interoperative and postoperative situations
(25). the rationale for this combination is that the
lower efficacy opioid antagonizes some of the less
desirable side effects, such as respiratory depression,
pruritus, and nausea, of the higher efficacy opioid
(25). for moderate degrees of pain, these lower efficacy opioids produce high levels of antinociception on
their own and may be used in combination with a
higher efficacy opioid with no danger of attenuating
antinociception. in cases of severe pain, however, in
which lower efficacy opioids do not produce maximal
levels of pain relief, it could be predicted that the
combination of one of these lower efficacy opioids
with a higher efficacy opioid would result in an attenuation of not only the undesirable side effects, but also
the higher efficacy opioid’s antinociceptive effects. in
the present study, we examined the effects of these

anesth analg
1999;88:407–13

regional anesthesia and pain management
morgan et al.
interactions among m-opioids

opioids on thermal pain; however, it could be predicted that the relationships between agonist and antagonist effects are the same across different types of
nociceptive stimuli.
in summary, the level of antinociception produced
by an opioid is determined by the intensity of the
nociceptive stimulus and the intrinsic efficacy of the
opioid. the level of antinociception produced by a
particular opioid in a particular situation can be used
to predict how that drug will interact with another
opioid, such that if antinociception is produced when
administered alone, an effective-additive interaction
will take place. in contrast, if one of the opioids fail to
produce an antinociceptive response when administered alone or has an unusual pharmacokinetic profile
(e.g., buprenorphine), then an antagonistic or less than
effect-additive interaction will take place.
the authors thank members of the behavioral pharmacology laboratory for assistance in the experiments and for comments on an
earlier version of the manuscript.

references
1. mjanger e, yaksh tl. characteristics of dose-dependent antagonism by beta-funaltrexamine of the antinociceptive effects of
intrathecal mu agonists. j pharmacol exp ther 1991;258:544 –50.
2. kenakin tp. pharmacologic analysis of drug-receptor interaction. 2nd ed. new york: raven, 1993.
3. o’callaghan jp, holtzman sg. quantification of the analgesic
activity of narcotic antagonists by a modified hot-plate procedure. j pharmacol exp ther 1975;192:497–505.
4. shaw js, rourke jd, burns km. differential sensitivity of antinociceptive tests to opioid agonists and partial agonists. br j
pharmacol 1988;95:578 – 84.
5. saeki s, yaksh tl. suppression of nociceptive responses by
spinal mu opioid agonists: effects of stimulus intensity and
agonist efficacy. anesth analg 1993;77:265–74.
6. walker ea, butelman er, decosta br, woods jh. opioid thermal antinociception in rhesus monkeys: receptor mechanisms
and temperature dependency. j pharmacol exp ther 1993;267:
280 – 6.
7. butelman er, winger g, zernig g, woods jh. butorphanol:
characterization of agonist and antagonist effects in rhesus monkeys. j pharmacol exp ther 1995;272:845–53.
8. morgan d, picker mj. contribution of individual differences to
discriminative stimulus, antinociceptive and rate-decreasing effects of opioids: importance of the drug’s intrinsic efficacy at the
 xxxg1635xxx . behav pharmacol 1996;7:261– 84.
9. adams ju, paronis ca, holtzman sg. assessment of relative
intrinsic activity of mu-opioid analgesics in vivo by using
b-funaltrexamine. j pharmacol exp ther 1990;255:1027–32.

413

10. france cp, woods jh. discriminative stimulus effects of opioid
agonists in morphine-dependent pigeons. j pharmacol exp ther
1990;254:626 –32.
11. young am, masaki ma, geula c. discriminative stimulus effects of morphine: effects of training dose on agonist and antagonist effects of mu opioids. j pharmacol exp ther 1992;261:
246 –57.
12. picker mj, yarbrough j, hughes ce, et al. agonist and antagonist effects of mixed action opioids in the pigeon drug discrimination procedure: influence of training dose, intrinsic efficacy
and interanimal differences. j pharmacol exp ther 1993;266:
756 – 67.
13. zimmerman dm, leander jd, reel jk, hynes md. use of
b-funaltrexamine to determine  xxxg1635xxx  involvement
in the analgesic activity of various opioids ligands. j pharmacol
exp ther 1987;241:374 – 8.
14. zernig g, issaevitch t, broadbear jh, et al. receptor reserve and
affinity of mu opioid agonists in mouse antinociception: correlation with receptor binding. life sci 1995;57:2113–25.
15. morgan d, picker mj. the m opioid irreversible antagonist
beta-funaltrexamine differentiates the discriminative stimulus
effects of opioids with high and low efficacy at the m opioid
receptor. psychopharmacology 1998;140:20 – 8.
16. young am, kapitsopoulos g, makhay mm. tolerance to
morphine-like stimulus effects of mu opioid agonists. j pharmacol exp ther 1991;257:795– 805.
17. paronis ca, holtzman sg. development of tolerance to the
analgesic activity of mu agonists after continuous infusion of
morphine, meperidine or fentanyl in rats. j pharmacol exp ther
1992;262:1–9.
18. woods jh, gmerek de. substitution and primary dependence
studies in animals. drug alcohol depend 1985;14:233– 47.
19. tiano mj, walker ea, dykstra la. cross-tolerance to  xxxd2070xxx 
differentiates m-opioid agonists in a rat tail withdrawal assay.
analgesia 1998;3:251–7.
20. walker ea, makhay mm, house jd, young am. in vivo apparent pa2 analysis for naltrexone antagonism of discriminative
stimulus and analgesic effects of opiate agonists in rats. j pharmacol exp ther 1994;271:959 – 68.
21. walker ea, zernig g, woods jh. buprenorphine antagonism of
mu opioids in the rhesus monkey tail-withdrawal procedure.
j pharmacol exp ther 1995;273:1345–52.
22. hambrook j, rance m. the interaction of buprenorphine with
the opiate receptor: lipophilicity as a determining factor in
drug-receptor kinetics. in: kosterlitz h, ed. opiates and endogenous peptides. amsterdam: north-holland, 1976:295–301.
23. gustafsson ll, schildt b, jacobsen k. adverse effects of extradural and intrathecal opiates: report of a nationwide survey in
sweden. br j anaesth 1982;54:479 – 86.
24. blaise ga, nugent m, mcmichan jc, durant pac. side effects
of nalbuphine while reversing opioid-induced respiratory
depression: report of four cases. can j anaesth 1990;37:794 –7.
25. parker rk, holtmann b, white pf. patient-controlled epidural
analgesia: interactions between nalbuphine and hydromorphone. anesth analg 1997;84:757– 63.

